The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia in which he requests that
the President of the Republic of Serbia be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, With the consent of the Council, to
invite the President of the Republic of Serbia to
participate in the consideration Without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Mr. Boris Tadic, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadic', President of the Republic
of Serbia.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Skender Hyseni.

It is so decided.

I invite His Excellency Mr. Hyseni to take a seat
at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council's prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
2
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.

It is so decided.

I invite His Excellency Mr. Zannier to take a seat
at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have
before them document S/2009/ 149, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. I now give him the floor.


