The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of India.

Let me begin by thanking Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson for his briefing on piracy and
armed robbery at sea and on the annual report of the
Secretary-General on piracy off of the coast of Somalia
(S/2012/783).

Even though the problem of piracy is as old as
the history of maritime navigation, the international
community is today facing it in unprecedented and
growing dimensions. Having started off the coast of
Somalia, the threat now looms over an area of more
than 2.8 million square miles, posing a formidable task
to patrolling naval forces. Not only is piracy a threaten
to the freedom of maritime navigation; it is having
destabilizing effects on global and regional trade and
security. The negative humanitarian impact of the
threat on seafarers, who are the lifeline of maritime
shipping, can no longer be ignored.

The Secretary-General's successive reports present
an alarming picture. Despite increased naval presence,
pirate attacks off the coast of Somalia have continued
with little change in the level of violence employed
by the pirates against seafarers and others. As of
22 August, Somali pirates still held 11 ships and 188
hostages, including 43 Indian seafarers. The problem is
also intensifying in the Gulf of Guinea.

Given the adverse impact of acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea on maritime trade, seafarers and
security, India attaches high priority to combating
piracy, including in waters off the coast of Somalia
and in the Gulf of Guinea. India has actively supported
international efforts at the operational level, including
by participating in anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of
Aden since 2008, and has also deployed its ships in
the eastern and north-eastern Arabian Sea. Operations
of the Indian Navy have helped to neutralize several
attempts of piracy.

While we will continue the counter-piracy
operations, there is also an urgent need for the
international community to address the serious
problem of seafarers who are taken hostage and the
consequent humanitarian problems faced by them and
their families. That will require active cooperation in
sharing information, evidence and intelligence related
to the investigation, prosecution and sentencing of
suspected pirates, as well as efforts to achieve an early
release of seafarers being held by pirates.

Although naval ships deployed in the Gulf of Aden
pursuant to the establishment of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia have successfully
thwarted several piracy attempts and provided security
escorts to merchant marines in those waters, the growing
scope and expanding coverage of the problem indicates
that naval operations alone may be insufficient, and
that there is a need to adopt a comprehensive counter-
piracy strategy that includes efforts to deter pirates and
ensure their effective prosecution.

No effort to prosecute and imprison pirates can
succeed without the effective involvement of the States
of the region. Capacity-building not only of Somalia,
but also of other States of the region, is an essential
component of that strategy. We commend the efforts
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
the United Nations Development Programme in that
regard, and urge them to continue their efforts. Their
assistance to the States of the region should focus on
four main areas: legal reforms to criminalize piracy,
capacity-building for the prosecution and trial ofpiracy
cases, effective law enforcement, and improvement of
prison infrastructure in Somalia and safe States in the
region.

India is of the firm View that steps to disrupt
land-based pirate activities and associated financial
flows are absolutely necessary to a multidimensional
counter-piracy approach. Therefore, it is essential to
investigate and prosecute individuals and networks
that provide the leadership, support and financial
flows for the sustenance of piracy. That would
require broader criminal legislation covering the
crimes of extortion, kidnapping, conspiracy, money-
laundering and financing of pirate activities, as well
as active collaboration and sharing of information
and intelligence among the private sector, States and
relevant international organizations. It should also be
kept in mind that combating maritime piracy is an
important issue that is intrinsically linked with the
security situation in Somalia and in the States bordering
the Gulf of Guinea.

We hope that the new Government of Somalia
will fully implement the counter-piracy measures
delineated in the road map and will be supported by
the United Nations and the international community.
We also encourage States on the Gulf of Guinea and in
the region to continue making all collaborative efforts,
including through regional organizations, in combating
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea.

In conclusion, we would like to note that the
increased presence of international and national naval
forces has had a variable impact on the success rates of
piracy attempts in different areas. For example, action
by the Indian navy has ensured that there has been no
successful act of piracy in the area just off the western
coast of India in the past year. Such trends require the
high-risk area for piracy to be regularly reviewed in a
transparent manner, based on confirmed incidents of
piracy. That is an absolute necessity for coastal States
in the region and should be given due priority.

In addition, we fully endorse the conclusion of the
Deputy Secretary-General that three challenges require
our immediate attention: better information-sharing
and trust-building among countries and agencies
involved in counter-piracy efforts, stronger capacity to
prosecute piracy-related cases, and the establishment of
a framework governing the use of privately contracted,
armed security personnel on board vessels to ensure
appropriate regulation and accountability. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's next report,
including on measures for the implementation of the
draft presidential statement that the Council will adopt
today.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Council has before it the text of a draft
presidential statement on behalf of the Council on the
subject oftoday's meeting. I thank the Council members
for their valuable contributions to the draft statement.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/24.

It is so decided.
Since the Council has some urgent business to of the Council, suspend the meeting until 3 pm.

attend to, I will, with the concurrence of the members _
The meeting was suspended at neon.
