I begin today's briefing by recalling, as I did last month (see S/2020/823), the deep suffering of the Syrian people, who, in this almost full decade of conflict, have experienced death, injury, displacement, destruction, detention, torture, terror, indignities, instability, de-development and destitution on a massive scale. They have seen the country they love devastated and are now grappling with coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and economic collapse. The Syrian people, both those inside the country and the millions of refugees outside, desperately need that suffering to be eased and to see a path out of this conflict. Against the backdrop of those hard realities and the deep distrust among the Syrian parties, a faint but real ray of hope shone from Geneva in the last week of August, when, after a nine-month hiatus, we were able to convene the third session of the small body of Syria's Constitutional Committee. The discussions within the Committee were mostly substantive and on the agreed agenda. The co-Chairs told me they sensed some common ground emerging on certain subjects. There were practical suggestions from members on how to identify such common ground and how to advance discussions. I was pleased with that outcome. That said, there were very real substantive differences, even at the quite general level of the discussions. Moreover, contrary to what I had hoped, the co- Chairs were not able to agree in Geneva on an agenda for the next session. We need a proposed agenda if the Committee is to meet. I worked hard in Geneva and ever since to assist the co-Chairs to reach an agreement. The discussions are continuing on a compromise proposal. Given the realities of organizing meetings, we need to finalize the agenda without further delay if we are to meet in early October, as we had hoped. Beyond agreeing on an agenda in line with the terms of reference and core rules of procedure, it is important to remind ourselves of other features of this document. It provides that delegations are to be nominated by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the opposition Syrian Negotiation Commission, in addition to a middle third civil society delegation; the mandate is to prepare and draft a constitutional reform; the Committee may review and amend the 2012 constitution or draft a new constitution; the constitutional draft must embody the 12 living principles that emerged from the Geneva process and were approved in Sochi; the co-Chairs have a responsibility to promote the good functioning of the Committee, including facilitating and proposing an agenda and workplans that enable all issues to be considered and do not make the consideration of certain issues dependent on agreement on other issues; the Committee is to work continuously and expeditiously, without preconditions to produce results and ongoing progress without foreign interference, such as externally imposed timelines. I am continuing to urge that the Constitutional Committee proceed in line with those already agreed terms of reference. If we can finalize an agenda and move forward in that way, I remain hopeful that we can deepen this process with a fourth session soon, and a fifth and sixth in coming months, as the COVID-19 situation allows. Here, let me pause to thank the Swiss Federal and Geneva Cantonal authorities, the United Nations Office at Geneva and its medical services, and the Committee members themselves, for their support in ensuring a COVID-safe third session, which will be a continuing priority for future sessions too. Yesterday, I invited the members of the middle 50 of the large body of the Constitutional Committee to a briefing on the work to date and to hear views and suggestions on the process. We will be following up on those discussions. Let me also note that during the third session, I had the opportunity to consult with members of the Syrian Women's Advisory Board. They provided useful ideas that conveyed their clear belief in the possibility of finding commonalities and the need to safeguard the rights of Syrian women. Like all Syrians, they wish to see concrete progress. In their view, that must happen in parallel to tangible improvements in the lives of Syrians, who have urgent economic and humanitarian needs, as well as security and health concerns. That is also the consistent message of a broad range of civil society actors with whom we engage. In the coming period, both the Syrian Women's Advisory Board and our Syrian Civil Society Support Room will remain active on all aspects of the political process envisaged in resolution 2254 (2015). The COVID-19 pandemic is emerging as a major challenge for the Syrian people, who are acutely vulnerable after 10 years of conflict. As Under-Secretary- General Lowcock told the Council two days ago (see S/2020/915), reports from inside Syria continue to point to a much broader spread of COVID-19 than the number of confirmed cases suggests. In some areas, existing health-care facilities have been unable to absorb all suspected cases, particularly as health-care workers, already in short supply, are themselves struck with the virus. Syrian refugees, both inside and outside camps, remain at great risk as well. The pandemic will only add to humanitarian needs, which remain acute. Many Syrians face food insecurity, poverty and deprivation, particularly in the face of unprecedented economic collapse and socioeconomic strain. By way of example, food prices remain at the highest level ever recorded. The World Food Programme shows the price of a standard-reference food basket increased by over 250 per cent compared to last year. Some Syrians even struggled to access water. In the north- east, the supply from the Allouk water station was cut once again in August, before resuming after the constructive intervention of several Member States. I appeal once again for the Council's support in securing both the necessary resources and humanitarian access for all those in need of relief, in accordance with international humanitarian law. It remains imperative to waive any sanctions or measures that can undermine the capacity of the country to ensure access to food, essential health supplies and COVID-19 medical support. I continue to appeal for the large-scale and unilateral release of detainees and abductees, especially women, children, the elderly and the sick, and for more meaningful actions on missing persons. I pressed that issue with the Astana guarantors when we met in Geneva. I note their stated intention to resume the meetings of the working group on this issue at the earliest opportunity, but I also note the deep dismay that lack of movement on this issue causes among Syrians of all backgrounds, and internationally as well. I will continue to press the issue with the Syrian parties, including in all forthcoming engagements. Syria remains a highly internationalized environment, with five foreign armies active in the theatre and Syria's sovereignty compromised. Militarily, however, current arrangements continue to sustain broad calm across Syria, compared to the intense violence of recent years. Indeed, the front lines have barely shifted in the past six months - the longest such period in the Syrian conflict - and a basic military status quo seems to be emerging. However, while Syria is calmer now, there continue to be worrisome incidents that could destabilize that calm. For example, a vehicle altercation between Russian and United States forces left four American soldiers injured and led to mutual accusations of breaches of existing deconfliction arrangements. We have seen further rounds of air strikes on military positions in Syria, attributed to Israel by the Syrian Government. Moreover, due to local unrest and geopolitical tensions, the south-west remains a theatre for regular security incidents. The March agreement between Russia and Turkey continues to sustain broad calm in the north-west, but we have also seen escalations on both sides, including rocket fire, artillery fire and air strikes hitting near the front lines, as well as deep into Idlib, killing and wounding civilians in some instances, in addition to increased military reinforcements on both sides of the line. In addition, there was another attack on a Russian-Turkish joint patrol, claimed by the Khattab Al-Shishani Brigades, wounding two Russian soldiers. We have also seen at least one attack on Turkish soldiers in Idlib, resulting in casualties. There have been improvised explosive device attacks and mutual fire in and around Afrin, Ras Al-Ayn and Tall Abyad, resulting in civilian injuries and deaths. Finally, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is engaged in worrisome activity in the desert, and we saw an attack on a pipeline in areas where ISIL is active, which resulted in a nationwide electricity cut in late August. I appeal to all relevant actors to contain violent and destabilizing incidents like these, build on the current relative calm and, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), establish a nationwide ceasefire to protect civilians, maintain international peace and security and support the political process. In accordance with the resolution, we must counter the threat of internationally proscribed terrorist groups active in some parts of Syria through a cooperative approach that is in line with international humanitarian law. As we seek to consolidate calm, we have both an opportunity and a responsibility to build a more meaningful political process. The realities on the ground remind us that only by focusing on a political settlement can we meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and restore Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. A political process is also vital if we are to address Syria's socioeconomic challenges and ensure the necessary conditions to enable millions of refugees to return to Syria in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner. It is clear that no one actor or group of actors - Syrian or international - can determine the outcome of this conflict. In that regard, I believe there is growing acknowledgement among many key actors that there truly is no military solution and that the only way forward is a negotiation and a political settlement, however difficult that may be. That is why I believe there is a common desire from all sides to move beyond a complete stalemate and see some movement. There is a readiness for steps to beget steps, for goodwill to beget goodwill and for us to move slowly but steadily along a path out of this conflict, supported by mutual and reciprocal measures and based on resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, I have received strong support from key players for United Nations efforts to facilitate the Constitutional Committee through a Syrian-led and -owned process that can act as a door opener. Beyond the Constitutional Committee, it is too early to say whether the increasingly shared assessment of the realities will turn into common diplomatic pathways for the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). That potential may be slow to materialize, but I will continue to nurture and support the process. I welcomed the recent presence, in Geneva, of senior representatives of Russia, the United States, Turkey and Iran for consultations on the margins of the Constitutional Committee. I have since remained in close contact with them and other European and Arab interlocutors. I particularly welcomed the opportunity to visit Moscow recently for substantive and wide-ranging discussions with Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov and Defence Minister Shoygu, in advance of the Foreign Minister's high-level visit to Syria last week. I encourage Russia and the United States to pursue further dialogue and for them and other key players - including the Astana guarantors, those who meet in the Small Group and the members of the Council - to work with me to advance our common goal in Syria: a political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The immediate priority is for the co-Chairs to agree on an agenda so that we can resume the Constitutional Committee soon, and for the Committee to proceed in accordance with its terms of reference. Meanwhile, we must continue to work to bring about positive and mutually reinforcing steps among Syrian and international players and a wider political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). With relative calm on the ground and with the urgent need to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people, now is the time to press ahead.
