Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for having taken the
initiative to convene this important meeting and for the
information it has provided on the situation following
the attempted assassination of two Russian citizens on
its soil on 4 March in Salisbury.

At the outset, allow me to reiterate to our British
friend and ally all the support that was expressed
yesterday and today by our highest authorities following
an unacceptable attack, which President Macron
condemned without reservation. In the name of the
cardinal values we share - first and foremost the rule
of law and the commitment to the principles of peace
and security of which the Council is the guardian and
guarantor - I would like to offer the United Kingdom
the full support and solidarity of France. There can be
no ambiguity with regard to our position on this.

Let us be clear. This assassination attempt in a
public place using a military-grade toxic nerve agent,
as reported to us, and which has affected other civilians
in British territory, is totally unacceptable. Theresa
May spoke today in the House of Commons and stated
that Russia is responsible in this attack. We have full
confidence in the British investigation to shed light
on the precise circumstances of this use of a chemical
weapon. It is essential that those who are at the origin
of the use of this chemical weapon be clearly identified
and prosecuted, and that all appropriate responses be
made as soon as possible to the issues raised by the
United Kingdom in this investigation.

Let us make no mistake. The facts and the
issues at stake are extremely serious. The ban on
the use of chemical weapons lies at the heart of the
non-proliferation regime that underpins our system
of collective security, as created and enshrined by the
Council and all its members.

The haphazard re-emergence of these barbaric
weapons with deadly consequences, which can be seen
not only in their recurrent use in Syria and the Middle
East, but also in Asia and now in Europe, cannot be
tolerated. It flouts the principles that form the basis of
peace and security; it undermines the non-proliferation
architecture, built stone by stone over the course of
decades; and it calls into question strategic stability.
We have repeatedly warned the Council of the risk of
the re-emergence of these weapons, their proliferation
to all types of actors, and the threat this situation poses
to the collective security system that we have gradually
built together.

Let us be very aware that we have reached a
new phase - that of the use of a substance that was
never declared to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the use of which is
prohibited by the Convention, in a public place on
the territory of a European country. France will never
accept impunity for those who use or develop toxic
agents. In that regard, we recall our full support for
existing institutions, in particular the OPCW. That is
also the reason why France launched an international
partnership in January, aimed at supporting existing
instruments in the fight against impunity in the use of
these weapons.

We must remain more mobilized than ever in the
fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and the impunity of those who intend to use
them. It is a priority and a major responsibility for all of
us, as well as a responsibility of the Security Council,
and we will be judged on it. In that respect, France
affirms its resolute commitment to that end, alongside
its partners and allies, within the Council and in all
circumstances that require it.

