The President (Spoke in Arabic): I shall now
provide a briefing in my national capacity.

Allow me to begin by expressing my appreciation
for the confidence the members of the Security Council
placed in my delegation during the preparations for the
Council's visit to Somalia, Kenya and Egypt last week.

The visit made itpossible the Council to achieve three
important objectives. First, the Council demonstrated
its support for the national efforts made by Somalia
to complete the political process. Secondly, after our
visit to Kenya, the Council was able to clarify the need
for more coordination and cooperation between efforts
made at the national and local levels in order to face
the challenges with regard to Somali refugees. Thirdly,
the Council took the lead in organizing for the first
time a consultative meeting with an important regional
organization, namely, the League of Arab States.

I would like to thank the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, who shared responsibility
for the preparation of the Council's visit, for his
coordination and cooperation. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Somalia, Mr. Michael Keating, the Director-General of
the United Nations Office at Nairobi, Ms. Sahle-Work
Zewde, and the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, Mr. Nabil El-Araby, for their efforts in
preparing for our visit.

I would like to stress that the Security Council's
visit to Somalia illustrated the importance of the timing
of visits by the Council to regions of interest. Indeed,
the visit to Mogadishu sent an appropriate, well-timed
message to all parties in the country that the Council
is interested in the achievements realized since 2012,
that all Somalis need to work together to achieve
reconciliation and peace, and that the Council will
not overlook anything that might obstruct the political
process. The latter is something that I intend to discuss
in detail at a later stage.

The Council's visit to the Kenyan capital, Nairobi,
included an important meeting with President Kenyatta,
who set forth his views on the challenges of the Somali
political process, the need to establish a Somali army
that is capable of shouldering the country's security
responsibilities, the challenges facing the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in Somalia,
and the requests of Member States for increased
support for the Mission. The meeting also included a
clear exchange of views on financing the salaries of
AMISOM. personnel, as well as criticism addressed to
Council on its members' commitment to human rights
and the fact that some AMISOM. personnel have been
involved in illegal activities.

The meeting with the President also touched upon
one of the most important topics for the international
community today, namely, the refugee phenomenon
and the socioeconomic and security challenges it poses
to receiving countries like Kenya. Accordingly, we
discussed the need for the international community
to provide greater support to receiving countries
to meet these challenges. President Kenyatta urged
Council members to support his country's decision
to close the Dadaab refugee camp. Council members
in turn stressed their appreciation for Kenya's efforts
to assume the burden that it faces while stressing the
need for Member States to respect their international
commitments with regard to the situation of refugees.

The visit to Nairobi also included a meeting with
high-level ministerial officials at which discussions
took place on logistics and on AMISOM's needs in
terms of helicopters and other means of transportation
and equipment, on the need to increase the Mission's
strength and adjust its mandate accordingly, and on
closing the budget gap that resulted from the reduced
financing that the Mission has been receiving. We
also discussed the security challenges posed by the
presence of large numbers of Somali refugees in Kenya
and addressed accusations that these refugees have
been taking part in terrorist activities. There were
also discussions about the negotiations between Kenya
and the Jubaland administration on the resettlement of
Somali refugees.

The Security Council visit culminated in a key
meeting to address the efforts made by certain circles
within the United Nations to resolve the humanitarian
crisis in Somalia, the difficulty of humanitarian workers
gaining access to all areas that are in need ofassistance,
and the challenges resulting from the increase in
recruitment of children by the Al-Shabaab movement.
We reviewed the lack of favourable conditions for the
resettlement of thousands of Somali refugees and the
unavailability of clear information on the presence of
terrorist elements inside refugee camps.

During our visit to Africa, I was honoured to
accompany the Council to Cairo. At the first-ever joint
consultative meeting between the Security Council and
the Council of the League of Arab States, we engaged
in a frank exchange of views on such issues as the
peace process in the Middle East, refugees, migration
and developments in Somalia and Libya. The joint
consultative meeting set an important and noteworthy
precedent that could lead to the establishment of a stable
mechanism for coordination and discussion between
the Council and the Arab League Council of Ministers.
The Arab League is an important regional organization
that could play a significant role in addressing the many
topics of common interest between it and the Security
Council, with a view to coordinating our positions
and becoming more responsive to the challenges that
the Arab region is facing, foremost among which are
terrorism and the way forward in the Middle East peace
process.

The discussions led to a consensus of opinion on
the need to coordinate the positions of the Arab League
and the Security Council, particularly with regard to
support for the political process in Libya and for the
country's institutions, which need to fulfil their tasks
so that they can win the confidence of the citizens of
the country. To achieve stability, the country needs
to put an end to competition among Libyan factions,
resolve the impasse between the Presidential Council
and the House of Representatives, and fight the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) on Libyan territory
through a common military command. Also addressed
were issues related to refugee crises, including the need
to protect their rights and counter the Islamophobia
and xenophobia facing Arab countries and the world
at large.

The meeting also discussed the need to coordinate
international efforts with those of countries in the
Arab region to create the conditions for Israel to come
to the negotiating table to reach an agreement on the
basis of the l967 borders, with all parties renouncing
violence, and addressing the humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian people. Arab efforts and the initiatives of
France and the Quartet to revive the peace process were
also praised. We also discussed the challenges Somalia
is facing in trying to achieve reconciliation and peace,
particularly the parliamentarian and presidential
elections, the expansion of the authority of the Federal
Government, coordinating international and regional
efforts to promote the Somali economy and the writing
off Somali debt by Arab States.

Our visit concluded with a meeting with Mr. Sameh
Hassan Shokry Selim, Egyptian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, with whom we discussed the situation in Syria
and Mr. Staffan de Mistura's efforts there, developments
in the Middle East peace process, the increased attention
that could be given to the French initiative and the role
that the Egypt and the United States Ambassadors could
play to bring the parties back to the negotiating table,
as well as the importance of finding consensus on some
of the main issues that would allow for the launching of
negotiations, including the establishment of two States
on the basis of the 1967 borders. We also discussed
the situation in Libya and the need to strengthen the
country's institutions and win the confidence of the
Libyan people so that they can achieve their ambitions
and work to coordinate the efforts to fight ISIL under a
unified joint command.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

On behalf of the Council I would like express my
appreciation to all members of the Security Council and
the Secretariat who participated in the mission for the
way in which they accomplished their important tasks.

The meeting rose at 10.45 am.
