Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
would like to join my colleagues in welcoming Deputy
Prime Minister Guterres and thanking him for his
contribution to today's debate. I would also like to
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, on her
appointment and thank her for her update on the
situation in Timor-Leste.

Let me also say that Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the acting head of
the European Union (EU) delegation, on behalf of the
EU, later in this debate.

Austria welcomes the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2010/85) on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which incorporates
the findings and recommendations of the technical
assessment mission that visited Timor-Leste last
month. The report of the mission is a very useful tool
for reviewing progress made on the medium-term
strategy and on meeting the benchmarks for UNMIT's
mandated priority areas. We also appreciate the

comprehensive and inclusive approach taken in the
preparation and implementation of the mission.

The Secretary-General's report reflects the
positive development that Timor-Leste has been able to
make, and we wish to commend the Government and
the people of Timor-Leste on their achievements. We
welcome the successful resumption of primary policing
responsibilities in a number of districts and units, and
are looking forward to the continuation of this process.
It is our understanding that the transfer of policing
responsibilities must be in line with the agreed criteria
and will require the completion of the certification
process. Continued monitoring from a human rights
and gender perspective, as well as effective
accountability mechanisms for the security forces, will
be important. We support adjustments in the number of
UNMIT police personnel, as suggested by the
Secretary-General for 2010, and agree that further
drawdowns would require an additional assessment.

Important progress has also been made
concerning the situation of internally displaced
persons. We now need to make returns and
reintegration sustainable. In this context, we welcome
the use of the Peacebuilding Fund emergency window
to finance infrastructure projects and monitoring
mechanisms.

Timor-Leste continues to face important
challenges in reducing poverty and creating
employment opportunities, in particular for its youth
population. There is an increasing need to move from
conflict prevention to a comprehensive development
agenda, as the representatives of the Timorese
Government have also repeatedly pointed out. The
current preparation of a national development strategy
will allow for more effective international support and
increased national ownership in this area, which should
focus, in particular, on assisting the country's youth.

We welcome some progress made in
strengthening the rule of law, including in holding
accountable those responsible for criminal acts and
human rights violations during the 2006 crisis, as well
as continued investigations by the UNMIT Serious
Crimes Investigations Team into serious violations
committed in 1999. We remain convinced that delays
in delivering justice can adversely affect public
confidence in the judiciary and, more broadly, in the
Government. We wish to reiterate our support for
Timor-Leste's endeavours to build strong institutions
that can fight impunity for grave violations of human
rights. UNMIT will also need to continue to play an
active role on this issue.

The Government's response to the independent
needs assessment report on the justice sector is very
encouraging. We hope that the recommendations of the
report will be taken into account in the ongoing
development of the Justice Sector Strategic Plan. In
this context, it is obviously also important to address
the specific rights and needs of women. We are
concerned about the difficulties encountered by victims
of sexual and gender-based violence in obtaining
justice. The provision of training to police and justice
personnel will be an important measure to address
these important challenges. We also believe that the
number of women officers, both in the national and the
UNMIT police, should be increased.

Security sector reform remains one of the major
challenges for long-term peace and stability. We
welcome the Government's efforts to develop a
national security policy, as well as progress made in
establishing civilian oversight of the security sector.
Further clarification of the respective roles and tasks of
the police and the defence forces is obviously
important. The "Force 2020" strategic plan constitutes
an important step in this regard. We commend the
defence forces on their intention to consider the
development of capacities for disaster relief and for
participation in United Nations peacekeeping. As I said
at the last briefing on this subject, Austria is exploring
ways to assist Timor-Leste in its capacity-building
efforts in these areas.

In conclusion, we believe that there should be a
positive response to the overwhelming desire of
Timorese society for continued United Nations support
until 2012. Austria therefore supports the extension of
UNMIT's mandate for a further period of 12 months
and the continuation of a strong good offices role for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Capacity-building should be at the centre of
international efforts to further increase national
ownership and ensure the long-term stability and
prosperity of the Timorese nation.
