Mr. Djumala (Indonesia): From the briefings by
Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, it is the
impression of my delegation that the current
situation - where the world seems perched on the thin
edge of war - is not hopeless, and that the objectives
of resolution 1441 (2002) can still be met.

According to Mr. Blix's report, more than 400
inspections, covering 300 sites, have already been
carried out. They were all carried out without notice to
the Iraqis, but still, access was nearly always promptly
provided. This is an indication that the Government of
Iraq has been cooperative so far, and is a good basis on
which to build both expectations and the actual work
for the rest of the exercise. It is to be noted that
Mr. Blix also said in his briefing on Friday that there
had been no convincing evidence so far that the Iraqi
side knew in advance that inspectors of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) were going to a particular
site. The UNMOVIC Executive Chairman observed
that the inspectors had not yet found any weapons of
mass destruction or related proscribed items or
programmes, and that they had only discovered a small
number of empty chemical munitions that should have
been declared by Iraq.
Similarly, Mr. ElBaradei reported on Friday that
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) had
so far completed a total of 177 inspections, at 125
locations. During the process, Iraq also provided
immediate access to all locations. The Agency has
found no evidence of ongoing prohibited nuclear or
nuclear-related activities in the country.

In the view of my delegation, there is nothing in
the reports of UNMOVIC and the IAEA to which I
have just alluded that concludes that Iraq is, or is not,
in violation of resolution 1441 (2002). Both reports,
however, are clear that the work of inspections is
continuing according to plan, and that those inspections
are enjoying cooperation provided by Iraq. At this
point, that is as much as can be expected.

It seems quite clear that resolution 1441 (2002) is
a finely structured document. It provides a description
of the disarmament scenario for Iraq and clearly
outlines the consequences of default or violations.
Between that scenario and the visiting of those
consequences on Iraq, the inspections authorized by the
Council have a critical role to play. It is only right that,
in formulating the next step, the inspectors and the
results of their inspections be taken into account. To
authorize war without that condition being fulfilled
would amount to preconceived warfare, and would
seriously undermine the credibility of the Council.

The problem is possibly with the pace of the
inspections. To that end, we share the views of those
who feel that strengthening the inspections regime-
including hastening the pace of the inspections - must
be undertaken as a matter of urgency. What is required,
then, is to allocate greater resources of time, manpower
and equipment to the inspections, in line with the
scenario outlined in resolution 1441 (2002).

In our view, that approach would strengthen
United Nations inspections by maintaining the
inspections regime on Iraq and enabling more to be
achieved quickly, with no dilution in the quality or
thoroughness of the work. That would further enhance
the credibility of the process and would give all sides
confidence that that process is fair and effective.

My delegation acknowledges the cooperation
provided so far to United Nations inspectors by the
Government of Iraq, and hopes that such cooperation
will be extended fully and unwaveringly in order to
demonstrate not only that Iraq is complying with the
terms of resolution 1441 (2002), but that it also in fact
wishes to be seen to be in compliance.
Having said that, my delegation is of the opinion
that diplomacy has not been exhausted in this matter
and that war is not imminent. We call for the unity of
the Security Council on this sensitive matter, as this is
the time to close ranks, not break them. Obviously, this
is a trying time for the Council, whose authority is at
stake on this issue. Its members must work in unity in
order to protect that authority. Such cooperation is also
imperative so as to enable important decisions
regarding this agenda item to be taken within the
Council - and at the appropriate time, as it should be.
In view of the complexity of the moment, this calls not
for the throwing up of hands, but for harder work,
wisdom and consultation by the Council in maximizing
the use of all diplomatic means with a view to reaching
a peaceful and durable solution to this question.

