Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing.

I would like to focus my attention on two recent
developments. The first is President Abbas' recent
announcement that a date would be set for elections
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in
Gaza. A credible electoral process, which ensures, in
particular, the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women, is essential to building democratic and
inclusive institutions in order to establish a democratic,
viable and sovereign Palestinian State. We expect all
Palestinian factions to engage in this process, with full
respect for human rights and the rule of law. In this
regard, we also reiterate our call on the Palestinian
factions to engage in good faith in the reconciliation
process. As an integral part of a future Palestinian
State, it is essential that the Gaza Strip be returned to
the control of the Palestinian Authority.

Secondly, we have taken note of the negotiations
between Palestinians and Israelis that have led to a
transfer of tax revenues. We encourage both parties to
continue negotiations in order to find a lasting solution.

The continuation of the settlement policy and its
related measures in the West Bank, including in East
Jerusalem, brings us ever closer to the point of no
return for the two-State solution. It is illegal under
international law, including resolution 2334 (2016). The
recent events near the settlement of Yitzhar and the
Palestinian village of Burin illustrate that the settlement
policy leads to tensions and violence on the ground. We
condemn the use of all violence, call for a de-escalation
of tensions and ask that those acts of violence do not
remain unpunished. It is essential to preserve the status
quo in the holy places in Jerusalem.

Lastly, we reiterate our deep concern about the
worrisome increase in the number of demolitions and
seizures of infrastructure and humanitarian projects in
Zone C. We urge the Israeli authorities to put an end to
those demolitions and to return what has been seized
or pay compensation for the damages suffered, for the
benefit of the Palestinian people.

With regard to the situation on the Gaza Strip, we are
deeply concerned about the impact of the demonstrations
on children. While we recognize Israel's right to ensure
its security, we condemn the disproportionate and
indiscriminate use of force. We urge Israel to respect
the right of Palestinians to demonstrate peacefully.
However, it is not acceptable for demonstrations in
Gaza to be hijacked by extremist elements.

We would like to commend the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, whose mandate and work we fully support.

I would like to conclude by stressing that there is
no alternative to the two-State solution, with the city
of Jerusalem as the future capital of those two States,
in accordance with internationally agreed parameters.
Peace can be comprehensive, just and lasting only if
it meets the legitimate aspiration of each party to
build its national destiny in peace and security in a
stabilized region.

