Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) (interpretation from Russian):
First, Sir, on behalf of the delegation of Ukraine, may I
congratulate you most sincerely on your accession to your
very important post as President of the Security Council
and express our conviction that your political and
diplomatic talents, as a person who occupies a very
important place at the United Nations, will help in
resolving some of the most complex problems which we
face. I should also like to express our gratitude to Mr.
Wisnumurti for the skilled way in which he guided the
Council's work during August.

It is a matter of particular satisfaction for us to speak
here at this meeting of the Security Council, which was
convened at the urgent request of the Russian Federation.
We believe that this meeting is timely in View of the
meeting in Geneva, and particularly the outcome of that
meeting, as well as the situation prevailing in the Balkans
today.

Ukraine was very much given hope by the results of
the Geneva meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. We believe that the situation in the Balkans

 

has now reached an important breakthrough. Direct
dialogue has been resumed between the parties to the
bloody conflict on the territory of one of the former
Yugoslav republics. The fundamental principles agreed
upon by the Foreign Ministers of the three countries in
Geneva, we believe, lay a sound foundation on which to
build a peace settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that the agreement reached on the parameters of the
territorial division between the various component parts of
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on the
Washington Agreements, and the Serb Republic, as well as
the fact that both parties have been guaranteed the right to
enjoy special relations with neighbouring countries,
provided there is respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, are fully consonant
with the interests of all national groups in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and are well balanced.

At the same time, we realize that these major
decisions simply mark the beginning of the difficult path to
peace in that sorely tried country; much still remains to be
done. The parties to the negotiations must shed their
prejudices about each other and show political courage,
which will make it possible to break out of the vicious
circle of violence and fratricidal war in the Balkans.

Ukraine is aware of all the difficulties involved in the
Bosnian conflict, and has always felt for that reason that
only by peaceful processes and a readiness to compromise
by all the parties to the conflict will it be possible to
resolve this problem. In its earnest desire to render
assistance to the parties to the conflict, Ukraine, through its
President, Leonid Kuchma, has expressed its readiness to
provide its own services as mediator in the resumed peace
process. At the same time, we should like to emphasize that
Ukraine's only interest in the Balkans is to establish lasting
peace, which will make it possible for our State to develop
comprehensive and mutually advantageous relations with all
the countries belonging to the former Yugoslavia.

In the light of the progress achieved at the Geneva
talks, Ukraine would like to repeat its invitation to the
leaders of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to hold talks in Kiev on the whole range of issues relating
to a peace settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in order
to secure further progress in this matter.

The Geneva agreements bring to the forefront two
further problems. First, in View of the very encouraging
progress which has been achieved in the process of
securing a peace settlement in the Balkans, it would be
desirable to review the question of putting an end to any
further bombing of military targets belonging to the
Bosnian Serbs by aircraft of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). We believe that such a step would
help create a favourable atmosphere at the talks and help
to strengthen trust between the parties.

A second matter, of even greater immediacy, is the
question of lifting economic sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which, by its restraint and its
well-thought-out position in connection with the most
recent dramatic events in the conflict in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia, has demonstrated its clear desire
for peace. The delegation of Ukraine will have occasion
to speak in detail on this subject when the question of
suspending the sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is considered in the future.

In conclusion, Ukraine would like to express its
appreciation for the efforts made by all the parties which
have made it possible for the beginnings of direct peace
talks in Bosnia and Herzegovina to take place, thus
resuscitating the hope that a comprehensive and lasting
peace will be reached in the Balkans.

