Mr. Di Tella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): For a
long time, we have been concerned mainly about weapons
of mass destruction. In the past decade, we have made
considerable progress in that field. However, that does not
mean that we must not also be concerned about small
arms. There is an element of irony in this situation:
weapons of mass destruction are terrible and have a
terrible name; small arms seem inoffensive, yet they
conceal a truly enormous problem.

It is our responsibility to mobilize the necessary
resources and to adopt appropriate policies to replace the
culture of violence with the culture of peace and
development. The issue of small arms has gained
momentum and today, the question is being discussed in
different forums. But we must move from words to
action. In our opinion, the problem of small arms has
three dimensions. First, there is a humanitarian element;
we are concerned about the victims of small arms and the
easy access to and use of such weapons by children and
adolescents. Secondly, there is an economic dimension,
because resources are used for arms acquisition instead of
for development. Thirdly, there is a security dimension,
because of the global and regional impact of the problem.

Of course, the phenomenon of the proliferation of
small arms takes on specific characteristics, depending on
the region in question. That is why different measures
need to be taken in response to the specific surrounding
circumstances. Let us consider the case of the southern
cone of America, which includes Argentina. It is not a
high-risk zone in that it does not have an excessive
accumulation of small arms. But the issue has an impact
on public safety because the effect of such weapons on
common crime is to cause more of it and make it worse.

Fortunately, the southern cone countries have made
a firm commitment to the struggle against the
manufacture of and illicit trafficking in small arms. The
Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials has
been supplemented by a declaration by the Presidents of
the countries of the Southern Cone Common Market
(MERCOSUR), Bolivia and Chile, setting up a joint
mechanism for the registration of those who buy and sell
such devices.

We have also established a system of information
exchange on the basis of the Inter-American Convention
and of the Model Regulations to Control the Movements
of Firearms, Parts and Components and Ammunition,
 

adopted by the Inter-American Commission for Drug Abuse
Control of the Organization of American States.

I want to thank the Department for Disarmament
Affairs for its support for the seminar on the proliferation
of small arms, ammunition and explosives, which was held
in Buenos Aires last May.

Those are some of the actions that have been taken in
our region. We know of other initiatives in Africa and
Europe. But such actions are not enough. We must curb the
negative impact of the proliferation of small arms on
human security, without affecting the right to self-defence
recognized in the Charter.

It is clear from a study by the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research that so far there has been no
integrated approach in response to the problem of small
arms in post-conflict processes. What is lacking is an
integrated approach that can assure lasting peace and lay
the foundations for development. And it is for that reason
that we support the holding of an international conference
on the illicit traffic in arms in all its aspects by the year
2001.

We are convinced that in order the promote the
establishment and maintenance of peace with the minimum
human and economic resources being diverted to arms, we
must implement Article 26 of the Charter and establish a
system for the regulation of armaments. That responsibility
is conferred upon this Council, and we cannot evade it.

