Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and Mr. Tanin for his important briefing. We also
welcome the presence of Mr. Daeic' and Ms. Citaku. We
have taken due note of their statements.

We acknowledge that the situation in Kosovo has
improved since the establishment of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in 1999. However, we are also aware that major
challenges remain to be overcome in order to achieve
sustainable peace and reconciliation in the region. For
that reason, we are pleased that an agreement has been
reached on the frequency of Security Council meetings
on this issue.

Peru reiterates the importance for all parties to
remain committed to the fulfilment and implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999) and the Brussels Agreement,
and for the Council to remain united and attentive
to fulfilling its role as guarantor. We have already
expressed our concern about the repercussions that
the adoption, by the Kosovar Parliament, of three laws
establishing the creation of an army and the decision
to raise the import tax on goods from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina to 100 per cent may have on
stability in the Balkan subregion. Trade contributes to
peace and understanding, so it should be encouraged,
not restrained.

We also call on the parties to avoid actions that
exacerbate mistrust and tensions and to take the
necessary measures to allow this dialogue process
to resume in a constructive and pragmatic manner.
We believe that the dialogue process facilitated by
the European Union continues to play a key role,
both in contributing to the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina and in promoting their
compliance with the commitments related to their
respective European integration processes.

In that connection, we wish to stress the
importance of involving the citizens of both countries,
and in particular women and young people, in building
this vision of the future. We welcome the initiatives
promoted by the Mission in the area of women and
peace and security and we hope that priority will be
given to the implementation of the youth, peace and
security agenda. We also underscore the importance
of respecting and strengthening the rule of law and
the trust of all citizens in institutions, especially in
the promotion and protection of human rights. That
requires the recognition of the ethnic, religious and
cultural diversity of the population and of its heritage.
In that regard, we underscore the work being carried
out by the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, as well as the process of the transfer of
powers to the Kosovar authorities and the role of the
Specialist Chambers.

My delegation would like to conclude by expressing
our appreciation for the work of UNMIK, the Kosovo
Force, the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the other
international organizations involved, and for their
ongoing contribution to building a sustainable peace
in Kosovo.

