Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me at the outset
to welcome you very warmly, Madam President, to the
Council. I also thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his very comprehensive, although again alarming,
briefing. I would also like to thank Commissioner-
General Krahenbiihl for his valuable insight into the
situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).

We now live in a time when the very fundamentals
at the heart of the Oslo process appear to be challenged.
The foundation of the two-State solution, which remains
the core of internationally agreed parameters, is being
impacted by facts on the ground. We have to restore
a political horizon for the resumption of a meaningful
peace process. We believe that it is only through the
negotiated two-State solution that a resolution of all
final-status issues, including Jerusalem, can be found.

We also have to be frank with ourselves - on the
political track, we have to acknowledge that the process
is currently almost entirely blocked, even taking
into consideration all of the commendable Egyptian
mediation efforts.
In terms of the security track, unfortunately, two
weeks ago we witnessed the consequences of one of
the biggest escalations in Gaza since 2014. Poland
strongly condemns rocket attacks from the Gaza Strip
targeting Israel and remains committed to supporting
its legitimate security interests. Hamas and Palestinian
J ihad's incitement to violence, as well as the exploitation
of protests for their own political objectives, have to
stop. At the same time, Israel should calibrate its use of
force and protect its borders using only proportionate
means. We call on both sides to exercise restraint and
engage constructively in efforts aimed at breaking the
vicious cycle of violence in and around Gaza.

The recent increase of Violence is paving the
way for growing frustration among the citizens,
allowing extremism to grow. It is also combined with
the extremely difficult humanitarian situation on the
ground, mainly in Gaza, where basic needs continue
to be unmet and many people lack access to basic
services, including health care. This could easily lead
to an escalation of social tensions that may destabilize
the situation in the region even further. In our opinion,
the current situation depriving the inhabitants of Gaza
of hope and real prospects creates an environment
conducive to inflammatory rhetoric that could again
result in violence and extremism, particularly among
the youth.

While addressing the question of future generations,
let me underline the critical financial shortfalls being
endured by UNRWA. UNRWA has worked for nearly
70 years to ensure access to quality education, which
is a human right fundamental to helping each child
achieve his or her full potential. In this context, the
unprecedented financial crisis of2018 forced the Agency
to take some very difficult measures, sometimes with
tragic personal consequences for its staff members.

As already mentioned by many in this Chamber,
the educational and humanitarian services, including
medical care, provided by UNRWA are key for young
Palestinians and their teachers, as well as the staff of
the Agency. UNRWA runs one of the largest school
systems in the Middle East, teaching nearly half a
million children in over 700 schools. Education remains
key to sustainable human development, and we should
do our utmost to support the agency in its endeavours
in this matter, especially in the light of the fact that
UNRWA is too often the only entity that offers people
any positive perspective.

In this regard, I commend the extraordinary
mobilization of donors, hosts and other partners, as well
as the support of the Secretary-General and many other
leaders, ministers and senior officials around the world,
that have allowed additional funding to be secured for
the UNRWA budget in 2018. It is vital to continue these
efforts also this year, as UNRWA remains a key factor
for stability and security in the region.

