Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to join those who have preceded me in
congratulating you and your delegation, Mr. President,
on Slovakia's skilful leadership of the Security Council
during the month of February. That skill is evident in
today's timely convocation of this open debate on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
delegation of Slovakia has led the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) with marked success. I am also grateful for the
presence and participation of our invited guests.

Last year the Security Council took a significant
step towards meeting its commitment to maintain
international peace and security by extending the
mandate of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for a further two years, thus
acknowledging that the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction poses a significant threat to peace and
security. The Council thereby gave operational impetus
to provisions relating to State implementation of non-
proliferation obligations previously set out in an array
of legal instruments on non-proliferation and at
conferences on the matter, which additionally called
for intensive cooperation among their respective States
parties.

Panama, whose economic development depends
on the smooth flow of international trade, considers
that, in the present international context of
globalization, international peace and security is
indivisible: an attack against one nation is an attack
against all. Cooperation is therefore crucial for the
success of resolution 1540 (2004).

The implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
has given rise to a process of interaction between the
Security Council and Member States, which are
obliged to report to the Council on their compliance
with the provisions of the resolution. From our
Viewpoint, there is one especially problematical area
here: among the requirements of the resolution is the
establishment of national export controls over dual-use
materials, substances, equipment and technologies.
That poses a challenge to State institutions not
designed to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

We take note of the efforts that must be made by
small countries seeking to do their collective duty but
lacking sufficient institutional, material or human
resources to do so expeditiously. We therefore
appreciate the assistance that the Committee provides
to States indirectly, through its expert groups, in
formulating and adopting national legislation to that
end. In particular, we welcome the idea of convening
outreach seminars on these and related issues, jointly
with regional organizations. Such cooperation should
continue and should be enhanced; it will create new
synergy between the United Nations and other
multilateral actors, which, each within its own area of
responsibility, can contribute to this common
undertaking.

I cannot fail today to join other members in
touching on another aspect of non-proliferation. In our
era of globalization, it is artificial and dangerous to
compartmentalize threats. Panama is among the vast
majority of States that has never even considered the
option of developing or acquiring weapons of mass
destruction; that would have run counter to our priority
of promoting national development in a context of
peace, security and the rule of law. Indeed, Panama is a
demilitarized State, having dismantled its army in
conformity with a constitutional mandate.

But all countries suffer from the scourge of the
production, illicit trade and proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. As former Secretary-General Kofr
Annan said, while some View terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction as the main threat to world peace,
others consider that they face the immediate threat of
small arms, used in internal conflicts. An effective
multilateral response to the threat to peace posed by
small arms and light weapons continues to be needed.

