Mr. Danon (Israel): If President Abbas were truly serious about negotiating in good faith; if he were really interested in peace, he would not be here today. He would have taken the advice that he received from several members of the Council and from many Arab States and used this opportunity to start direct negotiations. If President Abbas were serious about negotiating, he would not be here in New York; he would be in Jerusalem. In 1977, after the Yom Kippur War and countless clashes on the border, President Sadat of Egypt did not come to New York to speak at the United Nations. He went to Jerusalem to speak in the Knesset. President Sadat understood that to achieve peace, bold and brave steps must be taken and that a difficult history must be relegated to the past. President Sadat went to Jerusalem and spoke directly to the Israeli people about extending a hand for peace. I remember listening to that speech, as a child. The fact that the leader of a country against which we fought numerous wars spoke in the Knesset was incredible. All of Israel was glued to our screens, listening to his voice. Not long after the speech and that show of leadership and willingness to negotiate and compromise, Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat signed the historic peace treaty between Israel and Egypt. If President Abbas were serious about negotiating, he would not be here in New York; he would be in Washington, D.C. In 1994, His Majesty King Hussein of Jordan did not go to the United Nations to discuss the dispute with Israel. He went to Washington, D.C., and, together with Prime Minister Rabin and President Clinton he signed the Washington Declaration. Backthen, they agreed on the terms for negotiations and, only three months later, a historic peace treaty was signed between Israel and Jordan. If President Abbas were serious about negotiations, he would not be here today. He would be in Jerusalem or in Washington, D.C., sitting down with his negotiating partner. But President Abbas is not serious about negotiations or about peace. Instead, he has done what he always does. He came here to distract us from his unwillingness to negotiate, sit down and talk. Members can ask him about the last time he met with our Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. In the past decade, they have met only once. How many times has President Abbas come here to speak in the Security Council or the General Assembly? Why come all the way here? Why not drive to Jerusalem or have the Prime Minister drive to Ramallah? He is trying to blame the lack of progress towards peace on Israel, complaining instead of leading. That is not leadership. That was his way when he took office and that remains his way today in the sixteenth year of his four-year term. President Abbas claims that he wants sovereignty for the Palestinian people, but has done everything to avoid receiving it. His words are nothing but lip service. His call for sovereignty long ago became a battle cry rather than an actual goal. It is a way to keep the conflict alive. As I mentioned, in the last decade not even one meeting has taken place. On the other hand, over 150 United Nations resolutions concerning the Palestinians have been adopted in that period. Does that seem like a reasonable balance if one is sincere about peace? To hold zero meetings with one's negotiating partner while over 150 United Nations resolutions are adopted? It is only reasonable to someone who has no real intention of negotiating. It must be noted that the rejectionism of President Abbas has been encouraged by many in the international community, if not through words then through actions. Voting in favour of one-sided resolutions only further encourages his behaviour. Many here have fallen into the habit of trying to force the outcome of negotiations before they have even begun, adopting preconditions that directly contradict previous agreements between the sides. For example, Israel and the Palestinian Authority previously agreed, in internationally endorsed agreements, that a border would be determined only through direct and bilateral negotiations. Yet still, some here, against that explicit agreement, try to either precondition that future borders must be negotiated based on the so-called 1967 lines. Let us negotiate. If he is told that will be the outcome, he will not enter the room. That is what we are doing here. Why should he negotiate with us when others are negotiating for him? Negotiation means entering the room with demands and negotiating. That is what we did with President Sadat and King Hussein, and, God willing, that is what we will do one day with the Palestinians. But that is what real negotiations are. When President Abbas sees that his battles are being fought for him and there is no need for him to negotiate or agree to mutual compromises, it makes peace an ever more remote possibility. Meeting here once again to criticize Israel and the United States for their efforts to promote peace also does not increase the likelihood of President Abbas agreeing to negotiate. It would be best if the international community focused its efforts on bringing both sides to the negotiating table. It is also time to reconsider the international community's approach to resolving this conflict. It is clear that something in the current approach is not working. President Abbas spreads lies in order to mislead the international community into believing that his desired solution to the conflict is the only solution. In fact, he did just that today. However, all previous attempts at peace have been based on the same principles and dogmas, and they have all failed. Albert Einstein once defined insanity as doing the same thing over and over and expecting different results. President Trump's takes a sane approach to solving this conflict. It understands that we have to try something different. Maybe it will work this time. The basis of the plan is the idea of achieving just and lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians. However, what this plan does differently is refuse to accept the same out-of-date concepts of previous peace plans. This plan refuses to accept that the only way to solve the conflict is with a formula that has failed for over 70 years. The plan represents the requirement of a realistic approach that is not afraid to incorporate innovative ideas to address the concerns of both parties. It represents the necessity of a pragmatic approach in order to solve a complex problem. Even if some are critical of the specifics of the plan - and I know many are - they should still embrace its spirit, which says that it is time to look for a new and pragmatic approach to resolving this conflict.The plan's drafters themselves have said that the plan is only a suggestion - a tool for the sides to use in their negotiations. It is clear that some delegations are beginning to embrace the spirit of the plan. That is why they have used the opportunity presented by its release to call on President Abbas to negotiate, and we thank them for that. But President Abbas refuses to be pragmatic. He refuses to negotiate. He is not interested in finding a realistic solution to the conflict. Let us not beat around the bush. Progress towards peace will not be made as long as President Abbas remains in his position. That is the reality. Only when he steps down can Israel and the Palestinians move forward. A leader who chooses rejectionism, incitement and glorification of terror can never be a real partner for real peace. Israel has embraced the new innovative spirit of President Trump's plan and has agreed to use it as a starting point for negotiations. We thank President Trump and his team for their dedication to the cause of peace. Israel is criticized in this Chamber on a regular basis, but despite the lies and the hypocrisy, we are determined to fight for peace. We have always been willing to negotiate. We have on many occasions offered President Abbas opportunities to begin negotiations. But his response remains the same, and I encourage people to ask him, when they meet with him later today, why he is unwilling to meet with us. His response is always "no". He said it just the other week: "a thousand times no". Peace is a core aspect of our belief, of the Jewish way of life. I urge the members of the Council to tell President Abbas that speeches here at the United Nations cannot replace direct negotiations. I urge them to tell President Abbas that, unlike him, they choose peace.
