Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council arrived at a negative result today
because one of its permanent members used the right of
the veto. This means that the Council was prevented
from carrying out its duties to preserve international
peace and security in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. This is truly regrettable.

As far as we, the Palestinian people, are
concerned, we believe that this failure also means a
failure to contribute to ending the tragedy that has been
taking place in the occupied Palestinian territories
because of the bloody and oppressive campaign waged
against our people by Israel - the occupying Power -
and by the leaders in charge and the current and
previous Israeli Prime Ministers f Messrs. Sharon and
Barak - through all their declared and expressed
statements and positions that run counter to
international law and that call for escalation and
confrontation. This also means a failure to provide the
support necessary to revive what is left of the Middle
East peace process, as well as the necessary assistance
to the parties to overcome the difficulties they face by
simply assuming the presence of good intentions
among the parties. This regrettable result came about
despite the constant work done recently to which we all
contributed.

I would first like to express, on behalf of the
Palestinian people, our heartfelt thanks to the Non-
Aligned caucus in the Security Council, which
sponsored today's draft resolution - Bangladesh,
Colombia, Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius and Singapore.
Those friendly States undertook this marvellous action
in support of the just demands of the Palestinians and
in support of the peace process in the Middle East on
the basis of the principles of the Non-Aligned
Movement and on the basis of positions of principle
regarding the question of Palestine. Likewise, we
would like to thank the members of the Council who
voted in favour of the draft resolution and those that
expressed their readiness to support us even if the
current circumstances were more difficult. In that
regard, I would like to mention China and the Russian
Federation. We would also like to express our deep
gratitude to our brothers in the Arab Group and the
Group's Chairman this month 4 the United Arab
Emirates - as well as to Chairman of the Arab
Summit, the Arab Republic of Egypt.

Since November 2000 we have made efforts to
establish a United Nations observer force to provide
protection to the Palestinian people.

As members know, the result was the unfortunate
outcome which the Council reached for reasons known
to all. Subsequently, we resumed our efforts towards
the same objective. Later, when it had become clear
that it would be impossible to attain our objective now,
owing to the negative United States position, European
members of the Council took an initiative that would
have responded to the situation on the ground and to
the situation relating to the Middle East peace process,
with a view to moving the peace process forward.
There was a move to accept a limited step in the
direction of the possibility of setting up a force to help
protect Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories; this came to be known as the two-stage
approach.

To be frank, we were not very happy, because, as
is only normal, we feel that protection for our
Palestinian people should be expedited in order to put
an end to the current bloodshed. But, in the hope that
we could take a positive step that might open the way
to better prospects for greater Security Council
participation in the Middle East situation and that
might improve the situation on the ground and promote
the peace process, we agreed to respond to that
initiative; we cooperated sincerely with European
countries and with the United States of America 4
and, naturally, with non-aligned and other members of
the Security Council. More than once during that time,
we thought we were close to agreement. Indeed, on
Tuesday afternoon we achieved an agreement
conditional only upon acceptance by our officials.

Despite all of that, it became clear to us late this
evening that everything related to timing had
evaporated. There seems to have been an attempt to
delay action without setting any definite date or time.
And as for content, it was suggested that what had been
decided was in fact very far removed from what could
actually be agreed upon at this time. For our part, in the
light of our duty towards our people, it would have
been impossible for us to pursue action that would
result in something falling far short of what is
acceptable in the light of the situation on the ground, in
the light of past Security Council resolutions, and in
the light of the provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law. Moreover, it would be
unreasonable for us to pursue action that seems to drag
on indefinitely in the face of a situation that is daily
deteriorating and given the need for an international
response to the issue of timing.

To all of that we must add the convening of the
Arab summit at Amman, an important political
development that cannot be ignored. We wanted the
Council's action to send the right message to that
summit, one that would promote interdependence and
harmony between Arab action and international
legitimacy in addressing the deteriorating situation in
the region.

We made every possible effort to reach such a
positive conclusion, even at the expense of the
substance of the draft resolution - even, more than
once, at the expense of our own positions. Clearly, we
are sorely disappointed at the position we are in today,
including all the surprises and unexpected
developments, some of which were rather unusual in
terms of the Council's procedures and working
methods. It was out of the question to take a step
backward by sacrificing the legitimate needs and
demands of our people, including their need for
international protection, especially since no other
concrete proposal was put forward in terms of either
timing or substance.

From our perspective, this stage of our effort with
the Security Council has come to an end. We shall
certainly return at a later date to see what can be done,
in cooperation with Council members who are willing,
in the service of the principles of peace, justice and
legitimacy. We are confident that this will ultimately be
possible; under no circumstances will we cease to call
upon the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations. At the same time, we shall continue to
welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan; we call upon him to continue those efforts,
especially as the Council has been prevented from
doing its duty.

When we think of what has happened, we truly
think it strange: After hearing just a while ago the
unbalanced - at least from our point of view -
statement by the representative of the United States of
America, we have to admit that our astonishment is no
longer. Indeed, we would have liked not to be surprised
any longer, but for totally different reasons and in a
totally different way.

The Palestinian party will work sincerely to
resume traditional cooperation here at the United
Nations and in capitals with the friends who chose to
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution today. We
are confident that this is possible, particularly in the
light of the traditional Middle East policies of those
States.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute once
again and express our thanks to all of those who stood
by our side. I am especially thankful to the non-aligned
caucus - primarily its coordinator for this month and
the Arab member, Tunisia 4 for their positions of
principle in support of our people's struggle.

