Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to wish you success, Mr. President, in the important
responsibility you have assumed in presiding over
the Security Council in February. We have no doubt
that your natural leadership will be appreciated by
your colleagues on the Council and in the entire
Organization. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Masood Khan,
whose presidency also represented a time of strength in
thought and action in the service of world peace.

We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the representative of Cote d'Ivoire
on behalf of the Economic Community of West African
States.

I would like to welcome this open debate that the
Council has been kind enough to hold on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, at a time when civilian
populations in areas of tension are fighting for their
survival in an increasingly troubled world. My
delegation is also grateful for the quality of the briefings
by Ms. Navanethem Pillay, High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and Mr. Philip Spoerri, who have done
an excellent job of informing us about the challenges
we face.

The protection of civilians in armed
conflict - a major objective of the Fourth Geneva
Convention - continues to suffer from serious and
unacceptable shortcomings, to the detriment of
non-combatant populations. The various reports of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, as well as those of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, attest to the
continuing challenges that this haunting issue presents.
In fact, deliberate murders of civilians, attacks on
schools and health centres, obstacles to the distribution
of humanitarian aid, and sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as the forced disappearances and
other ways of drafting children, are continuing along
with the increasing spectre of violence in theatres of
operations. We see the constantly increasing growth in
the number of those internally displaced by conflicts,
which in 2011 reached 26.4 million people, according to
the latest report of the Secretary-General on the subject
(S/2012/376).

The world continues to confront a heavy
humanitarian burden, eloquently illustrated by the
situations in Afghanistan, Mali, Somalia, the Sudan,
South Sudan, the Gaza Strip and Syria. That brings
me to reflect on the remark of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon that the fate of civilians in many of
today's conflicts continues to deserve attention and
justify intervention. That reminds us forcefully of the
pertinence of his recommendations on the five core
challenges in his 2009 report (S/2009/277), reiterated in
his report for 2010 (S/2010/579). My country, like many
Member States, believes that this is essential in order to
improve the current situation and to ensure respect for
international law on the part of all, including non-State
armed groups. It is also necessary to strengthen the
protection of civilians by improving the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping missions and to
facilitate access for humanitarian aid, while focusing
on accountability when violations occur.

In order to considerably reduce the grave risks
that armed conflict poses for civilian populations, we
must establish a holistic strategy for prevention. That
could be based, among other things, on a number of
concrete actions that we should all strive to consider.
In my delegation's view, we should first track, control
and limit the trafficking in arms, particularly with
regard to non-State armed groups. Clearly, the fewer
uncontrolled weapons there are in circulation, the easier
it will be to protect civilian populations. In that regard,
Senegal believes that during the final United Nations
Conference on an arms trade treaty, to be held from
18 to 28 March, Member States should display the will
and flexibility needed to overcome the obstacles that
emerged from earlier negotiations in order to conclude
a treaty.

We should also effectively implement the principle
of due diligence formulated by the Secretary-General,
which, in addition to the importance of protecting
human rights, would also recognize the imperative
need to ensure security, which is essential to any viable
enterprise.

Bearing in mind the impact of mines on the tragic
situation of civilians in areas of conflict, it would be
judicious for the States parties to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects to maintain positive and appropriate follow-
up to their decision to re-examine the issue of mines
of all types, and not only anti-personnel mines but
also munitions and other unexploded ordinance.
The fundamental reason, need I recall, is that all the
devices that I have just mentioned present an ongoing
threat to the lives of civilians, impede the adequate
distribution of humanitarian assistance and undermine
any reconstruction. The actions I have mentioned
should therefore be underpinned by inclusive national
dialogues that represent the various sensitivities of the
countries directly affected, with the unanimous and
multifaceted support of the international community,
particularly neighbouring countries.
Finally, I would like to underscore the vital need to
undertake those various actions to reduce the causes of
violence, in the conviction that the many efforts made
to try to stamp out a crisis at its climax may suffice to
put an end to lingering tension. Therefore, the time has
come to strengthen preventive diplomacy by refining
the concept of a conflict-prevention mission - a
concept that has shown itself, on many occasions, to be
of real interest to many Member States.

