Mr. Garcia Belaunde (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
During the past few months, the situation in the Middle
East has suffered one of its gravest crises, causing
enormous destruction and death. Peru deeply deplores
these facts and considers it necessary to intensify the
efforts to achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East. We believe that the purpose
of this meeting of the Security Council, and also the
goal of the concerned regional organizations, should be
to help the parties to achieve a peaceful solution.

Although the events of the recent past have been
serious, especially for the Lebanese population, there
have been some positive reactions that opened new
chances for peace. One of them was the approval of
resolution 1701 (2006), adopted unanimously by the
Security Council, putting an end to the war in Lebanon
and northern Israel. We are pleased that that resolution
was accepted by the Governments of Israel and
Lebanon, and that its implementation, during the last
40 days, has been effective.

We believe that there is much more to do.
Nevertheless there are some points that must be
highlighted: the steady deployment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon is going in the right
direction, allowing the withdrawal of the occupying
Israeli forces from southern Lebanon and the
deployment of the Lebanese army, securing these areas
for the first time in many decades. The lifting of the air
and sea blockade is also a positive development. The

parties involved must continue to respect the cessation
of hostilities and to fully observe the Blue Line. It is
also essential to intensify the clearance of mines and
unexploded ordnance, for which the Government of
Israel must provide more detailed information.

The disarming of Hizbollah and the militias
operating in Lebanon remains a key element for
moving the peace process forward. The presence of
armed groups which challenge the State's monopoly on
the legitimate use of force throughout Lebanese
territory is not acceptable. This requirement, which has
been invoked repeatedly since the adoption of the Taif
Accords in 1989 and which was reaffirmed in the
Lebanese Government's decision of 27 July 2006, must
be implemented. To this end, it is also important that
the neighbouring countries in the region should
collaborate by avoiding the sale or supply of arms and
related materiel.

The demarcation of Lebanon's international
borders is also urgent, especially in those areas where
the border is disputed, including the Sheba'a farms
area. We know that the Secretary-General and his
envoys are working with the parties on the elements
and principles underlying a long-term solution. We
look forward to receiving their proposals.

I would like to underscore the efforts being made
by the humanitarian agencies and organizations in
Lebanon, which continue to do everything in their
power to bring aid to those who need it as promptly as
possible. I would also like to remind the Council that
the crisis situation will continue until the economic and
productive activities disrupted in Lebanon are resumed.
That is key in a successful rebuilding effort.

Another central problem in the region is the
situation of Palestine and the territories occupied by
Israel. Peru once again deplores the acts of violence,
kidnappings and loss of human lives, together with the
critical situation endured by the Palestinian population
in the occupied territories. On this issue we agree with
the call to strengthen the temporary international
mechanism to improve the economic and humanitarian
conditions in Gaza and the West Bank. We urge Israel
to use the mechanism to transfer the tax and customs
revenues collected on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority.

Furthermore, we reiterate that a negotiated
solution for the peaceful coexistence of two States with
secure and internationally recognized borders will

remain elusive if one of the parties fails to recognize
the other's right to exist. Fulfilling the requirements
laid down by the Quartet since the beginning of this
year - renunciation of violence, recognition of Israel
and acceptance of previous agreements and
obligations - should be understood as marking an end
to the phase of violence and confrontation and the
beginning of a phase of negotiation and construction,
in which the Security Council will be able to play a
more effective role.

To this end, and sharing the views expressed by
the Quartet yesterday in its statement, we hope that the
new Palestinian government of national unity, under
the leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas, will
reflect and implement these requirements in order to
begin a new era.

Finally, Peru believes that the principles
contained in the road map remain valid and we reaffirm
our commitment to this Council in order to make
progress towards a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict, based on
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1515 (2003).

