Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing, and the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.
The Security Council cannot remain indifferent before
the tragic events taking place between the Gaza Strip
and Israel. I therefore take this opportunity to thank
you, Sir, for convening this highly important meeting.

Again, for the third time in less than six years,
civilians have been caught in the crossfire between
Hamas' armed actions and Israel's disproportionate and
excessive use of force. Argentina stands in solidarity
with the wounded and with the families of the victims
in Israel and Palestine.

In response to the situation, on 10 July the Security
Council issued a clear call for the de-escalation of
violence, the restoration of calm and the reinstitution
of the November 2012 ceasefire. It also firmly appealed
for respect for international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians. At that time, Israel's military
operations had killed 114 Palestinians and wounded
over 680. One week later, casualties in Gaza had totaled
more than 270 dead and 1,800 wounded, most of whom
were civilians. The 34,000 internally displaced and
more than 1,700 families that had lost their homes
complete the picture of destruction and suffering.

We therefore firmly condemn Israel's rejection of
appeals on the part ofthe Council, the Secretary-General
and many voices of the international community, and
its decision to escalate the crisis by launching a ground
offensive. That decision will only generate greater
instability in the region, more victims and increased
suffering. We also condemn the continued and
indiscriminate firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel
and the militarization of civilian facilities.

Argentina supports the ongoing efforts to end
all military operations and to end the bloodshed. We
urge both parties to join in the efforts of Egypt and
other regional and international actors to establish an
immediate and durable ceasefire. We also support the
efforts of the Secretary-General. Once calm returns,
concrete measures must be taken to end this destructive
cycle of violence by addressing the underlying
conditions that led to the escalation. It will be necessary
to allow unhindered access of humanitarian assistance,
to ensure the sustained and regular flow of goods and
people through the border crossings, and once and for
all to realize the pressing political need for a single
and effective Palestinian Authority governing all
Palestinian territory and speaking on behalf of all its
people.

It would therefore be regrettable for the current
situation to be used to undermine the unity Government
in Palestine, which is widely recognized and supported
by those seeking peace in the region. More broadly,
these tragic events have once again highlighted the
urgent need for the parties to resume a process of
genuine negotiations, based on internationally accepted
standards, so that the solution of two States living in
peace can be achieved. There is no substitute for
dialogue and negotiation to translate that vision into a
reality. Achieving that goal must remain our priority.

Argentina believes that the Security Council must
resume its function of playing a decisive role in this
situation. If our initial message was not heard, it may be
time to speak up louder and with one voice to demand,
with all the tools at our disposal, an end to hostilities
and respect for international law. Argentina is ready to
do its part to ensure that the Security Council assumes
its institutional responsibilities and supports peace
efforts.
Argentina expressly reaffirms that it is the political
leaders of both parties who have caused so much
suffering and are responsible for each and every one
of the victims of the conflict they have unleashed. The
international community and the Council should ensure
that so much death does not go unpunished, and that
the victims are not condemned to oblivion. We must
keep their memory alive and demandjustice in order to
ensure a genuine, lasting peace.

