Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Ithank you, Mr. President,
and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, Executive
Director Fedotov and our close colleague, Ambassador
Tanin.

The year 2012 is proving, obviously, to be a major
milestone for Afghanistan. The Chicago Summit's
recommitment to Afghanistan was an unmistakable
statement to the insurgency. The commitments to
resourcing the Afghan National Security Forces
(ANSF) after 2014 were significant, as was the
agreement that NATO would lead a mission to train,
advise and assist the ANSF, including Afghan special
forces. Australia itself will contribute $100 million
per year towards ANSF sustainability and provide
training to the ANSF after 2014. We will consider a
special forces contribution, with the agreement of the
Afghan Government and under the right mandate. To
underpin this long-term commitment, Afghan President
Karzai and Australian Prime Minister Gillard signed a
comprehensive long-term partnership in Chicago.

As the Secretary-General has highlighted, the
insurgency continues to threaten peace and stability,
but its momentum has been severely degraded and
security conditions remain good in areas that have
transitioned thus far. But as we know, to ensure security
gains are properly sustained, we need to redouble our
efforts to support Afghanistan's economic growth and
development.

We support the Secretary-General's call for next
month's Tokyo conference to deliver a very clear
message that Afghanistan will not be abandoned in its
social and development needs. We must identify those
needs and the resources required and available to meet
them. Clear financial commitments from international
partners will be needed. To this end, Australia has
committed to increasing its own development assistance
from $165 million to $250 million per year.

As we know, the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will
become even more important as the transition process
advances. Therefore, the cuts to UNAMA's budget,
foreshadowed by the Secretary-General, will require
some hard, dexterous and creative reprioritization of
UNAMA's efforts, but its core mission to support and
underpin successful, enduring transition in Afghanistan
must be preserved. We encourage UNAMA to consult
closely with international partners on arrangements for
its ongoing presence.

Successful presidential and parliamentary elections
in 2014 and 2015 are, of course, indispensable for future
stability in Afghanistan. But clarity about the future
political process is needed quickly to ensure that the
necessary planning and preparations can begin. We
welcome the assurance in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/462) that the United Nations will remain an
active partner in coordinating international assistance
in the next round of elections, and we look forward to
ongoing close cooperation among UNAMA, the Afghan
authorities and the international community, including
ourselves, in support of credible and inclusive electoral
processes.

Reconciliation and reintegration have a long way
to go, but the insurgents need to understand that there
is no alternative to them. UNAMA's own support for
peace and reconciliation efforts remains important.
Reconciliation is obviously a complex and protracted
process, but we know that lasting stability in Afghanistan
can be achieved only through dialogue and Afghan-led
processes of reconciliation and reintegration.

We commend the Secretary-General for highlighting
the important role that women can and should play
in shaping positive outcomes. Gender issues remain
decisive for a successful Afghanistan, and we expect
that they will be central to much of the discussion at the
Tokyo conference.

In concluding, as we are all aware, Afghanistan will
become stable only if a secure external environment
is achieved. The Heart of Asia process, including the
recent Kabul ministerial conference, is foundational to
achieving this goal, and we commend the leadership of
Turkey in particular in this process.

The implementation of the confidence-building
measures from the Kabul ministerial conference will
be a significant next step. Australia has committed to
supporting the Heart of Asia countries in implementing
such measures for education and commercial
opportunities. We also thank Kazakhstan for its offer
to host the next ministerial meeting in the first half of
2013.

To conclude, my own Government is determined
to continue working with the Afghan Government
and people, and our other partners in the international
community, in support of a goal that, as we have all said
and know, is in everybody's interests - a secure and
stable Afghanistan whose Government, institutions and
economy are on an irreversible path to long-term and
sustainable development.

