Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The Middle
East is shaken by upheavals that are unprecedented
in modern history. There are long-standing and
escalating disputes.

We have spoken at length about the possibility
of preventing the slide towards widespread chaos in
the region. We have often warned of injustice against
Arabs caused by foreign interference or the occupation
of Arab territories in Palestine and Syria, saying that
it could cause the situation to spiral out of control, but
for decades those warnings have fallen on deaf ears.
The situation is still unresolved, and the management
of disputes has become an objective in itself without
there being a real attempt to resolve the situation or to
change the approach.

The item on today's agenda - "The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question" - has
been on the Council's agenda for many years and is
fraught with meaning. That should also help us identify
points ofreference. In fact, it reflects an awareness on the
part of the international body in charge of maintaining
international peace and security of the importance of
the Palestinian question and its influence on the Middle
East as a whole, as well as the implications of the
situation in the Middle East for international peace and
security. Indeed, despite the numerous conflicts that we
have seen recently, the injustice towards the Palestinian
people, who have been living without a State and under
occupation for more than half a century, remains the
oldest crisis, which reflects the dysfunction of the
international regime when it comes to achievingjustice
in that critical region.

We must imagine the situation that has been
ongoing for many years. The Palestinian people have
lived without freedom and under colonization, their
homes have been destroyed, and they remain trapped
behind the separation wall in the West Bank or under
siege in Gaza. We have to imagine the influence of
those images on generations of young people who
have lived like prisoners without a political horizon
that would allow them at least to dream about a better
future. The endless continuation of the Middle East
question, without resolution, assaults the awareness
of the international community when it contemplates
its failure to achieve the necessary parameters for a
solution that is in accordance with the international
legal framework, international law, international
humanitarian law and the Charter of the United
Nations - the first Article of which draws attention to
people's right to self-determination, an essential goal
for which our international organization was created.

We also recall that, in the framework of the United
Nations, we are not seeking any victory nor do we
wish to call into question the legality of any State.
We are also not seeking a solution that is logically
unacceptable or illegal under international law. We
must always remember that it is the Organization
that approved the creation of the State of Israel.
The recourse of the Palestinian people to the United
Nations implies a commitment to a legal and peaceful
solution and to achieving justice through the two-
State solution, which the international community
believes appropriate - two States, an Israeli State and
a Palestinian State reconciled in accordance with the
choice of the people. The Palestinian people aspire to
live in dignity in their homeland, and the Israeli people
also want to live in security within the framework of
good neighbourly relations in their own land. The two-
State solution, pursuant to Security Council resolutions,
the most recent being resolution 2234 (2016), calls for
the 1967 borders, including East Jerusalem.

Some have tried to manage the Palestinian issue by
providing assistance, perhaps because of an unfounded
fear of dealing with the core issue and the mistaken
belief that managing the conflict would be enough to
assuage fears and satisfy the status quo. That approach
of easing the suffering has lost its importance over the
years. Maintaining the status quo can be regressive and
eventually explosive. We have undoubtedly lost control
of the situation.

That is Egypt's position. Our treaty with Israel
constitutes the foundation for peace in the region and
reflects our position. The Arab States are also aware
of the situation, as has been reflected in their actions
pursuant to the Arab Peace Initiative, which lays the
basis for overall peace in the region. Thus, we invite all
stakeholders to encourage that approach and to work
assiduously on resolving the situation and restoring
the rights of the Palestinian people. Those efforts must
go beyond the occasional appeasement, which has lost
its effect.

Lastly, I would like to reaffirm the appeal launched
by Egypt, at the highest level, to the Palestinians and
Israelis to return to the negotiating table and to give
pride of place to serving the interests of their peoples.
Negotiations remain the best way to resolve the
conflict. We appreciate the commitment that we have
seen recently from international players, including the
friends ofIsrael, to achieving a comprehensive political
solution with a view to ensuringjustice and overall peace.
Egypt will work with both Governments - Israeli and
Palestinian - and with international forces in order
to achieve that common objective, in keeping with the
two-State solution and the principles of land for peace
and international equality.

