Mr. Brammertz: I am grateful for the
opportunity to present the report of the International
Independent Investigation Commission (S/2006/760, annex). Like the previous reports, this report provides a
snapshot of the Commission's work over the past three
months and of its ongoing activities. It gives only as
much detail as is possible in view of the underlying
need to preserve confidentiality and investigative
leads.

The reporting period was marked by the conflict
in Lebanon. As a result, and in accordance with United
Nations security regulations, the Commission's
international personnel were required to leave Lebanon
on 21 July 2006. The Commission relocated to a
temporary base in Cyprus, where activities resumed
almost immediately upon arrival. The gradual process
of returning international personnel to Lebanon has
already started.

Despite this situation, the Commission has made
progress in its investigation of the killing of former
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 others and in the
expanded technical assistance it provides to the
Lebanese authorities in the investigation of certain
other crimes.

In the Hariri investigation, 20 major investigation
and analysis projects are ongoing. The previous report
(8/2006/375, annex) concentrated on the extensive
forensic examination of the crime scene and of the
blast that killed Mr. Hariri and 22 others. Over the past
month, the focus has been on consolidating the results
of that examination and on conducting a significant
number of interviews with a View to identifying the
perpetrators at all levels.

The DNA analysis conducted on the human
remains found at the crime scene produced crucial
results. Several of these remains appear to correspond
to the person that allegedly detonated the improvised
explosive device, a man in his early twenties. Further
forensic tests are taking place to possibly establish the
regional origin of that person; his DNA is being
compared with existing DNA databases in several
countries. Independent tests carried out in two separate
environments earlier this year, as well as scaling
explosion experiments have corroborated the findings
06-54337
of the Commission with regard to the characteristics
and nature of the explosion of 14 February 2005.

In its previous report, the Commission indicated
that the minimum quantity of explosives used was
1,200 kilogrammes. Subject to final results, it is now
estimated that the quantity of explosives used would
have been closer to 1,800 kilogrammes. The
Commission has also reached preliminary conclusions
about a number of issues that were previously unclear.
For instance, two sounds were heard by some witnesses
on 14 February, while there was, according to our
findings, only one explosion. There are scientific
explanations for this phenomenon.

The Commission continues to investigate the
modus operandi used by the perpetrators. It is
examining information suggesting that Rafik Hariri
was the subject of earlier surveillances and possibly of
earlier attempts to kill him. It is likely that the alleged
bombing team knew that electronic countermeasures
were in place to protect the convoy and Rafik Hariri
and that they chose a method of attack that would not
be impeded by such countermeasures. The reduced
security arrangements for Rafik Hariri after his
resignation as Prime Minister created a number of
vulnerabilities enabling the attack to be perpetrated
more easily.

As a priority, the Commission is analysing and
investigating the communications traffic relevant to the
case and its international aspects. They demonstrate a
complex network of telecommunications traffic
between a number of individuals relevant to the
investigation. Thanks to its communication analysis,
the Commission understands better the preparatory
aspects of the attack, notably of the activities and
locations of the six SIM. card holders alleged to have
been part of the bombing team. This work remains
ongoing and is one of the areas where comparative
analysis with the 14 other cases is being pursued.

The Commission's strategic objectives for the
coming months are to undertake approximately 50 key
linkage-related interviews, collect and analyse a large
amount of already identified electronic data, technical
intelligence and documentation and develop its
communication and further sensitive sources.

In Security Council resolution 1686 (2006), the
Council expanded the Commission's mandate in
relation to the technical assistance it provides to the
Lebanese authorities in 14 other cases. The
06-54337

Commission has increased the resources it devotes to
this technical assistance and has concentrated on three
main areas.

The first area is in forensic investigation and
analysis for each case to establish the nature and
location of the explosive devices used. Forensic
evidence in these cases is being compared with that of
the Hariri case, for example by using common
fingerprint and DNA databases.

The second area is, as already mentioned, the
communications analysis. The objective is to lift, from
the vast amount of communications traffic in Beirut
during the period of the attacks, those numbers
common to some of the attacks, and to link other
relevant numbers.

The third area concerns the conduct of interviews
where the interviewees can provide information on
individual cases as well as on multiple cases'
commonalities. As a result of the work done during the
reporting period, the Commission has strengthened its
preliminary conclusions that the 14 cases were not
commissioned and executed by 14 disparate and
unconnected persons or groups with separate motives.
The Commission anticipates that further links between
these cases will become evident upon further collection
of information and evidence.

The Commission has continued to interact closely
with the Lebanese authorities - the Government of
Lebanon, the Prosecutor General and his senior staff,
the investigating judges assigned to the cases, as well
as with the liaison officer appointed by the Internal
Security Forces. The Commission has continued to
share with the competent Lebanese judicial authorities
all relevant documentary, testimonial and physical
information obtained in the course of its investigation,
including information relevant to individuals who are
detained and the assessment of the credibility of
witnesses. The Commission is grateful to the Lebanese
authorities for the outstanding support and work
undertaken, especially considering the particularly
difficult circumstances that marked the reporting
period.

The Commission requires the assistance and full
support of States on technical, legal and judicial
matters relevant to the investigation. Between 15 June
and 15 September 2006, a total of 39 new formal
requests for assistance were sent to 12 different
Member States and international institutions. Most
3
Member States responded in a positive and prompt
manner to the Commission's requests, providing
forensic technical assistance, technological support and
tracking and analysis of telephone communications and
facilitating witness interviews.

Pursuant to the common understanding reached
between the Commission and the Syrian Arab Republic
earlier in the year, Syria's cooperation with the
Commission has continued to be timely and efficient.
During the reporting period, the Commission submitted
11 formal requests for assistance to Syria, seeking
information and documentation about certain
individuals and groups. Syria also provided
documentation relating to experiments it conducted
concerning the properties and impact of various
controlled explosions. Follow-up meetings have taken
place with experts from the Commission to discuss
these experiments. The level of assistance provided by
Syria during the reporting period remains generally
satisfactory.

The Commission is satisfied with the progress
made so far in the investigations and will continue to
obtain the best possible results throughout the next
reporting period and until the end of the current
mandate in June 2007. These results can be achieved
only with the continued support of all States. In this
context, three areas are of particular importance.

The first area is requests for assistance. During
the last six months, more than 70 requests were sent to
States for their assistance, and the Commission
anticipates sending more such requests. Timeliness of
answers by States remains of paramount importance,
especially in light of the time constraints the
Commission faces.

The second area is witness protection. Witness
protection measures are crucial to the further
development of the investigations. The Commission is
putting in place such mechanisms in order to allow
more individuals with appropriate knowledge to step
forward and assist it in this sensitive area of its work.

The third area of particular importance is
resources. Strengthening the Commission's
institutional capacity is critical. Recruiting and
retaining competent personnel remains a concern, as
this affects the Commission's ability to fulfil its
mandate in a timely manner. The Commission trusts
that the Security Council and all States will continue to
support it in managing these and other challenges.
