Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I would like to align
myself with the statement made earlier today on behalf
of the European Union, but I would like to add a few
additional remarks.

First of all, let me thank the Lithuanian presidency
of the Security Council for bringing this important
issue back to the Council. As others speakers have
done, I also wish to congratulate Lithuania on today's
adoption of resolution 2222 (2015).

Denmark's efforts to support media freedom,
including the protection of journalists, are an integral
part of our long-standing efforts to enhance civil
society and human rights. The rights of journalists
and the free media need to be protected all over the
world. Unfortunately, persecution of journalists is
not a phenomenon restricted to only a few countries.
Denmark believes that journalists must be protected
to be able to carry out their work without fear of
retribution, attack or worse.

In too many countries, the State uses media laws
to keep media from criticizing those in power. This is
deeply worrying, although it is not a new phenomenon.
But what is a new and equally deeply worrying trend
is the fact that journalists are now being deliberately
targeted, not only by oppressive regimes, but also by
terror organizations and militia groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Not since the end
of the Second World War have we witnessed such a
distressingly large number of armed conflicts in and
between countries. Sadly, this is also reflected in the
number of journalists killed. Last year alone, as was
mentioned earlier today, 61 journalists were killed, and
this year the reported death toll has already reached 25.

The United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, adopted in 2012,
was an important step in addressing the individual
safety of journalists globally. However, the protection
ofjournalists and the free media is an ongoing effort
that cannot achieve success only through such top-
down initiatives, which need to be combined with
actual action on the ground.

At the Global Media Freedom Conference 2015
held in Copenhagen last month, the Danish Minister
for Trade and Development launched two initiatives
aimed at strengthening free media in developing
countries and in fragile States, both of which include
strong components for the protection ofjournalists - a
programme worth approximately $2 million through the
World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers,
and an additional $750,000 through International
Media Support in cooperation with the International
Federation of Journalists.

I would like to conclude by echoing what other
colleagues have already underlined: Freedom of opinion
and expression are indeed fundamental rights of every
human being. Today's debate and the adoption of
resolution 2222 (2015) mark an important contribution
to our common efforts.

