Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government of Mexico has already made a statement
on the conflict between Lebanon and Israel. However,
we would like to once again state our condemnation of
the provocation by Lebanese irregular forces that
precipitated this crisis and of the disproportionate use
of force that has caused destruction of fundamental
civilian infrastructure and more than 500 civilian
casualties in Lebanon and the Gaza Strip.

As the Secretary-General has said, the actions of
Hizbollah, although put forward as a defence of
Palestinian and Lebanese interests, in fact serve neither
of the two. Quite the contrary, it makes a whole nation
a hostage.

However, we think that the most urgent thing at
this moment is to move from the stage of recrimination
to that of action, in the Security Council as well as on
behalf of the international community. Yesterday, the
Secretary-General presented the elements for a draft
resolution of this organ. The immediate actions that are
necessary are evident: the creation of humanitarian
corridors, such as those approved this morning by
Israel, which should be broad enough to reach the
north of Lebanon, and freeing of Israeli hostages.

But this situation cannot be resolved with a
simple ceasefire or intermediate steps such as those I
have mentioned. Since the unilateral withdrawal by
Israel in 2000, in compliance with Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), it has not been possible to
stabilize the situation along the Blue Line. The efficacy
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), as the Secretary-General himself has said,
has been questioned on repeated occasions.

In this context, the just and lasting solution to this
conflict means guaranteeing the full sovereignty of the
Government and the legitimate military forces of
Lebanon in the south of its territory, along the Blue
Line. This demand of the international community is
already in resolution 1559 (2004). However, the
Lebanese Government has not had the means necessary
to implement it.

In this context, the proposal to create an
international force, preferably under the auspices of the
United Nations, is particularly relevant. In cooperation
with Lebanese authorities, it would guarantee security
and stability in the south of the country. This
international force should have a broad mandate and, if
necessary, should gradually replace the UNIFIL.

We also support the Secretary-General's proposal
for implementing resolution 1680 (2006) with regard to
a definitive delimitation of international borders
between Lebanon and its neighbours, Syria and Israel,
including the question of the Shaba'a farms.

Once these urgent issues are resolved, the
international community should monitor the
compliance with resolution 1559 (2004) with regard to
the disarmament of irregular forces operating in
Lebanon. The United Nations should have a plan and a
calendar for the definitive disarming of those forces,
and, if necessary, the Security Council should provide
the means to guarantee complying with this process.

Without a definitive disarming of the irregular
forces that operate in Lebanon, there can be no
guarantee of peace and stability, either within Lebanon
or outside. Mexico reiterates its support for resolution
46

1559 (2004) as the best formula to guarantee the
sovereignty and full independence of a stable and
prosperous Lebanon that can live in peace with its
neighbours.

Mexico also expresses its very deep concern at
the very serious humanitarian situation of the
population in Gaza. We make an urgent appeal to start
implementing the measures proposed yesterday by the
Secretary-General.

