Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I convey the
regrets of Ambassador Fode Seck, who participated in
the Security Council mission but is currently on another
mission outside the United States and is unable to be
with us this morning.

I wish to thank the Secretariat and the national
missions to the United Nations of the three countries
concerned - Mali, Guinea-Bissau and Senegal - as
well as the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau and the security team for
their efforts and assistance in ensuring the success of
the mission. I also thank all Council members for their
significant contributions in all phases of the mission,
reserving, of course, a special mention for Angola and
France, the organizer countries of the mission, for their
excellent collective work.

Turning to the report (S/2016/215), after Mali, the
Security Council mission visited Guinea-Bissau on
7 March to assess the political situation in the country.
Under the co-lead of Angola and Senegal, the mission
held meetings with Prime Minister Carlos Correia,
in the presence of some members of his Government,
including the Foreign Minister, the President of the
National Assembly, Mr. Cipriano Cassama, leaders of
the ruling party, the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC), and the opposition
party, the Social Renewal Party (PRS). The Council
also held a meeting with the President of the Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Jose' Mario Vaz. It should be noted
that meetings initially planned with the leadership of
UNIOGBIS, the diplomatic corps and civil society had
to be cancelled due to time constraints.

At the meeting with the members of the Security
Council, Prime Minister Carlos Correia discussed
the reasons behind the political crisis affecting the
proper functioning of the country's institutions and the
difficulties the Government's programme encountered
in obtaining the parliamentary approval in January 2016.

Essentially the Council had three important
messages to issue. The Council reaffirmed the interest
it attaches to the situation in Guinea-Bissau and its
ongoing commitment to assisting the country in its
efforts. The Council stressed the need for an inclusive
and constructive dialogue to ease persistent tensions
between authorities, but the Council also welcomed
the important role played by the Economic Community
of West African States Security Mission in Guinea-
Bissau, which should be supported in the pursuit of
its mission.

The Council met, as stated previously, with the
President of the National Assembly, who explained in
detail the crisis in the Parliament. Next, the Security
Council mission met with the leader of the PAIGC,
Mr. Domingos Simoes Pereira, who gave a detailed
briefing on the crisis within the ruling party that led to
the expulsion of 15 of its members who had abstained
in the voting on the State budget presented by the
Government to the Parliament in December 2015. The
mission also met with leaders of the main opposition
party, the PRS, who denied any involvement of their
party in the current situation. Finally, the mission held
its last meeting in Guinea-Bissau with President Jose
Mario Vaz, who called for a political solution to the
internal crisis within the PAIGC through a political
dialogue with all parties concerned. In the opinion
of President Vaz, this political dispute should not be
brought before the courts. In addition, he praised the role
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in the search for solutions to the crisis and
expressed to the Council members his commitment to
ensuring respect for the Constitution and the proper
functioning of institutions.

The Council stressed to President Vaz the
importance of dialogue in resolving the crisis and
reminded him of the regional and subregional
implications of the political deadlock, the threat of
transnational organized crime in Guinea-Bissau, drug
trafficking and the fear that terrorists and extremist
groups might take advantage of the situation to further
destabilize Guinea-Bissau and the region. In addition,
the Council called on the President to preserve the
dialogue and respect the laws and the Constitution of
the country as the only way to resolve the crisis, since
politics are also subject to the rule of law.

The mission left Guinea-Bissau with real concerns
about deep fracture among political leaders, State
institutions and the political parties, while asking
interested stakeholders to work to resolve the crisis
through dialogue in accordance with the Constitution
and laws.

Before concluding, I would also like to thank the
Guinea-Bissau authorities for the steps they took to
welcome the Security Council mission.

