Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway remains deeply
alarmed by the escalating cycle of violence in the
Middle East. The terrorist attacks against Israeli
civilians and the Israeli military campaign represent a
dramatic worsening of the situation.

Norway is fully aligned with what Secretary-
General Annan has described as the "core
problems" - that is, occupation, violence, including
terrorism, and the economic plight of the Palestinians.
Unless these problems are addressed, the conflict will
only escalate further. Norway also agrees with the
Secretary-General that the issues of security and peace
are two sides of the same coin, and these two issues
must be addressed in parallel in the spirit of Security
Council resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002).
Norway has repeatedly condemned Palestinian
terrorist attacks. Terrorism is not acceptable as a tool to
reach political goals. We call on the Palestinian people
to renounce terrorism and disassociate themselves from
the practices of extremist groups.

However, the ongoing Israeli military campaign
against the Palestinian Authority is destroying the
Palestinian police and its ability to fight terrorism. We
fear that the present military operations will only breed
further hatred and continued terrorist attacks. Israel's

military campaign and use of lethal force, especially in
civilian-populated areas, is not going to achieve its
aim. Such use of force will bring neither peace nor
security, but it will fuel hatred and despair. The
campaign must be brought to an end immediately.

The Israeli siege of President Arafat's compound
in Ramallah is another matter of concern. The
treatment of Mr. Arafat, the democratically elected
leader of the Palestinians, is unacceptable and can only
contribute to complicating the possibility for finding
any political solution. President Arafat has minimal
opportunity to act in the present situation. His ability to
function as the leader of the Palestinian Authority must
be restored immediately. Without that happening, no
process to lead us out of the present dire situation can
be found.

The humanitarian situation in the Palestinian area
must also be addressed. Reports about violations of
international humanitarian law resulting from the
recent military campaign are very disturbing. Norway
calls on Israel to immediately lift restrictions on
movement of humanitarian personnel and medical
relief. We are also concerned about the safety of
journalists covering recent developments.

The present escalation of the conflict has a clear
potential to threaten regional peace and security.
Norway therefore calls on Israel and the Palestinians to
immediately cease the fighting. Norway remains
convinced that only the resumption of a political
process can bring a lasting solution and peace to
Israelis and Palestinians. The Security Council has
indicated the way forward through resolutions 1397
(2002) and 1402 (2002). The international community
and this Council must stand united in its demand that
these measures be implemented.

