Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is pleased to extend its congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We know that your
experience and wisdom will serve you well in steering
the deliberations of the Council successfully. In
addition, you represent Bangladesh, a friendly country
that maintains close ties with Kuwait. I should like also
to pay tribute to your predecessor, the Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, Ambassador James Cunningham, for his
remarkable stewardship of the Council during the past
month.

I should like also to thank the Russian Federation
for its initiative to convene this meeting, and to thank
you, Mr. President, along with the other members of
the Council, for agreeing to discuss the humanitarian
situation in Iraq and the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. All of these are issues of
great importance, and some of them have a direct
impact on the security and stability of my country,
Kuwait, and of the Arabian Gulf region.

If we are going to start talking about the
humanitarian situation in Iraq as being the central
theme which has been extensively discussed by the
Council for over a month, it is only fair to begin by
acknowledging with appreciation the role of the
Council and its continuing and tireless efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq by
introducing many improvements to the oil-for-food
programme, with a View to enhancing its efficiency in
meeting the humanitarian needs of the brotherly people
of Iraq.

We in Kuwait fully understand the depth of the
Iraqi suffering, simply because of our own bitter
experience of anguish during the seven months of our
occupation. Therefore, Kuwait has all along expressed
sympathy for the suffering of the brotherly people of
Iraq. We have translated those feelings of sympathy
into every possible form of assistance and aid to
individuals in Iraq. Furthermore, we have always called
for an end to the suffering of the Iraqi people, pursuant
to Security Council resolutions.

The assistance given by Kuwait has not been
limited to the aid provided by the Government of
Kuwait, but has gone beyond that to include assistance
rendered by civilian organizations such as the Kuwaiti
Red Crescent Society.

The intensive deliberations undertaken by the
Council for over a month in order to mitigate the
suffering of the Iraq people attest to the sense of
responsibility demonstrated by the Security Council
towards the suffering of the Iraqi people. Kuwait
therefore welcomes and supports all efforts under way
to improve the humanitarian programme with a view to
eliminating restrictions on the flow of civilian goods,
in order to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people.

What is regrettable, however, is that, despite the
strict humanitarian nature of the oil-for-food
programme, the Iraqi Government, for its part, has not
worked to ensure the success of that programme or to
ensure benefits from its modalities.

The Secretary-General, in many of his periodic
reports on the implementation of that humanitarian
programme, highlighted that fact, especially in his
most recent report (S/2001/505), in which he
underscored the Government of Iraq's laxity in
discharging its responsibilities towards its people, as
demonstrated in the following areas.

First, the Government of Iraq, at the beginning of
phase IX of the oil-for-food programme, deliberately
reduced its oil exports, on some occasions suspending
them completely, as it tried to commit companies that
would buy Iraqi oil to paying illegal surcharges on
every barrel of oil purchased.
The Secretary-General, in paragraph 4 of his
report, stated that the reduced rate of export of Iraqi oil
resulted in a loss by the humanitarian programme of
revenues estimated at $2.6 billion. It is clear that this
substantial revenue could easily have been collected
and used for the purchase of humanitarian goods for
the benefit of the Iraqi people.

Secondly, I wish to note the inordinate and
unjustifiable delays in the submission of applications
for humanitarian supplies. The Secretary-General, in
paragraph 15 of the same report, expressed his deep
regret that, as at 14 May 2001 - that is to say, three
weeks before the end of phase IX - the Office of the
Iraq Programme had not received a single application
in the sectors of health, education, water and sanitation
and oil industry spare parts and equipment. Paragraph
17 of the report adds that $2.82 billion was still
available for new contracts.

Clearly, such delays in the submission of
applications for these basic humanitarian necessities -
especially medicines and health-care supplies, which
are badly needed by the Iraqi people - raise the
serious question of the Iraqi Government's indifference
to the suffering of its civilian population. Indeed, these
delays, if anything, confirm some accounts that the
Government of Iraq is exploiting the plight of civilians
in order to get the sanctions lifted without committing
itself fully to the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Thirdly, the Government of Iraq has deliberately
delayed, and prevented the granting of entry visas to
international personnel working to implement the
humanitarian programme, especially in the three
northern governorates, with a view to impeding the
efforts of United Nations agencies and to stalling the
vital projects undertaken by those agencies in the areas
of infrastructure development and mine clearance.

In paragraph 134 of the report, the Secretary-
General expresses his deep concern over the current
visa situation and the negative impact that the
interruption in essential activities is having on the
humanitarian situation in the three northern
governorates. The Secretary-General reiterated his call
to the Government of Iraq to issue the required visas
expeditiously, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding.

It is clear that the obstacles placed by the
Government of Iraq in the way of the implementation
of the humanitarian programme in the northern
governorates are aimed only at preventing any
improvement in the humanitarian situation in those
areas. Indeed, an improvement there would embarrass
the Iraqi Government, if compared with the
humanitarian situation in the central and southern
governorates, which are under its control.

Fourthly, aside from the inordinate delays in
submissions of applications by the Government of Iraq,
there are unopened letters of credit in the amount of
$1.151 billion, as indicated in paragraph 133 of the
report of the Secretary-General. The Secretary-General
recommended that the Iraqi Government take all
necessary measures to expedite the processing of the
letters of credit.

Fifthly, the Government of Iraq has, for political
reasons, refused to implement Security Council
resolution 1352 (2001), which was recently adopted
unanimously and which extends phase IX of the oil-
for-food programme for a period of 30 days. Without a
doubt, this refusal will result in the loss of assured
revenues estimated at more than $1 billion at current
international oil market prices.

Despite all of the obstacles and difficulties that
are impeding the implementation of the humanitarian
programme, one cannot ignore the substantial
achievements registered by the United Nations since
the inception of the programme in December 1996. The
value of the humanitarian supplies received by Iraq
exceeds $11.1 billion, and there are humanitarian
supplies in the pipeline estimated at $10.36 billion,
which have been approved and are due to arrive in Iraq.

The Secretary-General, in paragraph 123 of the
same report, stated that the programme has contributed
not only to arresting the decline in, but also to
improving, the living conditions of the average Iraqi.
This would have been difficult to achieve without the
sincere and genuine efforts made by the Office of the
Iraq Programme and the specialized international
agencies operating in Iraq. Indeed, the efforts of all
international personnel who are implementing this
unprecedented programme deserve our applause and
appreciation.

It is indeed regrettable that, despite the fact that
more than 10 years have elapsed since the Iraqi
aggression against the State of Kuwait, the Security
Council remains seized of the consequences of that
aggression because of procrastination and equivocation
by the Government of Iraq, whose aim is to evade
implementation of the basic commitments set forth in
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The most important of these commitments, which
represent the primary demands by Kuwait vis-a-vis
Iraq, are as follows: the first is the question of Kuwaiti
and third country prisoners and hostages. This
humanitarian issue, which embodies the suffering of
hundreds of families who do not know their children's
fate, has seen no progress due to lack of cooperation on
Iraq's part in the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 686 (1991), 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999),
all of which, among other things, call upon Iraq to
cooperate with the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and the high-level Coordinator,
Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov, who was appointed by the
Secretary-General to facilitate the return of these
prisoners and hostages.

It is clear that the Government of Iraq is
indifferent to the humanitarian dimension of this issue,
because it refuses to resume its participation in the
meetings of the tripartite committee and its technical
subcommittee, whose meetings it boycotted in January
1998 on the basis of unjustifiable political pretexts
despite the humanitarian suffering of those innocent
prisoners, their families and loved ones.

Indeed, that attitude does not contribute to the
creation of an atmosphere of confidence and serenity
among the people of Kuwait. Furthermore, the
Government of Iraq has not responded to the repeated
calls made in the Secretary-General's periodic reports
on this issue, which also urge it to continue cooperating
with the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. Kuwait believes that Iraqi
disregard for the statements given in this context by the
President of the Security Council to the press,
supporting the remarks of the Secretary-General and
lauding the sincere efforts of Ambassador Vorontsov, is
further evidence of the fact that it is still bent on
creating and maintaining high tensions in our region.

In this regard, we call on the Security Council
and the international community to redouble their
efforts to convince the Government of Iraq to be more
forthcoming and positive in addressing this issue and to
resolve the entire matter on humanitarian, religious and
moral grounds and in conformity with relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We can safely say in all objectivity that there is a
firm international consensus, both among members of
the Security Council and within the entire community
of nations, on the long-standing tragedy of those
innocent victims and that the Government of Iraq is
responsible for their continued suffering and for
restoring stolen Kuwaiti property. The record of the
Government of Iraq in dealing with this issue does not
essentially differ from its record in dealing with other
issues.

The statement issued to the press by the President
of the Security Council on Wednesday, 20 June 2001,
regarding the question of the return of stolen property
is yet another indictment of Iraq and proves that Iraq is
in full compliance neither with paragraph 2 of
resolution 686 (1991) nor with resolution 1284 (1999).
In that statement, the Council expressed its full support
for the efforts of Ambassador Vorontsov and endorsed
the Secretary-General's report contained in document
S/2001/582. It calls on the Government of Iraq to
cooperate fully with the high-level Coordinator in
order to resolve the matters pending in this file and to
restore all property seized, especially the national
archives and other official Kuwaiti documents, as well
as Kuwaiti military equipment. Kuwait hopes that the
Security Council will continue to pay adequate
attention to this important question beyond issuing
repeated statements, which fall on deaf ears in
Baghdad.

Thirdly, Kuwait has often drawn the attention of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General to the
non-peaceful intentions of the Iraqi Government
towards the State of Kuwait and other countries of the
region. Those intentions have taken the form of
repeated threats to the security and sovereignty of the
State of Kuwait. These threats have been made by
ranking officials in the Government of Iraq, such as
one by Uday Saddam Hussein, member of the Iraqi
National Assembly, who called for drawing up a map
of Iraq that includes Kuwait as part of that country.
Moreover, Iraq has alleged that Kuwait is stealing Iraqi
oil in the border region.

Such charges are taken very seriously and
carefully assessed in Kuwait. We cannot in any
circumstances accept these as statements for domestic
consumption only, as some claim them to be, because
the security and stability of States are not consumer
commodities. Similar accusations were levelled by the
Government of Iraq as pretexts for its invasion of the
State of Kuwait in August 1990. That is why, in its
letter to the Secretary-General and the President of the
Security Council, contained in document S/2001/412,
Kuwait declared its readiness to cooperate with any
impartial body the Security Council may see fit to
establish to investigate these Iraqi accusations, which
we are fully confident have no basis in truth.

The States of the Arabian Gulf cannot forget what
really happened because they had never imagined that
it could ever come to pass. Furthermore, the Iraqi
political and informational language addressed to the
Iraqi people and to neighbouring States in no way helps
to reassure us that the catastrophe will never recur or
that the Government of Iraq has learned anything from
past experience, abandoned its dreams or changed its
approach in dealing with its neighbours.

One reason for concern is that this Iraqi policy
seeks to create tension and to destabilize the entire
region. Instead of responding to the repeated calls of
regional and international organizations that it take the
necessary steps to demonstrate its peaceful intentions
towards the State of Kuwait and other neighbouring
countries and that it change its political and
informational language with a View to establishing an
atmosphere of confidence, Iraq - at the Arab summit
held in Jordan last March - rejected the inclusion of a
paragraph in the final declaration renewing its
commitment to guaranteeing the security and
sovereignty of the State of Kuwait. This position was
the source of consternation among the Arab leaders and
destroyed the consensus on the declaration, although
the text reflected all of Iraq's demands, including that
for the lifting of the sanctions against it. Thus, no
statement regarding the lifting of the sanctions was
issued by the Arab Summit because of Iraq's refusal to
include such a paragraph. Iraq's position prompted
many Arab leaders to assert that it had squandered an
opportunity to achieve an unprecedented consensus
among them on the need to call for an end to the
sanctions.

In closing, Iraq's implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions is the primary guarantee
of the security and stability of our region. Without
Iraq's full compliance with those resolutions, this vital
region of the world will remain in a state of constant
tension. Had Iraq implemented its commitments under
resolution 1284 (1999), adopted some 18 months ago,
in all probability the sanctions would have been
suspended, if not lifted, as has happened to other States
subject to a sanctions regime.

Therefore, we call upon this Council to continue
its efforts with a collective will and to affirm its unity
in its vision and approach. The Council should send a
clear, unmistakable message to the Government of Iraq
that the Security Council is acting on the basis of its
political and legal responsibilities in order to urge that
Government to fulfil its obligations.

In this way, Iraq will be able to regain its natural
status as an active regional and international member.
This would allow the fraternal people of Iraq to make
full use of the bounties and resources conferred upon
them by God and to enjoy a good life, with the same
wealth and potential as the people of all other States of
the region.

Our last prayer is to praise our Lord.

