Mr. Klein (United States of America): I would like
to welcome Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Tanin back to the Council, even if only by
video. I would also like to welcome Foreign Minister
Daeie and Ambassador Citaku back to the Council. The
United States commends both of their Governments
for their ongoing efforts to normalize relations through
the European Union-led dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade.

Since 1999, the United Nations has worked hand in
hand with the people of Kosovo to develop multi-ethnic
democratic institutions of Government. Kosovo has
established institutions that uphold the rule of law
and respect human rights. The people of Kosovo
have made important strides, and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has fulfilled its mandate. We strongly believe that the
time is right to downsize the mission further, given the
acute needs for United Nations personnel elsewhere in
the world. We would welcome hearing from Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin at our
next briefing on progress towards such downsizing.

During this reporting period, we welcomed the
27 January meeting between the Prime Ministers of
Kosovo and Serbia in Brussels in the context of the
European Union-facilitated dialogue to normalize
relations between Pristina and Belgrade. We look to both
countries to continue their work and implement their
agreements, even as elections proceed in both Kosovo
and Serbia. As always, we commend and fully support
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy Mogherini for her personal
engagement in advancing the normalization efforts.

Kosovo has also made important advances in
the rule of law, in particular the establishment of the
specialist court to address serious crimes alleged in the
Council of Europe's 2011 Marty report. We encourage
the Governments of the Netherlands and Kosovo to
expedite the completion of all the necessary steps to
establish the specialist court as soon as possible.

The political crisis in Kosovo, in particular the

continued violent obstruction of Kosovo's Assembly, is
a real cause for concern. The use ofviolence and tear gas
inside the parliamentary chamber and on the streets of
Pristina is reckless and irresponsible. It is incompatible
with a modern democracy and it must end. Peaceful
protest is a fundamental right in every democracy,
but there is no room for violence. Kosovo's turbulent
politics reflect the continued struggle that small nation
is in the midst of to improve its economic situation in
a transparent and fair marketplace, undergirded by the
equal application of the rule of law. Dialogue is integral
to overcoming the political impasses. We commend
the Kosovo police for their professionalism, during the
tumultuous days of large-scale protests, in handling the
minority who chose a violent path.

Let me take a moment to congratulate Kosovo on
the successful election ofa new President in accordance
with Kosovo's Constitution and laws. We praise outgoing
President Jahjaga for her courageous and successful
tenure as President of Kosovo. A tremendous advocate
for her country and its people, President Jahjaga ably
represented and advanced Kosovo's interests at home
and on the world stage.

Kosovo continues to contribute to global efforts
to counter terrorism and the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters. Kosovo has taken strong steps
to deter violent extremism, develop effective
preventive mechanisms and reduce the flow of foreign
fighters from Kosovo to Syria and Iraq. We support
comprehensive efforts to address those problems,
such as Kosovo's national strategy to counter violent
extremism and the law criminalizing foreign terrorist
fighters. International law enforcement cooperation,
especially against terrorism and organized crime, is
critical to regional security in the Balkans and beyond.
Kosovo's efforts to cooperate with its neighbours and
the international law enforcement community should
be welcomed, not blocked. We believe Kosovo has the
technical capability and legislative framework in place
to fully contribute to the international community's
law enforcement efforts. It serves no one's interests,
other than those of the criminals and the terrorists, to
exclude Kosovo from our collective efforts to counter
those common threats.

In that vein, we look forward to a day - and we
hope it will be in the near future - when Kosovo will
participate in all United Nations activities as a full
Member, thereby contributing to development, peace
and security for all nations. In the meantime, the
Security Council's time is better spent elsewhere. We
repeat our request that Council members agree to extend
the reporting period for the Secretary-General to report
on UNMIK from every three to every six months.

