Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): We listened attentively to the briefing by
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). Libya follows with great
attention the situation in Darfur, based on its eagerness
to achieve peace and justice, and has participated
actively in efforts aimed at the achievement of peace,
stability and justice in Darfur. Libya coordinates its
efforts with the African Union-United Nations Chief
Mediator for Darfur, Mr. Djibril Bassole, and with the
Government of Qatar, as well as with other regional
Arab and African efforts. We do this with a view to
bringing all parties together at the negotiating table in
order to achieve a permanent settlement of the conflict
and to put an end to the human suffering in Darfur.

Libya hopes that the members of this Council will
realize that there is no alternative to an active political
process that must take highest priority in order to foster
circumstances conducive to stability and security, and
to establish justice and national reconciliation in
Darfur.

The measures adopted by the Prosecutor come
under the framework of Security Council resolution
1593 (2005), which referred the situation in Darfur to
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. The
resolution raised a great number of objections both
within and outside the Council. A significant number of
Council members abstained from voting on that
resolution, and there are still questions circulating
around the purpose of issuing a resolution on Darfur
while the Council remains silent on other areas where
civilians are being killed by the most ferocious
weapons and where, up to this very moment, systemic
impunity is condoned before the eyes of the world.

The Gaza Strip and Afghanistan are testament to
that. Those who today speak about the realization of
justice and ending impunity in the Sudan are the very
same who opposed even discussion in the Security
Council of the report of the United Nations Fact-

Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48),
known as the Goldstone report, concerning the war
crimes and crimes against humanity committed against
Palestinian civilians by the occupying Israeli forces.
That makes the International Criminal Court nothing
more than a tool manipulated by certain countries to
further their policies. Regrettably, the Prosecutor
appears to be the executor of the policies of those
countries.

As we all know, the Sudan is not party to the
Rome Statute and is therefore not bound by the
resolutions of the International Criminal Court. Even
resolution 1593 (2005), which Mr. Moreno-Ocampo
and others use as a fall-back, is not binding on the
Government of the Sudan because it clearly affirms in
paragraph 2 that "that States not party to the Rome
Statute have no obligation under the Statute", although
it also "urges all States and concerned regional and
other international organizations to cooperate fully".
As indicated in the advisory opinion that the
Secretariat's Office of Legal Affairs circulated to the
press a few months ago, from a legal perspective the
term "urges" is not binding. I do not believe that Mr.
Moreno-Ocampo and certain delegations present are
better equipped to interpret United Nations resolutions
than the Office of Legal Affairs.

Paragraphs 62 and 63 of Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's
report contain clear falsifications of the Security
Council's pronouncements in a resolution and a
presidential statement. The Prosecutor is mandated to
work within the framework of a jurisdiction established
under professional principles and free of selectivity,
incitement and threats. He is expected to refrain from
making and repeating accusations and allegations
through press campaigns that go so far as to describe a
head of State as a fugitive from justice when that
individual is participating in summit meetings seeking
to resolve the conflict and to establish peace in his
country.

In that respect, the report before us, especially in
paragraph 66 - which is intended to indicate the
support enjoyed by the International Criminal Court -
clearly reveals how limited that support is. That
paragraph notes that "[d]uring the general debate in the
General Assembly in October, 56 States emphasized
the importance of cooperation with the Court including
in relation to arrests". This statement plainly shows
that more than two thirds of Member States do not in
fact support the steps and measures taken by the
Prosecutor in his dealings with the Sudan.

Although the report of the Prosecutor clearly
indicates in paragraph 67 that "African States parties to
the Rome Statute" - totalling 37 States - "have
affirmed their position as African Union members
that the Security Council should consider a deferral of
the Darfur investigation", the Prosecutor has ignored
that request, as the report reveals in subsequent
paragraphs, particularly paragraph 69, which focuses
on the Prosecutor's contacts with African States but
does not detail the outcomes of those contacts. That is
obviously because the States in question have rejected
his measures.

Also surprising is the absence of any objective
and practical vision behind the Prosecutor's measures
and positions. He requested that an arrest warrant be
issued against President Omar Al-Bashir at a time
when efforts were being made to deploy the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
to advance the peace process. On 4 March, he urged
the issuance of arrest warrants against State officials,
provoking popular outrage and undermining hopes for
peace and stability.

Regrettably, he did so in utter disregard for the
realities of the Sudan and its current sensitive and
complex circumstances. For instance, the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement between the North and South is now at a
critical phase as elections, an important referendum
and deadlines for resolving other outstanding issues are
looming. At the same time, we hear reports of violent
tribal conflicts over sources of livelihood in the South.
In Darfur itself, the humanitarian and security situation
has been affected by the Prosecutor's actions, and
incidents against humanitarian assistance and
peacekeeping operations are on the increase.

The Prosecutor has actively escalated his
accusations and marginalized the constructive efforts
and positions of the forces, parties and organizations
that have direct knowledge of the situation on the
ground and its repercussions in Darfur. He has ignored
several resolutions and statements that have been
reissued as official documents of the Security Council
after having been issued by important regional
organizations representing more than two thirds of the
States Members of the United Nations, including the
African Union - the Organization's principal partner

in Darfur - the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Non-Aligned Movement. The Security Council
operates on behalf of those States, while the United
Nations Charter recognizes the importance of regional
arrangements in achieving the pacific settlement of
disputes and specifically mandates the Council to
encourage their role in that respect.

In this regard, I recall the following African
Union resolution, in which the Peace and Security
Council expressed its conviction that,

"in view of the delicate nature of the processes
underway in the Sudan, approval by the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the application by the ICC
Prosecutor could seriously undermine the
ongoing efforts aimed at facilitating the early
resolution of the conflict in Darfur and the
promotion of long-lasting peace and
reconciliation in the Sudan" (5/2008/481, annex, para. 9).

The Peace and Security Council reiterated its call on
the Security Council, "in accordance with the
provisions of Article 16 of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, to defer the process
initiated by the Court" (ibid., para. 11).

In addition to the statements issued by the
African Union, the United Nations principal partner in
the hybrid operation in Darfur, other regional
organizations - including the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the League of Arab States and the
Non-Aligned Movement - have outlined similar
positions in a series of statements and resolutions on
this matter. In his briefing on 27 April, Mr. Rodolphe
Adada, Joint African Union-United Nations Special
Representative for Darfur and head of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, told
the Council:

"The ICC issue has dominated and polarized
Sudanese political life. It has weakened the position
of those in the Sudan who have been working for
compromise and consensus and has encouraged
militant sentiment ..." (S/PV.61]2, p. 2).

As members know, Mr. Adada's views about the
improved situation in Darfur did not please certain
members of the Council and he was forced under
pressure to leave his post.

09-6333]

It is unquestionable that peace and justice are
indivisible. But how can we achieve justice, especially
in a society exhausted by conflict and numerous
humanitarian tragedies? It can be done only through a
political process and by seriously and comprehensively
addressing both the conflict's underlying causes and its
effects. That is the lesson we learn from history, and it
is the only way to achieve national reconciliation,
security and stability, and to ensure respect for the
sovereignty of a State Member of the United Nations.
These are the objective conditions for establishing
justice and reconciliation.

That has been the basis of the positions and
resolutions of the African Union on this matter, which
were not motivated by any desire to overlook or ignore
the conditions needed for establishing justice in Darfur,
but rather by the determination to create those conditions
by bringing about security and political stability. In that
regard, we recall the report of the African Union High-
level Panel on Darfur (S/2009/599, annex I) chaired by
former President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, which
was adopted by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on 29 October. Libya highly appreciates
the Panel's efforts, and we hope that the Council will
discuss its recommendations objectively and positively,
bearing in mind the requirements of simultaneously
ensuring peace, justice and reconciliation, including by
providing redress for the victims of the Darfur conflict
and helping meet the desire of the people of the Sudan to
live in lasting peace and stability so that they can dedicate
themselves to development, progress and prosperity.

It is time to undo the negative effects of the ICC's
measures and return to the spirit of the Rome Statute
by activating its article 16, which gives us the authority
to defer investigations or prosecutions. That is what is
required to maintain peace and security, especially in
the light of the African Union High-level Panel's
recommendations. The Security Council's failure to
apply article 16 of the Rome Statute, despite a number
of requests that this be done, affects its credibility. The
negative ramifications of implementing article 13 (b)
require that we activate the other provisions and defer
pending legal steps.

That is necessary in order to create a climate
conducive to comprehensive solutions ensuring
stability and justice in the Sudan. That is the hope of
my country, whose Leader has the honour of Chairing
the African Union. It is also the hope of more than two
thirds of the Members of the United Nations, which are

represented in the relevant international and regional
organizations. All of them are continuing their noble
efforts on all tracks; we have no doubt that those
efforts will be effective in achieving peace, stability
and justice in the Sudan.

