Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I thank you for providing
this opportunity to discuss how the partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations
can be further developed. I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

In promoting peace and stability, enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is key, and the increased role of regional
organizations in peacekeeping contributes to the
efficient use of scarce resources. In Africa, the African
Union is shouldering a heavy burden alongside the
United Nations. We commend the progress made by
the African States within the framework of the African
peace and security architecture, bringing increased
knowledge and ownership to conflict management on
that continent. A more results-oriented cooperation
and a stronger African ability to deal with peace and
security challenges on African soil will be of benefit
to all.

The Nordic countries commend the role played
by African forces both in the framework of regional
missions, such as the African Union Mission in Somalia,
and in United Nations settings. More recently, in the
Force Intervention Brigade in the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo, African forces have again accepted to take
on high levels of risk, and have achieved significant
progress as a result. We also welcome the intention
of the African Union to develop its civilian conflict-
management capacities, and stand ready to support that
endeavour.

The Nordic countries fully agree with the
conclusions of the concept note that was circulated
prior to today's meeting (S/2014/478, annex) regarding
the complementary roles of the regional economic
communities, the African Union and the United
Nations. Alongside the United Nations, other regional
organizations such as the European Union (EU), as
well as NATO, give important logistical and financial
support and contribute to capacity-building.

The Nordic countries would also like to commend
the Latin American countries for their support to
United Nations peacekeeping, in particular through
their engagement in Haiti and their large contributions
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Similarly, we welcome the engagement of the League
of Arab States in conflict-management efforts in the
Middle East, notably in Syria.

Over the years, we have seen that the international
community lacks the capability to react quickly to early
warning signals. South Sudan and the Central African
Republic are recent examples. The early warning
mechanisms ofthe African Union and regional economic
communities, such as the Economic Community of West
African States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), have the potential to improve
this situation, and we hope that they can be further
developed in collaboration with the United Nations.
Although there are unarguably clear advantages of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, and between regional and subregional
organizations, this also creates challenges, not least in
the areas of command-and-control, joint planning and
coordination. Well-structured partnerships are needed
for the smooth transfer of regional operations to United
Nations operations and Vice versa.

We welcome the Secretary-General's June 11
announcement that he will be initiating work on a
comprehensive review of United Nations peacekeeping
(see S/PV.7196). The review should closely study
how United Nations partnerships with regional
organizations can be further developed, especially
regarding their operational aspects. A ministerial event
on the challenges of United Nations peacekeeping will
be organized by Finland and Uruguay in cooperation
with the International Peace Institute during the high-
level week of the General Assembly in September.

Effective peace operations require a comprehensive
approach. The Nordic countries continue to emphasize
the importance of ensuring that the framework for
women and peace and security is reflected in all aspects
of peacekeeping and activities relating to it. The Nordic
Centre for Gender in Military Operations, located in
Sweden, is designed to support the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions.

Strengthening the rule of law has emerged as a
central objective for United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and has led to the expansion and increasing
complexity of international police mandates and tasks
in peacekeeping operations. The strategic guidance
framework for international police peacekeeping
being developed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in close collaboration with Member
States, is designed to provide an overarching policy
architecture. A strategic guidance framework police
command meeting, to be co-hosted in Pretoria in October
by the Institute for Security Studies, South Africa, the
Swedish Police and the United Nations Police Division,
will further the framework's development.

The Nordic countries are strongly committed to
peaceful conflict resolution in Africa. We are jointly
engaged in several capacity-building programmes with
the Eastern Africa Standby Force that include giving
financial and advisory support, and we contribute to
capacity-building within the African Union Commission
and IGAD. The Nordic countries contribute troops,
military observers and staff officers, as well as police
and corrections officers and other civilian personnel,
to both United Nations and EU peace operations across
the continent. We are already contributing to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), and Sweden will soon
make a substantial contribution, with an intelligence
collection capability, in support of MINUSMA's all-
sources information fusion unit. In the area of civilian
personnel, we contribute to the majority of United
Nations missions in Africa, including MINUSMA, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

For more than a decade, the European Union has
been engaged in civil and military crisis management
and capacity-building in Africa, in partnership with
the United Nations and regional partners. One of the
instruments of the European Common Security and
Defence Policy is the EU Battlegroup concept, inspired
by the successful conduct ofOperation Artemis in 2003,
in support of the then United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
the spring of 2015, the Nordic Battlegroup, in which
Estonia, Finland, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway
and Sweden participate, will be on standby and capable
of carrying out military crisis management operations
should the EU member States decide to launch such an
operation.

In conclusion, the Nordic countries welcome the
Security Council's increased attention to the issue
of enhanced cooperation and partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations, and
we stand ready to contribute by supporting regional
capacity-building and through direct participation in
international and regional peacekeeping efforts.

