Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I should like to thank you for having
convened this important meeting of the Security Council
devoted to the role of the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants
in the context of peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-
building activities, and in particular to the quest for ways
and means of ensuring that the process helps to enhance the
effectiveness of the activities involved in peacekeeping and
peace-building. I also thank the Secretary-General for the
important introductory statement he made this morning.

The renewed consideration of this matter by the
Security Council in the context of its prerogatives in the
area of the maintenance of international peace and
security attests to the concern that this body rightly feels
for this threefold process, which is now a key dimension
of peacekeeping - namely, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of those who until
recently were fighting on opposite sides in an armed
conflict.

As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
exhaustive and detailed report to the Security Council on
this issue, this tripartite process contributes decidedly to
consolidating the foundations of peace and stability
because it helps reinforce confidence among former
belligerents, stabilizes situations after conflicts and
facilitates the transition of a society from conflict to
normalcy and development.

The international community has already acquired
considerable experience in this area in the context of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, and in particular
in the course of the last decade. That experience offers us
abundant lessons that we can apply to future activities. At
the present stage, we need to refine, consolidate and build
on that experience. In this connection, it seems to us that
the following aspects are of particular importance.

First, the systematic inclusion of clauses regarding
the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants in any peace agreement
bringing a conflict to an end would be productive in
helping ensure that the agreement contained a number of
parameters for the process, which must be carried out
with the political commitment of the parties.

Secondly, it seems to us that having the United
Nations coordinate all disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration activities should be the focus of sustained
attention, given the interlinkage, interdependence and
complementarity relating to the disarmament process in
the overall peacekeeping and peace-building environment.

Thirdly, we consider that substantial and sustained
support from the international community is a necessity,
in particular with regard to the requisite skills and
financial resources. There is definitely a role to be played
here by donors and international financial institutions.

 

Finally, the international community should pay
constant attention to the question of child soldiers, whose
recruitment has become a systematic and sadly disquieting
phenomenon in a number of armed conflicts, in defiance of
universal norms and to the detriment to these children's
dignity, mental stability and psychological well-being.

The draft statement that the President will be reading
out shortly on behalf of the Council seems to us to reflect
all of these concerns. It is for this reason that we support it
unreservedly.

