Ms. Pillay: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Council on the crisis in South
Sudan. My visit to the country this week, together with
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, revealed
a sharp and drastic deterioration in the human rights
situation. The deadly spiral of revenge killings that has
developed over the past four and a half months appears
to be reaching a level of intensity that is generating a
real fear of disaster among the people of South Sudan
and that is compounded by the likelihood of widespread
famine that the conflict has generated.

Two weeks ago, in the aftermath of the capture of
Bentiu by the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/
Army in Opposition, hundreds of people, many of
them civilians - including those sheltering in places
of worship and hospitals - were hunted down on
the basis of their ethnicity and killed. Following the
massacre at Bentiu, a retaliatory assault occurred in
Bor against displaced people who had sought refuge in
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
compound, leading to the deaths of at least 50 women,
men and children. Many more were injured, including
two peacekeepers.

Earlier this week, Mr. Dieng and I travelled to
Bor and met several of the survivors, who described
the assault to us and expressed fears of being targeted
on the grounds of their ethnicity or of their being
perceived as supporters of one or other of the warring
sides. Thankfully, the strong intervention of Indian
peacekeepers prevented hundreds more from being
killed or injured.

UNMISS has performed commendably in opening
its doors to some 80,000 people and has been sheltering
and protecting them as best it can. However, several
community leaders told us that they were terrified of
further attacks and wish to be moved from the United
Nations compound to places of safety. UNICEF reports
that more than 9,000 children have been recruited into
armed forces by both sides. Thirty-two schools have
been taken over by military forces, and there have been
more than 20 attacks on clinics and health centres.
Children have also been killed during indiscriminate
attacks on civilians by both sides.

Since December, we have seen versions of such
targeted ethnic violence in Malakal and dozens of
other, smaller towns across the country, as well as
in Juba itself. The accelerating cycles of revenge are
now such that the slaughters in Bentiu and Bor could
ignite further violence. Some ofthose key state capitals
have changed hands numerous times since the conflict
started, either following fighting or after the other party
retreated, leaving civilians more vulnerable to attacks.

Elements on all sides of the conflict have called
publicly for their supporters to hunt down other ethnic
groups. Harking back grimly to the events that led up
to the Rwandan genocide, following their capture of
Bentiu this month rebels commandeered a local radio
station and urged supporters to take revenge, including
by raping women from other communities. Even more
recently, according to media reports, the Governor of
the Lakes region told a gathering ofyouths last weekend,

"What we are doing today is eye for eye. You pinch
me, I pinch you too - no forgiveness. If someone
pinches you time and again and you do not do
the same, you are creating a point of weakness in
yourself."

Such statements by senior public officials fuel violence.
President Kiir told us that he hated revenge. I urged him
to make his statement known publicly in order to stem
the continued violence. Riek Machar acknowledged the
need for a political solution, stating that he "hates the
situation that he is in" and would be open to peace talks.
A matter of pressing urgency is the looming
humanitarian disaster. The rainy season has begun,
meaning that the planting season is already half
over, which raises the spectre of widespread famine.
Mr. Dieng and I have urged leaders on both sides to
observe a 30-day ceasefire to allow people to return to
their fields to plant as much as possible. Shockingly,
their reactions indicated that this was not an overriding
concern.

Last month I said, with respect to impunity and
accountability before the Council, that the pervasive
culture of impunity in South Sudan had fuelled the
current violence and that it was critical that the capacities
of the domestic judicial system to effectively address
accountability be established without delay. Only clear
and decisive moves towards accountability can hope to
stop the cycles of revenge killings and re-establish a
sense of common destiny across the country.

During our mission, Mr. Dieng and I conveyed
that concern to President Salva Kiir and five senior
Cabinet Ministers in his Government. We also
travelled to Nassir, where we discussed the killings in
Bentiu with opposition leader Riek Machar, the former
vice-President of South Sudan, since the attacks were
carried out by forces associated with the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition, which he
leads. The Government said that it is investigating the
mass killings of civilians in Juba in mid-December,
and Mr. Machar similarly assured us that he would
investigate the slaughter in Bentiu, adding that he
would do his utmost to stop his forces from attacking
civilians.

I welcome those commitments to investigate, but
as I said this week to my various interlocutors, such
investigations must be independent, transparent and
consistent with international standards, and they must
move swiftly to take action against alleged perpetrators
in order to reassure a terrified civilian population that
the escalation of ethnic violence will not continue to
intensify.

Unfortunately, I am not convinced that this will be
the case. I fear that South Sudan's leaders are locked in a
purely personal power struggle, with little or no regard
for the appalling suffering that it inflicts on their people.
Mr. Dieng and I warned them that they will inevitably
be the subject of international investigations regarding
the extent of their knowledge of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed by subordinates under
their authority and their failure to take reasonable steps
to prevent such crimes.

With regard to the peace negotiations, international
pressure has had some effect on the deadlock between
President Kiir and Mr. Machar. Last week, in what was
perceived as a gesture of reconciliation, the Government
released four prisoners whom it had accused of plotting
a coup. On Monday, peace talks between the warring
sides reopened in Addis Ababa under the auspices of
the regional East Africa bloc, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). And today, I
understand that United States Secretary of State John
Kerry has announced that the two leaders have agreed
to meet.

I was able to meet in Addis Ababa with the head
of the IGAD mediation team, the African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs and the Ethiopian
State Minister of Foreign Affairs. IGAD is pushing
for the quick deployment of the proposed protection
and deterrent force, which will provide protection
for the monitoring and verification teams responsible
for monitoring the implementation of the cessation
of hostilities signed in January. The IGAD head sees
that as, in his words, "a game changer" in reducing the
ongoing violence. Despite egregious violations of the
cessation of hostilities by both parties, the monitoring
and verification teams have not investigated any
reported violations.

As I was reminded by the Ambassador during
our meeting, more people have been killed after the
cessation of hostilities was signed than before. I call
on the Security Council to support the IGAD initiative.
The deployment of the protection force will help save
lives in the short run. The force should be deployed
only if it has a clear mandate that supports the political
resolution of the conflict.

I also met with four members of the African Union
commission of inquiry. They have just returned from
their first visit to South Sudan, where they met with
internally displaced persons and victims in furtherance
of their mandate to inquire into accountability, justice
and reconciliation. The Commission will require
substantial support if it is effectively to fulfil its
mandate, including a fully staffed secretariat with the
required expertise. My office stands ready to support
the commission whenever requested.

IGAD and regional leaders share the same outrage
as the rest of the world. They see the conflict as a
showdown between two leaders for political power and
the control of oil revenues.

With regard to international action and
recommendations, in December the Council agreed
that the number of UNMISS peacekeepers should
be increased from 7,700 to 13,200. However, the
contributing countries have still not supplied some
two-thirds of the extra troops. They are desperately
needed. I trust that the members of the Council will do
their utmost to ensure that UNMISS can count on a full
complement of peacekeepers, as well as an adequate
budget. The world's youngest country has a long history
of suffering. Its people look to the Council to exert its
authority to ensure a speedy political solution to this
dreadful conflict.

