I thank the Secretary-General and all the other speakers for their presentations. I would like to commend Russia for making women's rights a priority ofits presidency of the Security Council. Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we are still far from having achieved the goals set. This is no time for celebration. Progress in this area has been undermined by a succession of crises of which women are systematically the victims. Backtracking is a constant threat in every conflict or crisis, including the current pandemic. The time has passed from acknowledgement to action. The Security Council must not tolerate any regression. That is why it is essential to preserve each and every one of our resolutions and, above all, to work together to implement them. Although women are often key players in crisis response, they are still insufficiently present in all peace and post-crisis processes. Progress has been made in Afghanistan, Yemen, Libya, Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular. But negotiators and mediators do not have the place they deserve. Let us be honest. The conditions for this exist; it is simply a matter of making the most of them. That is why France finances training for civilian and military women, in conjunction with the Department of Peace Operations, UN-Women and the International Organization of la Francophonie. At the same time, we must pursue determined action against the scourge of sexual and gender-based violence. The prevention of such violence is not a choice but a requirement. Such violence must be suppressed. Access to sexual and reproductive rights and health care is being hampered, and the coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated the difficulties in that respect. We regret the politicization of these issues, which leads to losing sight of the best interests of women and girls. France condemns all sexist, misogynistic or homophobic discourse and supports actions in favour of victims through a significant contribution to the Global Fund for Survivors of Sexual Violence created by Dr. Mukwege and Ms. Murad. The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) requires an effort on the part of everyone. That is why national action plans are so important, and France is finalizing its third plan. It has strengthened the integration of gender issues into its humanitarian and development aid in order to provide targeted support to women in conflict and post-conflict situations. France will launch a €120 million fund this year to support women's organizations, particularly in developing countries. Finally, I would like to recall that France will host, in partnership with Mexico and UN-Women, the Generation Equality Forum in June 2021. On that occasion, a women and peace and security compact will be launched in order to build on existing commitments and raise new funding. France pays tribute to all feminists and human rights defenders around the world and will continue to make the full implementation of the women and peace and security resolutions a major focus of its action in the Security Council.
