The President: I thank the representative of Romania
for the kind words he addressed to me.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of El Salvador. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Castaneda Cornejo (El Salvador)
(interpretation from Spanish): I congratulate you, Mr.
President, on the important initiative to convene this
meeting of the Security Council to address a universal
issue that is of great humanitarian import.

We wish also to express our satisfaction at the
appointment of Ambassador Olara Otunnu as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict. As he carries out his mandate, he is
kindling growing interest by Governments in taking
genuine measures to meet this urgent and important
challenge.
El Salvador fully shares the international concern at
the growing number of children in various parts of the
world who are recruited or who volunteer to participate in
hostilities. That concern is all the greater as we daily see
the harmful after-effects of war on our own children:
more refugees, more displaced persons, sexual abuse and
exploitation, drug addiction, alcoholism, increased
numbers of children maimed by landmines, children left
orphaned, mental illness and psychological trauma. All of
this makes for an uncertain future for our societies and
for the persistence of the vicious cycle of poverty.

For more than a decade, we in El Salvador have
experienced the horrors of war, but the most vulnerable
among us - women and children - have suffered the
most. We therefore think it essential to join in calling for
the settlement of conflicts through dialogue and
negotiation, and for a radical change in the objectives of
war, including civil war, that would ban forever the direct
or indirect employment or involvement of children. The
international community has been formulating important
initiatives to put an end to this phenomenon, which
endangers the lives, health and emotional well-being of
children directly involved in hostilities, which destroys the
human and financial resources needed to rebuild nations
devastated by war and which jeopardizes the viability and
governability of countries over the longer term.

Among these initiatives I would highlight the report
of the expert of the Secretary-General, Ms. Graca Machel,
on the impact of armed conflict on children. That report
presents important evidence on the various ways in which
children are abused and brutalized in war, and offers
alternatives and recommendations for action in a number
of areas.

Negotiations are now under way at Rome on the
establishment of an international criminal court, which

 

provides a good opportunity to engage in a full debate and
to adopt key decisions on children in armed conflict. The
international community might consider laying down clear,
firm rules prohibiting the continued active participation of
children in armed conflict - which already constitutes a
flagrant violation of existing international norms contained
in the instruments of international humanitarian law and in
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. We therefore
believe that recruiting children into armed forces and
participation by children in hostilities should be included on
the list of war crimes in the draft statute of the international
criminal court.

Let me conclude by citing a remark made some years
ago by a former Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de
Cuellar, a remark that remains valid today:

"The way in which a society treats its children
reflects not only how compassionate and caring it is,
but also its sense of justice, its commitment to the
future and its desire to improve the human
condition... This is an indisputable truth, both for the
community of nations and for each individual nation."

The President: I thank the representative of El
Salvador for the kind words he addressed to me.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Azerbaijan and
Liberia, in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kouliev
(Azerbaijan) and Ms. Osode (Liberia) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Liberia. I invite her to take a seat at the Council table
and to make her statement.


