Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): At the outset, I
would like to join other delegations in welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Foreign Minister of
Iraq, to the Council and in thanking him for his
briefing on the current developments in his country.
My delegation also thanks Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
Special Adviser on the International Compact with Iraq
and Other Political Issues, for his briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) and Mr. Warren Sach, the United
Nations Controller, for his presentation on the status of
the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI) and the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB).

We also wish to thank the Permanent
Representative of the United States for his statement
on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I).

Like any other nation, Iraq is deserving of peace
and stability. The decline in the overall level of
violence across Iraq in the past few months is therefore
a source of great satisfaction and a development which
we welcome. The efforts by the Government of Iraq to
address security challenges have yielded tangible
results. Despite this encouraging development,
violence in Iraq continues and it remains a challenge
for Iraq to achieve genuine sustainable peace.

In our view, the increasing capacity of the Iraqi
security forces in ensuring peace and stability is
critical to the withdrawal of foreign forces. In this
regard, we welcome the continued efforts by the
Government of Iraq in making the Iraqi security forces
better trained, better equipped and greater in number.

We also recognize that 2008 is a critical year in
the partnership between Iraq and MNF-I as the latter's
mandate was extended by resolution 1790 (2007) on
18 December 2007 on the basis of a final request from
the Government of Iraq.

We therefore believe that training and capacity-
building should be given a greater emphasis in the
support and assistance of MNF-I for Iraq. This will
hopefully help Iraq to be more self-reliant in meeting
its security needs.

Atrocities in Iraq cannot be fully responded to by
a security approach. An approach that promotes
inclusiveness and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms must also be sought. In this
regard, Indonesia supports the efforts by the Iraqi
Government to engage leaders from across the political
and religious spectrums to promote confidence-
building through national dialogue and reconciliation.

Violence in Iraq has caused serious human
displacement. More than 2 million Iraqis have fled to
neighbouring States, particularly Syria and Jordan; and
58 per cent of the internally displaced persons (IDPs)
are under age 12, creating special issues involving the
protection of children.

The humanitarian crisis and the displacement that
have been caused can lead to further instability in Iraq
and has created a new challenge in the host countries.
The development of a national strategy to address the
Iraqi IDPs and refugees by the Government of Iraq is
an important step. Sufficient resources must be secured
in order to transform the strategy into reality.

The role of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian
agencies remains critical in assisting the Government
of Iraq and the host countries in dealing with the Iraqi
refugees. The 2008 consolidated appeal, which was
launched in Baghdad on 12 February 2008, is a
commendable initiative for pooling the financing for
the humanitarian activities.

The IAMB remains an important body in the
oversight of the use of resources of the DFI. Iraq is one
of the richest countries in terms of its natural
resources. The work of the IAMB must help Iraq to
ensure that the Iraqi people benefit from the Fund.

With regard to UNAMI, we continue to underline
its importance in providing Iraq with various types of
assistance. Its electoral assistance will be particularly
important as Iraq is now preparing for parliamentary
and provincial elections. Collaboration between
UNAMI and the Independent High Electoral
Commission of Iraq is also an important step in
ensuring the credible conduct of the elections.

As a final point, in reaffirming our full support
for the Iraqis in their pursuit of a peaceful, stable,
prosperous and democratic Iraq, my delegation wishes
to highlight three elements that we consider key in
contributing to the early solution of conflict in Iraq.
First, an all-inclusive reconciliation among the Iraqis
involving the current Government; secondly, the
participation of the international community in the
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts in the country
and finally, with the consent of Iraq, the deployment of
enhanced, mandated United Nations capacities and
presence in the country, as foreign troops draw down.

