The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Indonesia for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions, a cornerstone of international
humanitarian law. And it is with enormous pleasure that
I see with us Peter Mauer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, guardian of the Geneva
Conventions. It also marks the twentieth anniversary
of the Security Council's adoption of the protection of
civilians as an item on its agenda, a response to the
Council's "deep concern" at the erosion of respect for
international humanitarian law.

However, while the normative framework has been
strengthened, compliance has deteriorated. We are
rightly critical when assessing the state ofthe protection

of civilians, for there is great cause for concern. But let
us first recall that we have seen some progress over the
past 20 years. A culture of protection has taken root,
in the Security Council and across the United Nations.
To use the Council's own words, the protection of
civilians is "one of the core issues" on its agenda. A
comprehensive protection framework now exists, based
on international law and Security Council practice.

The protection of children, and of all civilians,
from loathsome acts of sexual violence in conflict has
been strengthened through the deployment of specialist
advisers in peace operations, thereby reinforcing
the work of humanitarian agencies. Monitoring and
reporting on grave violations against children in
conflicts and engagement with warring parties has led
to the demobilization and reintegration of thousands
of children.

Security Council-mandated United Nations peace
operations have protected and saved countless civilian
lives. In South Sudan, nearly 200,000 internally
displaced people are currently sheltering at sites for the
protection of civilians. In the Central African Republic,
the United Nations Mission has supported local peace
and ceasefire agreements that are monitored by civilian
and military components. Civilian casualty recording
by the United Nations in Afghanistan has led to the
adoption of measures by pro-Government forces to
minimize harm. Millions of civilians receive cross-
border humanitarian assistance in Syria. And war
criminals, from Cambodia to the former Yugoslavia,
have been tried and convicted.

Security Council resolutions on the protection of
medical care in armed conflict and on conflict and
hunger have given important focus and urgency to
these issues. I look forward to working with Member
States to ensure they are implemented.

But, despite those advances, grave human suffering
is still being caused by armed conflicts and a lack of
compliance with international humanitarian law. As
my report (S/2019/373) underlines, civilians continue
to make up the vast majority of casualties in conflict.
In 2018 alone, the United Nations recorded the
death or injury of more than 22,800 civilians in just
six countries - Afghanistan, Iraq, Mali, Somalia,
South Sudan and Yemen. In Idlib, in north-west
Syria, we saw a new wave of shelling and airstrikes
against hospitals, schools, markets and camps for the
displaced, killing, wounding and creating panic among
the civilian population.

In all conflicts, when explosive weapons were used
in populated areas, 90 per cent ofthose killed or injured
were civilians. Overall, approximately 1.4 million
people were newly displaced across international
borders, while a further 5.2 million were internally
displaced. Widespread access constraints jeopardized
humanitarian and medical assistance to civilians in
need. Violence against humanitarian and medical
workers and facilities persisted. The World Health
Organization recorded 705 attacks against health-care
workers and facilities injust eight conflicts, resulting in
451 deaths and 860 injuries. Three hundred and sixty-
nine aid workers were kidnapped, wounded or killed.
And starvation of civilians was used as a method of
warfare, as were rape and sexual violence.

Chief among our challenges is enhancing and
ensuring respect and compliance for international
humanitarian law in the conduct of hostilities. In many
cases, our information suggests that respect for these
bodies of law is at best questionable; in others, and
as detailed in several of my country-specific reports,
we have witnessed blatant violations. Nonetheless,
there are examples where warring parties respect
the law and are implementing precautions, collateral
damage estimation and other efforts to minimize the
impact of fighting on civilians. Those practices must
be implemented effectively and standardized across
parties and theatres of operation.

Greater attention must be paid to those who are
already vulnerable during peace time - such as the
elderly, children and the disabled - who are rendered
all the more vulnerable and in need of protection during
flight and conflict. We must also take urgent action to
reduce the humanitarian impact of urban warfare, and
in particular of explosive weapons. Member States
should do more to condition arms exports on respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights
law. And they must call for greater respect for the law
and protection of civilians by parties to conflict, and in
particular, partner forces, including in the context of
multinational coalition operations. We also need greater
progress on accountability by closing the gap between
allegations of serious violations and their investigation
and prosecution.

Progress is needed most at the national level.
My report recommends action in three areas: first,
developing national policy frameworks that establish
clear institutional authorities and responsibilities for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict; secondly,
principled and sustained engagement by humanitarian
organizations and others with non-State armed groups
to negotiate safe and timely humanitarian access and
promote compliance with the law; and, thirdly, ensuring
accountability for serious violations.

As a practical matter, the Security Council can do
much to enhance compliance with the laws of war. That
includes providing financial and technical assistance to
support the investigation and prosecution of war crimes
in conflict-affected States.

We also need action at the global and multilateral
levels. For the Security Council, that means being more
consistent in how it addresses protection concerns
within and across different conflicts and being more
comprehensive in terms of, for example, grappling with
the protection of urban warfare. It also means keeping
today's conversation going, with Member States, United
Nations actors and civil society engaging on a sustained
basis to implement the actions I have outlined.

For, as bleak as the current state of protection is,
there is considerable scope for improvement if we each
do our utmost to promote and implement the rules that
bind us to preserve humanity in war. This is the best
way that we can honour the twentieth anniversary of
the protection agenda. We have the rules and laws of
war. We all now need to work to enhance compliance.

