Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): First of all, I wish
to congratulate Argentina on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August and
also thank it for bringing this important issue before
the Council for its consideration. I also thank the
representatives of the four regional organizations for
their substantive and comprehensive briefings.

Thailand aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).

Thailand joins many of the previous speakers
in recognizing and commending the significant role
and valuable contributions of the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in resolving
conflicts and maintaining peace and security. We
wholeheartedly support the idea of developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations as well as that of
exploring greater cooperation in the fields of conflict,
early warning, prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, as contained in document
S/PRST/2010/1.

As mentioned by my ASEAN colleague earlier,
disaster relief is one area of possible cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
I would like to echo his statement by highlighting one
important example of the establishment of Tripartite
Core Group - the United Nations, ASEAN and the
Government of Myanmar - which was extremely
successful in mobilizing and delivering humanitarian
aid to people in need in the wake of Cyclone Nargis,
which struck Myanmar in 2008.

Indeed, cooperation between ASEAN and the
United Nations was established many decades ago, and
we continue to have close consultations to strengthen
our collaboration. This year will see a special session
between ASEAN and the United Nations to review our
partnership, with the goal of widening and deepening
our areas of cooperation.

My delegation would like to highlight the untapped
potential of the various regional and subregional
arrangements. Given their capacity, their role can extend
beyond the original scope of the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Thailand envisages an enhanced role for such
organizations in confidence-building and preventive
diplomacy, which are instrumental for sustainable
peace and conflict prevention. In that regard, allow me
to offer the Council a few thoughts on the issue.

First, it is essential that the United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations increase their focus on
preventive measures by expanding and deepening their
cooperation in promoting international norms, values
and principles of democracy, the rule of law, good
governance and respect for and protection of human
rights, which are fundamental for a united and peaceful
society.

Secondly, we are concerned by the increase in
the number of conflicts and the level of violence that
originate from sectarian tension or are precipitated by
hate speech, religious rhetoric and racial incitement.
Regional and subregional arrangements can serve
as early warning mechanisms when tensions arise.
Furthermore, those organizations can play a Vital role
in creating a culture of peace by promoting respect
and appreciation for diversity and harmony among
peoples of different cultures, faiths and beliefs, both
interregionally and intraregionally.

Thirdly, Thailand also encourages closer
engagement between regional organizations and the
Security Council on issues affecting regional peace
and security, from peacekeeping to sanctions, as well
as thematic issues on the Security Council's agenda.

Finally, another area where the United Nations
and regional organizations can enhance their close
cooperation is the systematic compilation and full
utilization of regional organizations' knowledge and
information on the specific geography and situations on
the ground, the unique cultures of local communities
and the "do's and don'ts". That will be very useful when
multinational forces are deployed for peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions in areas where they lack
familiarity.

Let me conclude my statement by paying tribute
to the men and women of regional organizations and
international forces who tirelessly work and risk
their lives in conflict zones around the world in the
maintenance of peace and security.

