Mr. Sharma: I promise not to test the patience of
representatives too much, but many observations have
been made and I would indeed like to make comments
on at least some of them.

To begin with, I wish to thank all delegations for
the views, points of emphasis, assessments and advice
which they have given on the work of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). I can assure them that I have taken very
careful note of them and that I and my colleagues will
profit from them.

I also wish to thank delegations for their
expressions of support and appreciation for
UNMISET's work. They are a great encouragement to
me and to my many colleagues, who are responsible for
any useful contribution that we may have been able to
make. Here, I wish to express my deep appreciation for
the committed and sterling support that I have
consistently received from all of my colleagues. After
every appearance before the Council, I brief the entire
staff and membership of UNMISET collectively, and I
will personally convey to them the dominant
sentiments expressed in the Security Council and its
expectations of us. I can assure the Council that we
will continue to strive to the utmost to try to fulfil its
mandate to the best of our capacity.

I also wish to place on record the supportiveness
and accessibility that I have always received from the
leaders of Timor-Leste, for which I remain deeply
grateful. In addition, I wish to assure individual
delegations that we stand ready to provide any
information or clarification on UNMISET's work that
they may require, now or in the future.

Of the many observations that were made, I
should particularly like to recall those that emphasized
the need to strengthen public institutions. That is a
central preoccupation of ours. I should also like to
endorse the observations concerning the need for the
international community's continued assistance. An
emphasis on human rights is obviously central to our
work, and we fully support that. We will always work
in the light of the highest international norms in the
field of human rights, which the Government of
Timor-Leste intends to observe. Lastly, the emphasis
on the rule of law as a core element of the new
democracy and the need to preserve and promote it are
things of which we are extremely mindful, as is the
Government.

Many points were covered in the statements by
delegates, and I should like to throw some light on four
or five of them.

First are the many observations on the judicial
system. In November 2002, the Government of Timor-
Leste and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) conducted a joint mission to assess the
judicial system. Those bodies are now in the process of
preparing projects to strengthen the capacity of the
judicial system.

It is true that, in many respects, the courts
continue to function in a haphazard manner and are in
great need of assistance. It was observed here that
illegal detention of persons on expired detention
warrants has been an unfortunate practice. Similarly,
the courts have failed to hear cases in a timely and
efficient manner, and that is a major concern. While
there is a lack of personnel - which hinders
efficiency - officers of the court have also been
perceived as needing to display the required
understanding of the roles of judges, prosecutors and
public defenders. That is a particular concern, since
legislation adopted by Parliament in the future will be
tested through litigation before the courts. I should
emphasize that the leaders of Timor-Leste are well
aware of the need to do this urgently, and we are in
close interaction with them on this matter. They have
an avowed commitment to democracy and the rule of
law, and they have said so on a number of occasions.
However, it is clear that internal will and discipline,
provision of personnel and significant bilateral and
multilateral assistance will all be required to improve
the functioning of the justice sector, both alongside and
after UNMISET. It is expected that the finalized justice
sector programme will be ready by the end of June this
year

There was a related question concerning the
Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal was established
by the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) but had been largely non-
functional since December 2001. UNMISET thus
found a non-functional Court of Appeal and made the
greatest possible efforts to locate and employ suitable
judges who would serve as judges on the Court of
Appeal. In February this year, the four original
members of the Superior Council of the Magistracy
recommended to the President of Timor-Leste that one
of those judges, Mr. Claudio Ximenes, be appointed
President of the Court of Appeal. In March, the
President of the Republic issued a decree appointing
Mr. Ximenes to that position. There was a question as
to whether the Parliament needed to ratify that, and the
decree was sent to Parliament. Parliament decided by a
vote last Tuesday that its ratification was not required.
Therefore, the President of the Court of Appeal is now
expected to be sworn in over the course of the week.

There were comments and encouragement by
many delegations urging that the target date of 30 June
to agree on a line constituting the border be met. I wish
to state that, at the Joint Border Committee's most
recent meeting, in December, both sides agreed on a
work plan that envisaged a meeting in January to
compare border lines drawn from satellite imagery
unilaterally by each side and the start of the field work
in February. That meeting was held in March, having
been delayed. Both sides adopted a new work plan, in
accordance with which joint field work was to start in
April. At a meeting held in Jakarta in April, both sides
agreed to start the field work on 5 May. In order to
meet the target date, strong commitment by both
countries is needed, and further delays should, of
course, be avoided.

Timor-Leste will require technical and financial
support to make its contribution - particularly for the
field surveys - and UNMISET is trying to be as
helpful as it can in that respect. Meeting the target date
does not, of course, depend only on accomplishing the
joint survey work. We are sure that both sides are
mindful of the requirement to continue negotiating in
good faith, on the basis of the 1904 treaty agreed upon
by both sides as the legal basis for the international
boundary. The developments so far have been
extremely promising, as noted by many delegates, and
we hope that the process will continue in the same
spirit.

Some delegations asked about the operational
readiness of the National Police of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) to take over internal security challenges after
the United Nations peacekeeping force (UNPKF) and
the United Nations police (UNPOL) have left. Many
challenges do indeed lie ahead, particularly in relation
to the level of readiness that the PNTL will have
achieved by around this time next year.

The police force has to be ready to meet internal
security threats in the future. In essence, there are four
main challenges. First and foremost is that of working
towards the creation of an impartial, non-partisan,
apolitical, efficient and accountable police force. That
will require a mix of legislation, regulations and
training.

The second challenge is that of appropriate
provisioning of the Border Patrol Unit, to which some
delegations have referred. The Government, UNMISET
and troop-contributing countries, through the donation
of their facilities to the PNTL, are trying to address this
issue.

The third relates to the creation of the rapid
deployment groups. The following elements need to be
considered in depth: their size, composition and
physical location; their standard operating procedures
and the training to be given to them; and the supply of
appropriate armaments and other equipment.

Finally, the training and development of rapid
intervention units to deal with urban disorder would be
facilitated through the stationing of an internationally
formed unit approved by the Council, as this would
provide the rapid intervention units more time to
develop and consolidate. We hope to achieve that end
successful as well.

However, development of the police can take
place effectively only against a backdrop of general
respect for the rule of law. An honest, efficient and
accountable police force but one which, for instance, is
forced to accept illegal detentions due to problems in
the judiciary or in the correctional system cannot
command the trust and confidence of the community it
polices. Improvements in the delivery of justice,
particularly in this Year of Administrative
Restructuring and Justice in Timor-Leste announced by
the Prime Minister, are critical if the police force is to
grow into the social and professional role expected of
it. The Government realizes that very well.

There was a reference to the workshop which was
concluded just a couple of days ago. It was indeed a
very successful workshop. It succeeded in making the
development of the PNTL a participatory process. It
attracted high-level, active participation from the
Timor-Leste leadership; from ambassadors and other
representatives from several countries, including those
based in Jakarta; from senior officers and the rank and
file of the PNTL; and from representatives of various
sectors of society in Timor-Leste. It promoted a sense
of ownership among all stakeholders in this critical
process. It also demonstrated the Government's
commitment to making the PNTL a professional and
accountable force equal to the challenges before it. As
President Gusmao said at the workshop, the police
must appear in the eyes of society to be the guardians
of order.
It has been decided that another workshop will be
held very shortly - at the end of May or in early
June - in which the role of the various wings of the
police that are being created will be further discussed,
because there was not enough time to go into this in the
required detail. This in itself is an indication of the
success of the workshop: that it is mindful of the need
to complete the work it started.

There were questions about situations on the
ground at the present time. The recent attacks by the
armed groups were on an exceptional scale. In my
statement I mentioned that even if numerically,
compared to many other regions in the world, they may
have looked not all that serious, the requirement is to
look at them in the context of the immediate past from
which the nation is emerging and of the future
challenges which an extrapolation of incidents of this
type could pose to the country. Then we can evaluate
these developments in the context required. Those
attacks involved heavily armed personnel. They were
well equipped, and their level of tactical training and
awareness made their tracking and apprehension a
challenging task, even for capable forces.

These occurrences do not lend themselves to easy
distinctions between external and internal threats. They
lie in a grey area between the two. But what is certain
is that they need to be dealt with by military forces in
the immediate term, and probably largely by
augmented Timorese forces in the long term. Neither
have the civil disturbances we have seen been
apolitical. The riots in Dili appeared to have included
the careful targeting of property, which would
undermine confidence in the Government.

At this nascent stage of the country's
development, any perception of a possible return to
violence and disorder would exacerbate the sense of
insecurity in the population and must therefore be
effectively combated. I am most grateful to the Council
for having strengthened our hand so that we will be
able to do what is needed.

I should add that, following these incidents, the
Government has encouraged the formation of Village-
based security groups to assist the police and the
peacekeeping force in looking out for infiltrators. Since
January, high-ranking Government officials have often
spoken about the importance of the population being
the eyes and ears of the police and bringing
information or suspicious people directly to the
authorities. Such civic-education messages are
understandable in a country where there is not a police
presence in each village. The wounds of 1999 are still
fresh, and there remains considerable and
understandable fear in the community about the
possibility of a resurgence of violence in the country.
But civilian security groups are nothing new in
Timor-Leste; indeed, such groups are common
throughout the region. And even without Government
direction from above, it is probable that Timorese in
rough urban neighbourhoods and in isolated, largely
unpoliced, villages will form their own security groups.

However, there are grounds for concern that some
of those groups could take vigilance to the point of
vigilantism. That is of considerable concern not least
because of the possible undermining effect it could
have on the PNTL, which must remain at the centre of
international efforts to establish the rule of law.
UNMISET has been in discussion with the Government
on this issue, and the Government is fully cognizant of
it as well. To date, there is little evidence to suggest
that these groups are incorporated into wider structures
that could be used for political purposes, but that
possibility also needs to be monitored.

