Mr. Cevik (Turkey): We would have preferred this
meeting to take place at a time other than when the
international community is mobilizing all its resources
to defeat Daesh. We can assure all present that Turkey
has spared no effort to solve this matter bilaterally
before it was taken up by the Security Council. The
inviolability of borders, the preservation of territorial
integrity and the political unity of States are the main
principles of Turkey's foreign policy. Because we are
extremely sensitive in matters concerning our own
sovereignty and territorial integrity, we treat others the
way we want to be treated. Those principles apply to
Iraq more than to any country. In fact, our sensitivities
concerning Iraq's sovereignty and territorial integrity
have in the past even created tensions in our relations
with some of our closest allies and partners.

Turkey and Iraq are linked by unbreakable bonds.
Historically, geographically and culturally, we share
a common past and we look forward to our common
future. Iraq needs friends to help it defeat Daesh
without delay. Turkey is one of them. Turkey is currently
hosting almost 500,000 Iraqis. All their humanitarian
needs are being met by the Turkish Government. We
also continue to dispatch humanitarian assistance
to Iraq and to the three camps that we have built in
the area under the control of the Kurdistan Regional
Government, hosting nearly 40,000 internally displaced
persons. A sustainable end to the tragedy in Iraq can be
achieved only by defeating Daesh. The critical step in
that regard is to raise the military capability of Iraqi
forces, including through military training.

Turkey has extended military assistance to Iraq
since the beginning of the Daesh occupation of Mosul.
That has been taking place at various levels, one being
the training camp in Bashiqa, Mosul. We set up that
camp in conjunction with the local authorities and
upon the request of the Iraqi Government. In Bashiqa,
members of the Turkish military have been training
Iraqi volunteers who will constitute the core of the
Mosul national guard. Back in 2014, the Iraqi Army did
not have the trust of the local population in Anbar or
Mosul, and it was apparently very reluctant to fight.
That led to a rapid collapse of the defence against Daesh
in Mosul in June 2014. At that time, we all agreed on the
formation of the national guard units. It is hard to accept
the notion that Turkey's military training efforts in Iraq

have gone unnoticed. We have informed our partners
and Iraqi officials of it on various occasions. Owing
to the increasing threats to our military personnel in
Bashiqa, we decided to reinforce the force protection
component of our units in the camp.

Unfortunately, that issue has been taken out of
context and the number of troops that was dispatched
exaggerated. Taking into consideration the Iraqi side's
concerns, Turkey immediately took steps to de-escalate
the matter. In that regard, we immediately stopped all
further reinforcements in Bashiqa. On 5 December, our
Defence Minister spoke to his Iraqi counterpart and
assuredhimthattherewouldbenofurtherreinforcements
in Bashiqa until the concerns of the Iraqi Government
were answered. On 6 December, Prime Minister Ahmet
Davutoglu sent a letter to his counterpart, Haidar A1
Abadi, on the issue and clearly explained the role and
functions of the Turkish personnel in Bashiqa. On
8 December, Foreign Minister Cavusoglu spoke to his
Iraqi counterpart and provided him with a detailed
explanation that our military personnel in Bashiqa had
not been given any combat role. On 10 December, the
Under-Secretary of the Foreign Ministry and the Chief
of Intelligence visited Baghdad as special envoys of
Prime Minister Davutoglu and conducted extensive
talks with Prime Minister Al Abadi, Foreign Minister
Ja-afari and Defence Minister Al-Obeidi. In those
meetings, our respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Iraq was reconfirmed. Our determination
to maintain the support that we have been providing to
the Iraqi Government in its struggle against Daesh was
also reaffirmed.

On 11 December, as a result of the meetings of
our envoys and taking into consideration the concerns
of the Iraqi Government voiced in those meetings, a
statement was issued by the Prime Minister's office.
In that statement, we announced Turkey's readiness
to adjust the number of our military personnel in
Bashiqa. After that statement's release, we immediately
began rearranging the number of troops in Bashiqa.
The additional security elements there left the camp
on 14 December. It will be recognized that all those
steps to de-escalate the situation and reach a common
understanding have been launched by the Turkish side,
while the Iraqi authorities preferred to express their
position through the press.

We are convinced that the measures we employed
would have been sufficient to leave that issue behind and
refocus our efforts on fighting Daesh. We also believe
that our statements created enough breathing space for
the Iraqi Government to implement a new mechanism
for discussing all aspects of our cooperation in the area
of security. Unfortunately, that has not been the case.
From the outset, we tried to resolve that matter through
bilateral channels, because bringing the issue to various
international platforms would serve no other purpose
than to undermine the solidarity of the international
community against Daesh.

The allegations concerning this issue and attempts
to bring it before international forums have put our
troops in Bashiqa at risk. The Daesh attack on our
unit on 16 December substantiated Turkey's concerns
about the safety of its troops in Bashiqa. Unfortunately,
two Iraqis were killed in the attack, and four others
were wounded. Four members of the Turkish military
contingent were also injured. That attack also justified
Turkey's decision to reinforce its military presence in
the camp. In the immediate aftermath of Iraq's reaction
against our troop movements, Minister Cavusoglu
asked his Iraqi counterpart whether the Iraqi Army was
capable of protecting our military personnel against
Daesh.

Now, in response to those who questioned Turkey's
intentions and the necessity of dispatching a security
force, we would like to pose that question one more time.
Will the Iraqi armed forces be able to prevent attacks
against our trainers in Bashiqa after we have relocated
the security detachment there? As we prepared for this
meeting, Turkish troops, which the Iraqi Government
claims have violated the sovereignty of Iraq by their
presence in Bashiqa, were actually defending it
against a terrorist organization in retaliation to the
attacks it launched. Our units in the camp destroyed
approximately a dozen artillery positions, command
posts, observation posts and approximately 40 vehicles
that were at the disposal of Daesh. Does the Iraqi
Government want us to halt such actions and leave?

The whole point of the international campaign to
support the Iraqi Government is to help Iraq to build
and reform its own defensive capabilities. Ultimately,
through those efforts, our collective aim is to empower
the Iraqi Government to re-establish its legal authority
over the whole country.

Turkey has been under attack not only by Daesh
but also by the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) terrorist
organization. Its headquarters are based in the Qandil
region of Iraq. We have been calling on the Iraqi
Government to stop the activities of the PKK. Each
time, the response we have received has been that the
Iraqi Government had no control over that part of the
country. If the Iraqi Government claims that it has full
sovereignty over all its territory, then it is our right
to expect that it will prevent the use of Iraqi soil for
terrorist attacks against our own territory. However,
both Daesh and the PKK continue to pose significant
threats to Turkey's safety and security from areas
beyond the reach of the Iraqi Government, and it is our
right to exercise self-defence.

We understand the difficult political environment
in which the Iraqi Government functions. However,
that should not be an excuse to limit the assistance
offered to that country to defeat Daesh more quickly.
On the ground, the Popular Mobilization Forces
number 130,000, are armed with tanks, artillery, rocket
launchers and even unmanned air vehicles. Those forces
are far stronger than the Iraqi Army and not under the
effective control of the Iraqi Government. Turkey has
provided more than 2,400 overflight clearances for
cargo aircraft carrying military equipment to Iraq. This
is only part of the total military assistance that Iraq has
received and purchased.

Yet, the Iraqi Government has not been able to
reform and restructure the Iraqi Army or train and equip
a mere 5,000 volunteers in Anbar. That is not a logistical
problem. That is a matter of political will. There seems
to be a determination in Baghdad not to allow and
support any armed force that is not part of the Popular
Mobilization Forces. It is therefore not surprising at all
that the closure of the training programme in Bashiqa
is being sought, or that those started by the coalition in
Anbar have been delayed or stalled so successfully. We
are concerned that the Government of Iraq is repeating
the mistakes of its predecessor. It is that attitude that
puts the sovereignty of Iraq at risk.

We have said it before, we will say it again, and
we will keep repeating it until we put an end to all the
baseless allegations - Turkey has never had and will
never have any interest in violating Iraq's sovereignty,
nor do we, unlike others, have any plans or ambitions for
Iraqi territory. We are sure that the discussion here today
is being followed with great interest and satisfaction
in places like Raqqa, Mosul and Damascus by those
who would like to see the cooperation and cohesion
of the international coalition against Daesh disrupted.
In many others, it is being followed with concern and
regret. Ankara is one of them. We are certain that is
also true for most of the capitals represented around
the table.

Let us put an end to this discussion here today and
carry on the work at hand. Let us defeat Daesh. Turkey
will continue to combat Daesh as a national and global
security threat, in cooperation and coordination with
all its partners in this fight.

