We thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for his briefing. We welcome the participation of Mr. Ivica Da¢ci¢, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia. We listened carefully to what Mr. Konjufca had to tell us today. By the way, I am looking at the flag in the background of the picture of Mr. Konjufca and I fail to recognize what flag it is. Judging by the colours, it may be Swedish or Ukrainian, or it may be the flag of Barbados. Or, since we are discussing the Balkans, is it perhaps the flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina? I note that Mr. Konjufca spoke under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure. We would therefore like to request that all who speak under this rule be informed of what background and symbols are appropriate when they brief the Council. The situation in Kosovo continues to deteriorate. The rosy pictures of Kosovo's democratic achievements that we were presented with and heard at this meeting did not convince us otherwise. We have been consistently saying that this project is not viable. We hear today about a new looming political crisis in Kosovo. What is more, Kosovo-Albanian leadership demonstrates no interest in dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, despite Serbia's readiness to resume negotiations upon Pristina lifting discriminatory tariffs. Many in the West hurried to welcome, as they did in today's meeting, the announcement by Mr. Albin Kurti that the tariffs were abolished as of 1 April. The fact is, they were only temporarily suspended, accompanied by Pristina making even more unacceptable demands of Belgrade. We see and notice attempts by the United States and the European Union (EU) to create conditions for dialogue to resume. We believe that such attempts will fail if they ignore the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and if unilateral measures introduced by Pristina are not lifted. EU-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristinaremains stalled, first and foremost because the EU did not ensure that Kosovo Albanians fulfil the obligations taken on seven years ago - to establish a community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo. We trust that Mr. Miroslav Lajeak, the new EU Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and other Western Balkan regional issues, will be able to find a solution to this issue. We continue to deplore plans backed by some Member States to create a so-called Kosovo army, which run counter to the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and will lead only to the destabilization of the situation in Kosovo and in the Balkans as a whole. We bring to the attention of our American colleagues that the NATO Bondsteel facility was established within the framework of peacekeeping operations in order to implement resolution 1244 (1999), but it later became a de-facto American military base in Kosovo. It is now being used to train Kosovo Albanian units with the aim of creating Kosovo armed forces - contrary to the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999). We still await concrete information on the perpetrators of an incident in the Zubin Potok municipality on 28 May 2019, where officials of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) were detained and beaten by Kosovo police. That crime remains uninvestigated and its perpetrators unpunished. We demand and insist on a thorough investigation and that its perpetrators be brought to justice. Incidents targeting Serbian religious sites and cemeteries also continue. The decision on the plot of land owned by the Visoki Deeani Monastery has not been implemented for several years. Pristina continues to shy away from cooperating with Belgrade in the investigation of the murder of the Kosovo Serb politician Oliver Ivanovice in January 2018. In December 2019, six Kosovo Serbs were indicted, but there are serious doubts regarding the impartiality of investigative procedures. We must once again point out that the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's Office in The Hague are doing nothing to investigate crimes committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army. After many years of endless red tape by yet another expensive army of judges, prosecutors and experts, not a single indictment has yet been issued. All this legal folderol has been going on since 2011 when the EU took it upon itself to investigate facts stated in the report issued by Mr. Dick Marty, former member of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. We have a question: When will criminals who committed numerous atrocities against the Serbs, including trade in human organs, be brought to justice? The President of Serbia offered cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina in fighting the coronavirus disease. We welcome it, but we note with concern the publication in Kosovo media of personal data of Kosovo Serbs infected with the disease. That is irresponsible and unacceptable. In conclusion, we support Belgrade and Pristina in their efforts to achieve a sustainable and mutually acceptable solution based primarily on resolution 1244 (1999) - one in line with international law and endorsed by the Security Council. No fast-tracking of the so-called final normalization between Belgrade and Pristina or imposition of artificial deadlines can produce that goal. The Council should continue to lend its support to UNMIK, which is a key international presence in Kosovo that plays a leading role in monitoring the situation, maintaining stability and creating conditions conducive to a negotiated solution.
