Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): We too are grateful to
Judge Jorda, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), for his
useful briefing and for the report on the Tribunal. That
report contains specific proposals and measures to
improve the operation of the Tribunal. I would like also
to thank the entire bench ofjudges of the ICTY for the
service they continue to render to the international
community, the service which is especially valued and
cherished by the children of the region who lost their
brothers and sisters, their mothers and fathers during
the war in the former Yugoslavia.

Indeed, the report meticulously provides us with a
comprehensive review of the work of the ICTY in
terms of what has been done, what needs to be done
and how to go about doing it.

It is useful, therefore, to indicate that my
delegation is studying the report with keen interest, not
only as it relates to the former Yugoslavia but also
because of the resonance it has on the International
Criminal Tribunal on Rwanda (ICTR).

On balance, we wish to express our appreciation
that the Tribunal has demonstrated its determination to
take aboard the recommendations by the Group of
Experts. We do believe that in spite of the problems
borne in the application of new institutions, both
Tribunals have passed the test of time as Viable
instruments for dispensing justice in exemplary
fashion.

In this context, Namibia hopes that the Hague and
Arusha processes will stand out as exemplary
mechanisms from which sufficient lessons can be
drawn for the future International Criminal Court.

Having said that, let me pose the following
questions. The first one concerns the ICTR. We
understand that the report on the Tribunal is in the
pipeline, but, all things being equal, what are the
similarities and complementarities, if any, between the
two Tribunals? The second question is predicated on
the assumption that you, Mr. President, operate in the
realm of political affairs; and if that is true, which I
believe it is, how do you handle political pressure from
Member States and people like me? How do you ensure
the independence and the impartiality of the Tribunal?
Thirdly and lastly, in your personal opinion, will these
mechanisms bail us out on the future of the
International Criminal Court?

Finally, Mr. President, we look forward to the
report of the ICTR. My delegation expresses its
readiness to work with the other members of the
Council, as well as the entire United Nations
membership, in an informal working group to study the
recommendations and proposals of the judges with
regard to improving the working methods and practices
of both Tribunals.

