Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Over a
year ago the United Kingdom welcomed the revitalization
of the United Nations role in political discussions aimed at
a resolution of the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia. The
Geneva process created a framework for tackling the lack
of confidence and trust between the two parties and for
taking forward the practical issues which need to be
addressed in reaching a political settlement.

Unfortunately, the parties have not shown sufficient
willingness to use this framework to tackle the key issues.
They seem to have limited themselves to talking about
mechanisms rather than substance. The Abkhaz side has not
lived up to its commitments on refugee returns; and the
Georgian side has not, in our view, managed to tackle the
problem of armed bands seeking to destabilize the region
by launching attacks against Commonwealth of
Independent States peacekeepers and Abkhaz officials.

The events of May this year were a direct result of
this lack of commitment by the parties. Provocation by
the Georgian armed bands, followed by an extreme
response by the Abkhaz side, resulted in a new wave of
refugees and destruction of property in the Gali region.
Both parties must bear their share of the blame for this
tragedy, which has set back the whole peace process.

What is clear from the events of May is the close
link between the problem of the return of refugees and
the activities of the armed bands. Progress on the return
of refugees would weaken the position of those seeking
a military solution to the conflict. The absence of
progress only strengthens the hand of the extremists.

That last week's meeting in Geneva took place
despite this unpromising background shows that both
sides at least wish to avoid a repeat of the events of May.
This is welcome. Unfortunately, they again failed to make
progress on the key issues. Nevertheless, the concluding
statement does at least contain a reaffirmation by the
parties of the Tbilisi Declaration of August last year,
which included their commitment to a peaceful settlement.

The international community stands ready to help
bring about a peaceful settlement. But first the parties
must help themselves. The time has come for them to
begin to match their words with results. It is particularly
important that the return of refugees should start as soon
as possible and be implemented under secure conditions.
Refugees will not wish to return if they have to face the
prospect of having their homes burned down, as happened
in May.

The United Kingdom remains committed both to the
political engagement of the United Nations and to the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG).
But our commitment is not open-ended. Along with
progress in the negotiations, we expect an improvement
in the security situation on the ground. Countries cannot
be expected to provide unarmed observers in a situation
where international personnel are being deliberately
targeted.

We have supported the Secretary-General's proposals
for the resumption of limited patrolling by UNOMIG and
for increased security measures for the Mission. However,

 

our strong preference remains for the deployment of a self-
protection unit. We do not understand the opposition from
some quarters to an arrangement which the Secretary-
General believes would provide enhanced security. This
option must remain open.

This draft resolution has our full support. It is strongly
worded, but asks that the two parties do no more than carry
out commitments to which they have both already agreed.
The Council will judge them by their actions over the
coming weeks.

