The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his briefing, and to congratulate him
on his assumption of that important post. I would also
like to express my appreciation to him for his efforts to
promote the political process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I also wish to thank Mr. Adnan Terzic,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his statement.

We are pleased to note that, in the 10 years or so
since the signing of the Dayton Accords, through the
efforts of all parties in the country and with the
assistance of the international community, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has taken positive steps to build the
capacity of its institutions, relaunch economic
development, improve the judicial system, speed up the
reform of the police and promote ethnic integration.
Positive efforts have been made and clear results have
been achieved.

The country has also begun the process ofjoining
the European Union (EU). Since taking up
responsibility for security, the EU military mission
(EUFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina has contributed
to the country's political progress. China would like to
express its acknowledgement of that achievement.

All parties should today doubly cherish the hard-
won results that have been achieved in the context of
the country's political process. We look forward to the
parties concerned in Bosnia and Herzegovina further
strengthening mutual trust and unity in order to achieve
harmony among ethnic communities, including their
common development.

Along with the rest of the international
community, China would like to assist Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the areas of economic development and
long-term stability. We shall make our own efforts in
that regard.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now call on the representative of Austria.

