Mr. Takasu (Japan): First of all, I would like to
express my deep appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and, through you, to all the other members of the
Council for giving me the opportunity to address this
high-level meeting in my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Peacebuilding
Commission is actively engaged in effectively
supporting post-conflict peacebuilding efforts, in the
belief that the measure of its success is real impact on
the ground.
In accordance with its mandate, the
Peacebuilding Commission is striving to marshal
support and resources for peacebuilding and recovery
in post-conflict countries and to improve coordination
within and outside the United Nations system in an
integrated manner. We have been trying our best to
enhance cooperation with partners beyond the United
Nations system, such as regional and subregional
organizations, international financial institutions,
bilateral donors and civil society.

One of the key observations from our intensive
work is that all peacebuilding efforts require
addressing the regional as well as the local dimensions.
As most conflicts have significant regional dimensions,
it is indispensable to engage regional and subregional
organizations in the process. Issues such as the illicit
trade in arms and narcotics trafficking cannot be
addressed without coordinated regional and
international efforts, including effective border control
among the countries in a given region. Youth
unemployment and a lack of economic opportunities
are widely recognized as a common challenge to post-
conflict societies. This problem also requires a regional
approach, as unemployed youth often move from one
place to another in search of employment
opportunities, including, sometimes, as soldiers. The
Peacebuilding Commission has analysed those issues
and has offered practical guidance in our country-
specific activities and in the Working Group on
Lessons Learned.

The Peacebuilding Commission truly values the
ongoing efforts of regional and subregional
organizations. These organizations play an important
role in the areas of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. At the same time, their activities are
more effective when they are fully integrated into, and
well coordinated with, the overall work of the
Commission. Successful peacebuilding requires the
sustained engagement of multifaceted stakeholders
with diverse expertise and specialties. I recognize the
essential added value that the Peacebuilding
Commission can provide with its convening role of
mobilizing the dedicated efforts of all stakeholders.

The founding resolutions of the Peacebuilding
Commission refer directly to Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter and thereby provide a strong
rationale for close collaboration between the
Commission and regional and subregional
organizations. The Commission will explore practical
and flexible ways to cooperate and make a concrete
difference on the ground.

The first three countries to be considered by the
Commission, namely, Burundi, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau, are all in Africa. As a member of all
three country-specific configurations of the
Commission, the African Union has been an effective
and active contributor to the Council's deliberations,
both in New York and on the ground. We value and
appreciate the Union's effective partnership. In that
connection, I would like to suggest two ways of
promoting more enhanced collaboration between the
African Union and the Peacebuilding Commission.

First, the African Union may wish to have more
active inputs in the process of drafting and
implementing the integrated peacebuilding strategies of
the Peacebuilding Commission and to align itself more
closely with them. The strategies are articulated in such
a way as to minimize the risk of relapse into conflict,
and they thus also contribute to conflict prevention.
The integrated strategies elaborated for Burundi and
Sierra Leone serve as a good basis for cooperation
activities by the African Union.

Secondly, we see great potential in harmonizing
the policy framework on post-conflict reconstruction
and development adopted by the African Union's
Executive Council and the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which take similar approaches to
promoting post-conflict peacebuilding. The
Peacebuilding Support Office is engaged in active
collaboration with the AU's subcluster on the policy
framework, which is expected to produce tangible
benefits for both the Peacebuilding Commission and
the African Union Peace and Security Council. Those
efforts will also facilitate the development of linkages
between post-conflict reconstruction and development.

In conclusion, I can tell the Council that we are
making great strides in fostering close collaboration
between the Peacebuilding Commission and regional
and subregional organizations, starting with the African
Union, to promote peacebuilding and conflict
prevention in Africa. I intend to consult further with
members of the Commission on how it can best address
that need. The Commission's planned meeting
tomorrow afternoon with the Chairperson of the
African Union Peace and Security Council will provide
a useful opportunity to that end. I look forward to
fruitful discussions on that occasion.

