Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): First of
all, Sir, I would ask you to kindly convey our warm
welcome to Foreign Minister Wang Yi, as well as our
utmost pleasure at seeing him chairing this open debate
of the Security Council. His presence in this organ is
reflective of China's unwavering commitment to the
Charter of the United Nations. Pakistan would also like
to pay its respects to the large number of ministers who
have gathered here for this very important debate.

The true value ofany blessing in life can be assessed
only in its absence. We therefore find wisdom in your
initiative to celebrate the United Nations Charter while
reflecting on history. The world before 1945 bore the
scourge of the two World Wars and their devastation,
the horrific internecine conflicts of the eighteenth
century and the associated travails of humankind. We
must therefore keep remind ourselves of the lessons
learned from the international conflicts that preceded
the Charter of the United Nations. While our quest for
absolute peace has yet to be fulfilled, since the adoption
of the Charter, humankind has never had the kind of
relative peace, prosperity and development that it has
today.

This year in the history of the United Nations
is not just for celebrations; it is a time to remind
ourselves of and reflect on the values that strengthen
the Charter of the United Nations, a time to renew our
commitment to the sovereign equality of States. We
must respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, peaceful settlement of international disputes
and non-interference in internal affairs of States, and
we must refrain from the use of force or the threat to
use force against the territorial integrity and political
independence of States.

On the basis of these principles, Pakistan remains
committed to the maintenance of international peace
and security. As the leading troop contributor to the
United Nations, with over 8,000 troops and boots on
the ground, Pakistan is committed to global peace and
security, which is evident from the sacrifices that we
have made. More than 140 Pakistani troops have laid
down their lives and countless others have suffered
injuries. We continue to stand firmly by United Nations
peacekeeping efforts.

The Charter places special emphasis on resolving
international disputes by peaceful means, through
dialogue and consultations. The Security Council
should therefore make frequent recourse to the tools
available to it under Chapter VI and should employ
Chapter VII measures only as a last resort. Its actions
should therefore conform to the purposes and principles
of the Charter as provided for in Article 24.

The Charter also promotes the universal application
of international law. The Security Council, through
its uniform actions, must lead by example and exude
credibility. Its use of force should be consistent with
the Charter principles of collective security. It should
make optimum use ofthe International Court of Justice.
Long-standing disputes and situations must be resolved
in accordance with Security Council resolutions. Let me
emphasize that the fulfilment of the inalienable rights
of all peoples, especially the right to self-determination,
would pave the way for uniform implementation of all
resolutions.

We fully agree that there is a need to uphold
democracy and the rule of law in international relations.
All Members of the United Nations, irrespective of
their size and population, have an equal stake in the
making of international order, and their participation
should therefore be on an equal footing. Lastly, with
this spirit in mind, let us resolve to pursue our goals
towards collective security and common development
through a win-win situation of cooperation.

