Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I should like to
thank you, Sir, for your briefing to the Council this
morning and join other colleagues in conveying the
United Kingdom's thanks to Ambassador Grauls and
Ambassador Jurica for their briefings. I also take this
opportunity to thank the staff and the experts of each
Committee - I see that Mike Smith is here - for their
time and the efforts that they put into their important
work.

I should like to pay particular tribute to
Ambassador Grauls. This, I think, is his last session. I
should like to pay tribute to his leadership of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). We will greatly miss him after December.

With respect to the 1267 Committee, my
Government would like to highlight the need for the
Committee to continue to work hard to improve the
legitimacy of the list so that it reflects the current
threat. We must continue to update the list at every
opportunity that presents itself. The adoption of
resolution 1822 (2008) earlier this year provided for
important due process improvements. The inclusion of
a review of all the names on the list is a very important
mechanism if we want to maintain the validity of the
list. We do not take our responsibility lightly here, and
we believe that it is incumbent on all of us to ensure
that there is a meaningful and proper review.

In addition, we believe that we must continue to
ensure that fair and clear procedures are strengthened
in order to enhance the efficiency and transparency of
the regime, and that we have adequate procedures for
listing and de-listing. The European courts, as was
mentioned in the statement made by the French
Ambassador, have sent an important signal on the
listing of individuals. We need to ensure that we
develop our processes to address better the concerns
that they raised. The consolidated list remains an
important counter-terrorism tool, but it must be used
effectively if it is to remain so.

I should like to turn to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) over the past six months. We appreciate their
work. The report that they produced in May on the
global implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
provides us with useful benchmarks, and we
particularly welcome the trend towards more targeted
and focused visits that you, Sir, mentioned in your
remarks.

My Government is working with CTED to
pioneer the first of those focused visits in the new
format, and we are fortunate to be able to host
Mr. Smith's team next week. We believe that it will be
the first CTED visit to a permanent member of the
Council and the first, also, to a developed country. We
see that as a demonstration of the commitment of the
United Kingdom and the Security Council to the
universal implementation of the measures in resolution
1373 (2001). I take this opportunity to pledge my
Government's full cooperation and assistance for the
visit, and I hope that what CTED learns about how we
implement our commitments under resolution 1373
(2001) can make a useful contribution to good practice.

I should also like to welcome CTED's efforts to
organize joint outreach events with the other subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council involved in combating
terrorism. This month's seminar in Nairobi is the latest
example of that good work.

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), my Government welcomes the
Committee's report on the status of implementation. It
shows the range of measures Member States are
adopting to ensure full implementation of the
resolution. With 159 States having submitted a first
report, we are now at the stage at which quantitative
progress is near completion, and therefore the focus is
rightly moving towards the quality of the
implementation. The Committee's focus on capacity-
building and knowledge-sharing should support that.

We look forward to the Committee's being able to
further develop its clearing-house function for
channelling assistance to States in need and matching
requests with States providers of assistance, as well as
intergovernmental organizations. A more qualitative
focus will also mean that the Committee's role in
monitoring and assessing the adequacy of measures
implemented by States through continued reviewing of
the national implementation matrices will assume more
importance.

That shift has similar implications for outreach
activity. My Government welcomes the fact that
outreach activity that has taken place since the last
briefing is moving away from basic awareness-raising
towards more focused outreach, with greater emphasis
on the development of national capacity to implement
resolution 1540 (2004). That is often done in
collaboration with relevant international or regional
organizations whose interests overlap.
I should like to say something also about the
1540 experts, given that other colleagues have raised
that issue today. The United Kingdom also recognizes
the vital contribution that the expert staff of the 1540
Committee continues to make to the Committee's
work. With merit and experience now agreed as the
most important criteria for their selection, we urge the
Committee to finalize the appointment of new experts
as soon as possible, since delays in their appointment
would lower the likelihood of the Committee's being
able to attract the best possible team of eight for the
job.

Finally, I would like to associate the United
Kingdom with the statement made by the
representative of France on behalf of the European
Union.

