Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to wish you every success.
I also want to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, for
his briefing on the latest developments in my country.
We welcomed the visit by several members of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, led by the
Permanent Representative of Sweden in his capacity as
the Committee's Chair.

Two months have passed since the Security
Council last met and heard a briefing by Mr. Salame
(see S/PV.8341) on the operations of the United Nations
Support Mission to Libya for the previous period. While
we value and support his efforts to help the country
arrive at some sort of stability, we want to emphasize
the importance of developing the Mission's operations
so as to expedite the achievement of the peace,
peacebuilding, and sustainable stability that we all
desire, using preventive tools that can put a stop to any
negative developments, especially on the security front.

The Libyan delegation would like to underscore the
importance of implementing well-organized security
arrangements that rely fully on professional and regular
police service and other law-enforcement services. We
must seek successful solutions capable of eliminating
the undisciplined activities of various armed groups,
which consistently claim that they are working with
the State and the Government of National Accord
but in reality function in complete contradiction to
that. They use weapons in densely populated areas
and their constant interventions obstruct the work
of Government institutions, while at the same time
they ignore instructions and refuse to adhere to the
principles of hierarchy and discipline in the work of the
State security forces.

The international community has worked to
intervene in Libya by adopting Security Council
resolutions aimed at protecting civilians and upholding
democracy. But seven years since the crisis began,
Libyans all over the country are asking questions about
the reasons that have led to the current situation, as
well as about the Council's resolutions and whether
they are being implemented. The resolutions note and
call for the measures needed to protect civilians and
human rights and to achieve stability and peace. They
are an obligation that all Council members and all
States Members of the United Nations must abide by.
But Libyans are not feeling the results of that obligation
in real life. Our civilians live under constant threats
of danger; the State's instability continues; terrorists
continue to thrive; and Libyan political parties continue
to manoeuvre. They do not want to arrive at a solution,
even though logic has dictated that Libyans have left
behind one historical stage and moved on to another.
That should have been a step towards a change for
the better, enabling them to achieve and fulfil all that
they aspire to in terms of a modern civil State that can
guarantee progress, prosperity and well-being.

However, that is not the reality and the behaviour of
some States has made our crisis worse. In that regard,
we want to point out the frequent violations of Security
Council resolutions on Libya described in United
Nations reports, especially with regard to obstructions
of the process of reaching a peaceful settlement
between Libyans, violations of the arms embargo and
the continuing illegal trade in oil and attempts to use
frozen Libyan assets. Unfortunately, certain States have
been involved in those abuses and have been named
in many of the reports issued by the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011). We have
seen that the Council has taken no measures against the
States that have carried out such acts. We believe that
they have exacerbated the situation in Libya and have
given all kinds of unscrupulous support to those whose
aim is to prolong the status quo, thereby depriving my
country of stability.

We want to underscore the provisions in Security
Council resolutions that require all Member States to
stop dealing with parallel entities that claim legitimacy,
including the so-called transitional Government, whose
continued existence, in our view, is a threat to the
country's unity and contributes greatly to creating an
atmosphere of discord and division among Libyans. We
stress that the time has come for them to disappear and
be replaced by unified institutions that work to serve all
Libyans. In that regard, we hope that the Council will
bring greater pressure to bear on States to stop dealing
with such entities and help us unify all the various
Libyan institutions, including the Central Bank and
military, security and other institutions.

We value the genuine international efforts that
certain States, along with regional and international
organizations, have made to help Libya overcome its
current crisis, but we also want to stress the importance
of ensuring that those efforts are clear and not duplicated,
while bearing in mind the following points. The first is
the need to underline the important and primary role
of the United Nations in supervising the process by
implementing the United Nations Action Plan, which
was adopted in 2017 as a road map designed to reach
solutions acceptable to all Libyan factions.

The second is the importance of pursuing intensive
and constant diplomatic efforts to reach out to all
Libyan factions. We must urge them to meet among
themselves in order to overcome their political deadlock
and arrive at agreements and understandings that must
be implemented and may not be disavowed for any
reason. All who violate or obstruct any kind of positive
progress capable of helping to complete the transitional
political process must themselves be held accountable.

Thirdly, no States should take advantage of the
situation in Libya to settle scores that foster the
country's instability and deteriorating situation.

Fourthly, the Security Council must distinguish
between the political parties and the armed groups,
since most of the latter do not actually belong to any
political party but rather carry out illegal actions that
can only be classified as criminal and should not be
considered merely as part of the political differences.
The Libyan State needs help from new initiatives to
dismantle those groups and merge them into its security
and military bodies as professionals, away from
personal allegiances, following the orders of the State
and its relevant institutions.

The fifth is the importance of completing the
political process in a democratic way that is not based
on the concept of quotas. We must establish a clear time
frame for meeting all the constitutional requirements
for moving to the phase of organizing legislative and
presidential elections. The fact is that the current
painful situation in Libya must come to an end and
cannot continue indefinitely. It should be clear to all
that if this situation continues it will have disastrous
effects for Libya, its neighbours and the entire world.
Imagine how many lives would be saved, how many
terrorists acts foiled, how many development projects
implemented and how many mutual interests served
between my country and the countries of the rest of
the world if we all worked to expedite the peace and
stability process.

My delegation would like to draw the Council's
attention to a dangerous issue involving the actions
of outside mercenary gangs entering southern Libya
and launching attacks on Libyan cities and violating
the State's sovereignty, as well as committing acts of
extortion and murder, which have put national security
and civilian lives injeopardy. The most recent examples
were the attacks on the cities of Kufra and Sabha. We
hope that neighbouring African States will subdue and
control those and secure their borders. We also hope
that the Security Council will urge those States to abide
by the relevant Security Council resolutions and find a
way to stop the illegal entry of those elements that are
opposed to the Government. That would prevent them
from being exploited by armed groups already in Libya
and used as mercenaries to carry out hostile acts, which
have contributed to significantly escalating and further
worsening the situation.

Irregular migration and its impact affect us in
every area. Although we deeply regret and condemn
what irregular migrants are subjected to by trafficking
networks and gangs, we stress that we have also fallen
victim to that abominable phenomenon, which is foreign
to our society. The scope ofhuman trafficking in all its
apparent and non-apparent forms and manifestations
makes us wonder about the nature and extent of such
a trafficking because it involves more than simply
transporting people from one side of the Mediterranean
to the other. Although Libya may be a transit State, the
incentives for trafficking in migrants and what makes
it lucrative originate outside of the Libyan State. The
international community must trace the various steps of
such trafficking, starting with the countries of origin,
then with the transit countries and eventually with the
receiving countries, so as to determine the responsible
parties, as the responsibility for addressing illegal
migration is a collective one, which does not befall a
single country. We must seek and develop a unified and
comprehensive strategy to deal with this phenomenon,
and avoid blaming one single country.

The Government of my country understands that
Libyan assets were frozen by the relevant 2011 Security
Council resolutions in order to preserve the wealth of
the Libyan people. However, we fail to understand how

those assets can be maintained without the involvement
ofthe relevant Libyan institutions. On several occasions,
and in letters to the Security Council and in meetings
with the sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, those Libyan
institutions have warned of the massive depreciation
of those assets. Moreover, we point out that the 1970
Committee does not understand the nature of those
assets, which are the property and earnings of official
Libyan institutions. Their continued freeze, the passage
of time and international economic fluctuations have
significantly diminished the market value of those
assets, as they have not been well managed. My
delegation reaffirms the need for the Security Council
to establish a fair mechanism that would meet the goals
ofthe relevant Security Council resolutions while at the
same time enabling the management and investment of
Libyan assets by the relevant Libyan institutions, given
that they belong to the Libyan State and that they are
investment-related.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to we
stress the need to find a solution to the problems facing
Libya. We are convinced that the Security Council
could find a way to resolve those unjustified problems
and differences in my country if it were to speak as
one voice and in one language to deal with all internal
and external parties. It must not focus on the narrow
interests of one party, because serving the short-term
interests of any one party would result in a disaster for
everyone in the long term, especially given that the
vast majority of the Libyan people has grown tired of
the situation, which in and of itself is a fabricated and
illogical one reflecting local and international agendas
and lacks popular support. The situation calls for the
restoration of the State and its bodies so that they can
function effectively as institutions governed by the
spirit of law, order and justice.

