Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French): We thank
France for having organized this debate. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing. I reiterate my
Government's respect for her leadership and the
ongoing support that she provides to the consolidation
of peace and democracy in Haiti. We recognize the
troop-contributing countries and the United Nations
personnel deployed in Haiti. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Haiti,
Ambassador Regis, here among us.

Allow me to start on a positive note. Brazil agrees
with the British economist Paul Collier that there are
reasons to be optimistic about the future of Haiti:
Haiti's lack of inter-ethnic conflict, its location in a
region of peace and cooperation, its proximity to the
largest market in the world and its dynamic and highly
skilled diaspora in many developed countries. I would
add to that list the resilience and courage of the Haitian
people. Haiti is the first black republic in the Americas
and inspired several nineteenth century freedom
movements. Despite that history, the country was
isolated and even neglected in the region for some time.
Today, thanks to the efforts of regional and subregional
organizations and to the contributions of countries in
the region to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Haiti has been welcomed and
integrated in its regional context in Latin America and
the Caribbean.

We must also recognize the progress made by Haiti
since the earthquake, much of which is highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/157).
Beyond Haiti's macroeconomic stability, it is very
encouraging to see improvements in the indicators
related to the Millennium Development Goals, which
are the result of efforts by both the Government and
other stakeholders, which have focused on education,
health and the reduction of inequality and extreme
poverty. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
real impact of a number of programmes developed in
recent years, such as "Ti Manman Cheri" in the field
of education and "Aba Grangou" in the area of food
security. The decrease in the number of displaced
persons is also remarkable.

(spoke in English)

Brazil welcomes the Security Council visit to Haiti
last January, which was important in terms of reiterating
international support for Haiti and encouraging the
Government to quickly organize elections. The unified
and constructive message transmitted to Haitian
political actors contributed directly to recent political
achievements. We are fully aware, nevertheless, that
the process still requires close monitoring.

Brazil supports the Secretary-General's positive
assessment regarding stability and security in Haiti.
While recognizing that there are still reasons for
concern in the security area, including in the light of the
upcoming electoral process, the enhanced performance
of the police in preventing crimes and controlling civil
unrest is worth underlining.

That should not give rise to complacency. The
Haitian National Police has yet to make further
progress. We encourage the Haitian National Police
to continue to benefit from MINUSTAH's efforts to
ensure a successful handover of responsibility for
security in critical areas.

The relatively small number of operations that
have required active engagement on the part of the
military contingent of MINUSTAH since the previous
report (S/2014/617) illustrates both the Haitian National
Police's increasing capacity and the fact that the current
stability threats in Haiti demand a response that is
increasingly less military in nature.

In that context, the continuation of the drawdown
foreseen in resolution 2180 (2014) is natural, as there has
been no dramatic deterioration in the security situation,
nor are we facing challenges that were not foreseen when
the decision to implement the drawdown was taken last
October. Should, however, new circumstances lead to a
deterioration of the situation on the ground, a revision
of the consolidation plan by the Security Council could
be considered.

We recognize that the electoral process may
exacerbate tensions, and we therefore support the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the posture
of uniformed personnel be reviewed so as to ensure
maximum visibility and full use of the authorized force
levels.

We concur with the Secretary-General's view
on the importance of ensuring Haiti's leadership of
the electoral process ahead. A lighter presence by
MINUSTAH should be accompanied by a stronger role
for national institutions.

In spite of its reconfiguration, MINUSTAH should
continue to promote a culture of peace by maintaining
its mandated tools to develop quick-impact and
community violence-reduction projects, as well as an
adequate engineering capability.

Brazil welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
country team to consolidate a comprehensive integrated
strategic framework aligned with Haiti's priorities. The
challenge henceforth is to provide sustainability for the
gains of recent years, allowing for a gradual reduction
in the presence of United Nations troops while the
country evolves towards a stage of increasing stability
with institutional, economic and social progress.

In that process, the international community's
relationship with Haiti should increasingly be guided by
the establishment of partnerships capable of improving
the living conditions within Haiti, the only country in
the Americas still categorized as least developed.

Without forgetting the enormous challenges that
the country still faces with regard to modernization,
Brazil is convinced that we should continue to look to
Haiti's future with optimism.

Despite the concern caused by the political crisis
that led to the paralysis of the Parliament, we welcome
the various negotiations that led to the formation of
a transitional Government, the appointment of the
members of the provisional Electoral Council and the
recent adoption of the electoral law by presidential
decree.

Brazil hopes that progress and a constructive
attitude on the part of the Haitian political actors will
lead the country out of the crisis and contribute to the
holding of fair and transparent elections.

Brazil's commitment to Haiti is long-term. A
scenario of prolonged political stalemate and the
prevalence of sectoral interests over collective wellbeing
will make our task more difficult. We therefore urge
Haitian leaders to persevere in their efforts to deepen
the social compact and consolidate democracy in Haiti
as soon as possible.

