Mr. Oshima (Japan) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. Minister, for having
taken the initiative of organizing this debate on
subregional and cross-border problems in West Africa.
I am pleased to note the important role being played by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in an effort to help countries emerge from
conflict, to consolidate the peace achieved and to
promote security and development in West Africa. In
that context, my delegation assures you of our full
support.

I also thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Ould-Abdallah, for the important
report (S/2005/86) on this subject. We particularly
appreciate the integrated approach, mentioned in the
report, to the issues of humanitarian assistance zones,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes, security sector reform and border control.
The report addresses a variety of issues, but I would
like to refer specifically to three points that we
consider to be of particular concern: security issues,
especially small arms and DDR; cooperation and
coordination among United Nations missions; and
governance.

First, I would like to discuss the issues of small
arms and DDR. The Second Biennial Meeting of States
to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of
Action on small arms and light weapons will be held
this year, and the first review conference on that
subject is scheduled for next year. It is our hope that
the countries members of ECOWAS will make further
progress towards implementing the Programme of
Action prior to those meetings. As recommended in the
Secretary-General's report, transforming the ECOWAS
moratorium on small arms and light weapons into a
legally binding instrument could be an example of that
kind of success, together with the establishment of the
Small Arms Unit already created within the ECOWAS
secretariat and further cooperation among the countries
in the region to control the illicit flow of small arms in
border areas. We hope that the moratorium will be
further strengthened so that it can serve as a model for
other regions on this issue. My Government has been
playing a leading role here, and Japan's specific
contributions in this area were outlined in our
statement at last week's open debate on small arms. As
indicated in our statement, my Government is
determined to continue its contribution to the
development of international frameworks on this issue
and to the promotion of projects on the ground, such as
the collection and destruction of illicit small arms.

Concerning the DDR process, it is particularly
important to tackle the issue of reintegration,
particularly the problem of youth unemployment, in
order to avoid the recurrence of conflict. We welcome
the conclusion of the disarmament and demobilization
processes in Sierra Leone and Liberia. We look
forward to further progress in collecting the small arms
remaining in communities and to new progress in the
reintegration phase in those countries. Japan has
extended assistance of nearly $10 million for
reintegration programmes in both countries, Sierra
Leone and Liberia, and will continue to provide such
assistance in future. Furthermore, the disarmament
process in Cote d'Ivoire is facing difficulties. Since
DDR is an important aspect of the peace process, we
wish to ask all parties to the conflict to tackle that issue
in good faith.

Secondly, I would like to touch on the question of
coordination and cooperation among the United
Nations missions. Since the United Nations missions in
the region are playing a role more far-reaching than
ever before, we must consider how best we can
mobilize the limited resources available to the
Organization. It is a positive development that the
chiefs and force commanders of the five United
Nations missions in the region are maintaining close
communication and coordination with each other. We
very much hope that this mutually cooperative
relationship will be further promoted and at many
levels. We believe that cooperation among the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) in
the area of border control is of special importance.

UNAMSIL will be withdrawn at the end of this
year, and we need to keep that in mind when
considering what form future cooperation could take
among United Nations missions in West Africa.
Controlling Sierra Leone's borders with its neighbours,
particularly Liberia, will be a special challenge, and we
hope that the Government of Sierra Leone will
continue to play an important role through its
cooperation with the relevant United Nations missions
such as UNMIL.

With regard to humanitarian assistance, it is
encouraging that this year's consolidated appeals
process for West Africa is focusing on preventing any
deterioration in the human security situation in the
region and that close cooperation is occurring among
the various actors in the field, such as coordinated
group meetings organized by the Secretariat's Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Japan is
contributing actively in the area of refugees and food
assistance, amounting to $120 million since 2000.

Thirdly, I wish to speak of governance. Recently
we witnessed an unconstitutional transfer of power in
Togo. That runs counter to the efforts of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and ECOWAS to
prevent the seizure of power by such methods, as
described in the report of the Secretary-General. We
pay tribute to the ECOWAS efforts to find a solution to
this issue, and we very much hope they will lead to an
early and peaceful settlement in accordance with the
will of the Togolese people.

We fully share the view of the Secretary-General
that "the primary responsibility for promoting peace in
the region rests with West African leaders and
communities themselves". One of the important pillars
of Japan's policy towards Africa is the consolidation of
peace through ownership by the African countries
themselves. My Government highly appreciates the
fact that in that spirit African nations and organizations
have been increasingly exercising their ownership in
resolving conflicts in the region in recent years. It is
also encouraging that through public information
activities and education, civil society, United Nations
missions and the Integrated Regional Information
Network (IRIN) are implementing their programmes at
the grass-roots level in order to promote peace and
security.

We are expecting important elections this year in
Liberia, C6te d'Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau. We hope
they will be conducted successfully through the
exercise of ownership by those three countries, with
the necessary assistance provided by the international
community. My Government is prepared to continue
providing assistance in a positive spirit to the efforts to
consolidate peace and development in West African
countries.

