Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland thanks Catherine
Bertini for the work that the World Food Programme
(WFP) is doing in so many crisis situations and for her
own outstanding contribution as the head of WFP since
1993, including her highly persuasive efforts to engage
key donors. In this latter regard, Ms. Bertini has, I
think, exemplified diplomatic skill according to one of
its traditional definitions - that is, in getting what you
need from other parties, you make those parties feel
that it is they who have gained from the transaction.

At last week's public Council meeting on
Afghanistan, I noted the remarkable statistic that WFP
will be providing assistance to up to 8.8 million people
in Afghanistan in the coming months. That is but one
example of WFP's extraordinary successes, some of
which were summarized earlier in our debate. We also
appreciate the work of WFP in addressing the more
structural causes of food insecurity in Afghanistan;
investment in women's bakeries and the Food for Work
and Food for Education programmes are excellent
examples. We look forward now to the establishment of
real food stability in the country as the relief and
reconstruction effort takes hold.

We particularly welcome the efforts of WFP to
address the specific needs of schoolchildren. The
campaign to assist up to a million schoolchildren by
the end of the school year is an essential investment in
Afghanistan's long-term health and development.

The work of WFP in Afghanistan has been
essential to the success to date of the Bonn process in
very practical ways, including through the provision of
food supplements to civil servants in addition to their
wages, but also in contributing in a very tangible way
to the return to more normal living conditions for
millions of Afghans.

The World Food Programme is a very important
partner for IrelandAid. WFP consistently receives a
very large proportion of Ireland's total commitment to
emergency humanitarian assistance, and in the past two
years we have allocated a substantial part of our
humanitarian budget to WFP. That reflects our
confidence in the ability of WFP to deliver emergency
food aid efficiently and effectively. In the context of
the steady expansion of Ireland's aid programme, we
look forward to further deepening our relationship with
WF P.

Today, we wish Ms. Bertini every success in the
future.

