Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first join
others in thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his update this morning on recent
developments in the Middle East. We also thank the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their presence here today and
their contributions to our debate.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union delegation on behalf
of the European Union later in our debate today.

We are close to the end of the ten-month partial
moratorium on settlements that the Israeli Government
committed to. The four-month deadline for the
proximity talks, after which the Arab League wished to
evaluate results, is also rapidly approaching. The
coming weeks will therefore be crucial for achieving
progress in the peace efforts for the Middle East. These
efforts must lay the foundation for a sustainable
negotiating process; otherwise they will add to the long
list of missed opportunities and play into the hands of
peace opponents. Quartet members are fully committed
to helping the parties get back to the negotiating table.
We appreciate the extraordinary efforts undertaken by
the United States Special Envoy, Senator Mitchell, to
identify common ground for starting a process towards
the implementation of a two-State solution.

Austria calls on both parties to honour the
obligations they agreed to under the Road Map, and to
refrain from any policies that may undermine the spirit
of negotiation in good faith. Israeli settlement activities
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, the demolition of
houses and the continued building of the separation
barrier on Palestinian land continue to constitute major
obstacles to peace. In this context, we, like others, wish
to express our grave concern about the recent
demolition of homes in various neighbourhoods of East
Jerusalem, as well as about decisions on renewed,
continued settlement construction.

Trust in a peace process will depend on visible
and tangible changes on the ground. Austria has
consistently acknowledged Israel's right to protect its
citizens against indiscriminate attacks emanating from
Gaza. We repeat our call for an immediate end to all
such attacks. At the same time, we continue to believe
that security concerns cannot justify the blockade of
Gaza. That blockade is unacceptable, unsustainable and
counterproductive. We therefore welcome Israel's
willingness to review its policies regarding imports to
the Gaza Strip. We are convinced that the prospect of
reconstruction, new job opportunities and increased
freedom of movement can contribute to a positive shift
of attitudes, and reverse the current worrying trend of
de-development, as asserted by United Nations experts.

We welcome Israel's decision to allow, as a first
step, imports of building materials for United Nations-
supervised projects. These measures go in the right
direction. At the same time, they still fall short of the
fundamental change of policy leading to a durable
resolution to the situation in Gaza that European Union
Foreign Ministers called for in their latest European
Union Council conclusions.

We strongly encourage Israel to allow for large-
scale reconstruction, to create conditions for a full
resumption of productive activities, to allow for
exports of agricultural produce and industrial goods as
soon as production can recommence and, most
important, to grant freedom of movement to the
civilian population living in then Gaza Strip.

Austria is deeply disturbed by recent attacks
against non-governmental organizations and
international organizations in Gaza, including, as
others have already mentioned, the vandalizing of a
summer games facility for children of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. Hamas, as the de facto
authority in Gaza, bears the responsibility to ensure the
safety and unhindered operations of the United Nations
and civil society.
Regarding the follow-up to the Security Council's
presidential statement of 1 June concerning the military
operations against the Gaza flotilla (S/PRST/2010/9),
we wish to reiterate the importance of a prompt,
impartial, credible and transparent investigation
conforming to international standards, so as to clarify
all facts. We therefore support the ongoing efforts of
the Secretary-General and call on Israel to positively
react to his proposal for an international inquiry.

Austria welcomes the continuing trend of
increased stability and economic growth in the West
Bank, in particular as it seems that this is due not only
to foreign aid but also to improved overall security and
a number of successful reform efforts by the
Palestinian Authority. Nonetheless, last month's
decision to postpone municipal elections was a painful
setback in the Palestinian Authority's efforts to build
the institutions of a future State. We call on Palestinian
political representatives to seriously pursue
reconciliation efforts and to agree on a political
platform based on the Quartet principles and the quest
for peace, democracy and the rule of law. The current
split between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
jeopardizes prospects for the successful
implementation of a two-State solution.

