Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): The decision we are about
to take, to establish a multifunctional United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Central African Republic, is
an important step for the country, for the region and for the
United Nations. It will give the Central African Republic
much-needed international political and security support in
the crucial process to elections that lies ahead. Partly
through the commendable efforts of the Inter-African
Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui
Agreements (MISAB), conditions in the country have
improved. But the security situation remains fragile.

The presence of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA) will play a
significant role in building security and in strengthening
democracy and the rule of law in the Central African
Republic. It will also, indirectly, have an important
stabilizing effect in the region. The regional security is
precarious, and any deterioration of the situation in the
Central African Republic could have perilous
consequences. It is noteworthy that MINURCA will be
the first entirely new United Nations peace operation in
more than three years. The establishment of MINURCA
will demonstrate the determination of the United Nations
and of the Security Council to assume their
responsibilities with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security in Africa, as well as
elsewhere. It is, indeed, fundamental that the Security
Council should be ready to decide on actions throughout
the spectrum of conflict resolution: from early warning,
prevention, mediation and other such instruments to
peacekeeping and, if need be, enforcement.

The United Nations presence in the Central African
Republic - the Special Representative and
MINURCA - will be multifunctional. This is an
important result of thorough discussions among the
members of the Security Council: one which Sweden very
much welcomes.

We are looking forward to the appointment of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, who has been
given a strong political mandate within MINURCA as
well as a key coordinating role for the United Nations in
the Central African Republic.

The success of MINURCA will depend on the
continued cooperation of all parties in the Central African
Republic. President Patasse and his Government have so
far made considerable progress in fulfilling their
commitments to economic, social, security and electoral
reform, as expressed in the letter dated 8 January 1998
from President Patasse addressed to the Secretary-
General. In this context, we note with satisfaction that a
National Reconciliation Conference will take place later
this month. Much remains to be done, however, to
implement outstanding reform measures.

In conclusion, may I express Sweden's gratitude to
the States that participated in MISAB and to France for
their contributions to peace and stability in the Central
African Republic. The task of MINURCA will be to build
upon the success of MISAB.

 

Let me also add that Sweden fully concurs with the
statement made by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.

