Mr. Holliday (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the Secretary-General's end of
mandate report on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2005/310) and
also thanks Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
presentation to the Council. I also wish to extend a
particular welcome to Ambassador Guterres.

UNMISET has done an outstanding job, and we
would like to commend all who have contributed. In
particular, we wish to thank Special Representative
Hasegawa for his leadership and commitment. The
people and the Government of Timor-Leste have come
a remarkable distance in the short time since
independence. Their spirit and determination is
admirable. We would also like to recognize the
substantial achievement on the part of the international
community, which clearly demonstrates a model for
successful peacekeeping.

It is now time to move on to supporting Timor-
Leste in building its own capacity for self-reliance and
self-governance. We fully appreciate the challenges
that Timor-Leste will continue to face as a new State. It
will continue to need concrete support from its friends,
including the United States, for some time to come. We
hope that the support of the new special political
mission - the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL) - will provide the additional assistance
and skills transfer necessary for the Timorese to
achieve further self-sufficiency. As we stated last
February, this transition from peacekeeping to a
sustainable development framework represents an
extremely significant and positive milestone in the
history of Timor-Leste.

We remain committed to achieving credible
accountability for the crimes committed against
humanity in 1999, and we look forward to the
upcoming report of the Secretary-General's
Commission of Experts tasked with reviewing current
judicial processes and recommending additional
measures, if necessary. We would like to commend the
Serious Crimes Unit for its thorough and careful work
and to again express our concern about proper handling
of crucial evidence gathered by that body. In that
context, it is imperative that the United Nations
preserve a full copy of the Serious Crimes Unit files, as
specified in resolution 1599 (2005). We welcome the
decision of the Secretary-General to maintain a core
international staff to ensure that the Serious Crimes
Unit files are copied.

Since the report of the Commission of Experts
will not be completed until after the closure of
UNMISET on 20 May, we would support a delay in the
liquidation of the Serious Crimes Unit until the
Council can consider the recommendations of the
Commission of Experts. We hope that the Government
of Timor-Leste and UNOTIL, as well as Timor-Leste's
bilateral partners, will provide all necessary facilities
for the staff to continue to make a complete record of
all the Serious Crimes Unit's papers.

As one of Timor-Leste's largest bilateral donors,
our assistance has been focused on rehabilitating the
local economy, promoting free and open markets,
strengthening democracy, improving the judicial sector
and training the police and military forces. We hope
that Timor-Leste's bilateral and multilateral partners
will continue to work with the people and Government
of that country to further institutional capacity-building
and security-sector training.

It is important that the Government of Timor-
Leste take increasingly more responsibility for the
nation's future. During this final year of specialized
United Nations political assistance through UNOTIL,
we hope that the Mission will be able to transfer the
necessary skills to build Timor-Leste's capacity to
provide for its own security, with a special focus on
policing.

