I thank the President of the International Court of Justice, Judge Abdulqawi Yusuf, for his insightful remarks on how best to strengthen the cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. I would also like to express my appreciation to South Africa for having brought this timely debate to the Council in the context of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the International Court of Justice and the hundredth anniversary of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice. The Charter of the United Nations established the International Court of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, with the primary function of adjudicating inter-State disputes. The Court was further envisaged as a jurisdiction that is voluntary in character, exercised solely over consenting States, in accordance with the Statute of the International Court of Justice and the Charter of the United Nations. The sustained caseload of the Court, with a geographically diverse spread of cases referred to it, is illustrative of its universal reach. After a century of adjudication, the Court continues to be relevant as a mechanism for the peaceful settlement of disputes and a key component of the contemporary international peace and security architecture. The Court's relevance is best seen against the backdrop of the wide-ranging spectrum of subjects over which it has exercised jurisdiction and developed ground-breaking international jurisprudence, especially on the principles of the self-determination of peoples and equal rights, as well as on the environment, the protection of human rights and others. The relevance of the Court is additionally seen in its strengthening of the rule of law through judicial capacity-building. In that regard, we welcome the adoption early this week by the General Assembly of resolution 75/129, co-sponsored by Tunisia, establishing a United Nations trust fund to facilitate access to the Judicial Fellows Programme of the Court for the benefit of bright students from across the world, particularly from universities in developing countries, to enhance their skills in the field of the peaceful settlement of disputes. The most recent contentious case with which the Court was seized, concerning the application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, is yet another illustration of the contribution of the Court, as a compulsory jurisdiction through clauses in multilateral treaties, to the maintenance of international peace and security and the protection of human life through provisional measures. By indicating provisional measures, the Court is viewed as an instrument of preventive diplomacy, based on early warning and information-gathering, which seeks to protect human life, prevent irreparable harm and preserve the rights of the parties that constitute the subject matter of a dispute. Turning to the relational perspective and the cooperation between the Security Council and the Court, Tunisia, in spite of scarce practice, continues to see merit in the two organs being separate yet complementary and mutually reinforcing, having different yet related competencies in the settlement of international disputes, within the framework of the Charter of the United Nations. Tunisia calls for enhanced interaction and coordination between the Security Council and the Court within their respective mandates by making full use of the relevant international legal provisions, with the aim of defusing tensions and securing peace through law at the international level. The Security Council should therefore consider referrals to the Court and requests for the Court to issue advisory opinions on any legal questions, as provided for under Article 36, paragraph 3, and Article 96, paragraph 1, of the Charter, in order to resolve international disputes and contribute to the clarification and further development of international law. We also acknowledge the role of the Court in spurring the Security Council to action as provided for under Article 94 of the Charter. The Security Council, being the primary organ for the maintenance of international peace and security, has the political mandate and the political responsibility for ensuring compliance and upholding the rule of law by giving effect, where appropriate, to judicial decisions after the Court has allocated rights and responsibilities and assessed competing legal claims among States parties. Appraising the relationship between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice invites a reckoning with the past and present of the international system in order to enable fresh engagement with the future. Seventy-five years after the establishment of the United Nations, we are witnessing adversarial times in which the international community is being faced with complex and unconventional threats and evolving challenges to global peace and security, such as terrorism, pandemics, climate change, cybercrime and piracy. The coronavirus pandemic has proved to be a particularly challenging test not only for humankind but also for multilateralism and for the structure and functioning of the system of international relations as established in 1945. Tunisia believes that it is essential that cooperation and multilateralism continue to prevail, that the Security council be reformed and expanded, and that creative legal thinking be enabled within the boundaries of the Charter of the United Nations in order to develop norms and instruments governing orderly relations between States and effectively counter the emerging threats of the twenty-first century. The codification and progressive development of international law along with cooperation and multilateralist action should be allowed to continue hand in hand through recourse to international organizations, tribunals and courts, and within a genuinely representative international system, in order to bring about a fairer, more orderly and more prosperous world and continue to live up to the purposes and principles of the Charter.
