Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, Montenegro
and Serbia; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I thank the President very much for organizing this
annual briefing. This is a very important discussion,
and it is clearly also important that we find the right
sort of language. I am sorry that the preceding speaker
was unable to do so in his concluding remarks.

Let me start by expressing our appreciation to
the Committee Chairs for their extensive updates and
summaries of the actions and initiatives that they have
taken. This year has already seen several events to mark
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004). Those included a Security Council briefing on
10 April and an open debate on 7 May (see S/PV.7169).
We strongly support such initiatives. Outreach is an
essential part of our work to raise awareness of the
challenge and our response and to garner broad political
support.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is often viewed through
the lens of counter-terrorism, but it is more than that.
The proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, as well as their means of delivery, constitutes
a threat to international peace and security. The threat
of terrorism and the risk that non-State actors may
acquire, develop, traffic in or use nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery remain
high. Therefore, it is the duty of all States of the world
to fight the threat. The full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is not simply a legal requirement. It is
incumbent upon us all and in all of our interests.

We therefore applaud the efforts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), efforts
at matchmaking between donors and those that seek
support. We will redouble our efforts to play our
part in helping partners to implement resolution 1540
(2004). For example, we have adopted an EU Council
decision in support of the practical implementation
of that resolution and signed an agreement with the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs as the
implementing agency. A large component of the EU
Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Centres
of Excellence initiative is devoted to supporting national
action plans on resolution 1540 (2004). Universal
reporting under the resolution is within reach, and I
hope that we will achieve that goal this year.

Finally, we support the recommendations that
were agreed in the 2013 annual review, including the
sharing of effective practices, the development of a
living network of points of contact and interaction with
civil society and the private sectors, as well as with
parliamentarians. We hope that those recommendations
can be implemented quickly.

The terrorist threat that we face continues to
evolve, with more active terrorist groups than before.
In 2013, there were nearly 10,000 terrorist attacks,
resulting in more than 18,000 deaths and over 32,000
injuries. Terrorism remains a threat to global peace and
security. Resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001) are
therefore still as pertinent and important as ever. They
play a crucial role in our security. That is underscored
in the recent report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations system in implementing
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/68/841).

We remain committed to the idea that the scourge
of terrorism can be overcome only by measures that
adhere to the highest human rights standards and are in
full compliance with the rule of law. Terrorism needs to
be fought as a crime by law and within the law with full
respect for fundamental rights.

We welcome the fact that the Security Council has
taken significant steps to further reinforce fair and clear
procedures for United Nations sanctions. We commend
the Ombudsperson's work and reiterate our support for
her unwavering efforts. We reiterate our call upon all
Member States to extend their full cooperation to the
Office of the Ombudsperson in each and every case.
The discussions in the Council in June on the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee will provide an excellent
opportunity to further advance those procedures and to
strengthen the effectiveness of the Committee and the
work of the Ombudsperson.

We welcome the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), in particular the vast
array of counter-terrorism efforts and activities. In the
period of concern, we participated with great interest in
a number of events focused on countering the financing
of terrorism and preventing terrorist travel, such as
the high-level open briefing on 25 April on preventing
the misuse of travel documents by terrorists, traveller
identification management and document security.
That is a crucial issue, in particular as many countries
are faced with the growing threat of an increasing flow
of international recruits to terrorist organizations,
including foreign fighters. Such foreign fighters can
pose an acute terrorist threat on their return to their
home countries. Sharing information and best practices
on detecting those who travel abroad to fight and on
preventing them from doing so is vital. We strongly
support further work in that area.

We warmly welcome resolution 2129 (2013),
which renews the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The
resolution calls on the Committee and CTED to be more
active in countering violent extremism and to focus on
prevention in response to the global terrorist threat.
Communities, civil society and other partners should
be involved in finding solutions. The resolution also
highlights the positive role that victims of terrorism
and women can play in that process.

Finally, it is worth drawing attention to resolution
2133 (2014), which is the first resolution dedicated to
the issue of kidnapping for ransom. Building on the
commitments made in resolution 1373 (2001), it calls
upon all Member States to take action to prevent
terrorists from benefiting directly or indirectly from
ransom payments or from political concessions and to
work together to secure the safe release of hostages.

I would like to conclude my intervention by
underscoring that our resolve to defeat terrorism and
the proliferation of chemical, biological, radiological or
nuclear weapons must never weaken or falter. We remain
committed to working with the three Committees. Their
work must remain a priority for the United Nations and
its Member States.

