Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz
for their informative briefings on the progress made in
the work of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

By the end of last year, we saw the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia complete its
mandate to prosecute those responsible for grave
violations of international humanitarian law in that
country. We have therefore been able to close the first
two international criminal tribunals for the prosecution
of the perpetrators of grave violations of international
humanitarian law. That jurisdiction was fully
transferred to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, which is complementing the
Security Council approach to establish justice and
end impunity in order to achieve international peace
and security. Peace means not only putting an end to
armed conflicts, but also ensuring justice for victims
of war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing. This
can be done by prosecuting those found responsible
for perpetrating such crimes in accordance with the
relevant international laws.

We take note of the report of the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals on the progress of its work (see S/2018/347).
In that regard, I would like to make the following
three points.

First, we welcome the efforts of the President
and the Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism to improve its work by adopting effective
working methods that help to facilitate legal research,
analysis and the drafting of decisions and judgements
issued by the Mechanism, without prejudice to the
mandate set out in resolution 1966 (2010) and despite
the challenges it is facing. Those challenges include
heightened judicial activity, such as requests for the
review ofjudgements rendered, access to confidential
information and allegations of contempt of court; no
approval by the General Assembly for the Mechanism's
proposed budget for the biennium 2018-2019. The
Mechanism therefore had to prepare a revised and
reduced budget by decreasing the size ofits staff, which
had a negative impact on the implementation of the
Mechanism's mandate, as well as on its staff morale.

Secondly, we commend the prompt proceedings
undertaken by judges, prosecutors and the Registrar
during the trials before the judges of the Mechanism so
as to swiftly issue judgements against the accused, such
as the issuance ahead of schedule of final judgements
in recent cases.

Thirdly, the Mechanism should take the remarks
of Member States on its work into account in order to
achieve the desired outcome, in particular in cases of
conditional early release.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Peru for its
strenuous efforts as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, as well as the Office
of Legal Affairs.

