Mr. Kolby (Norway): I, too, would like to thank
Hans Haekkerup for his briefing and to reiterate
Norway's full support for the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) to implement resolution 1244 (1999),
including the preparations for elections. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report and
for his presence here today.

We welcome the progress reported with regard to
the small-scale returns of Kosovo Serbs, the transfer of
responsibilities to the municipal administration and the
efforts to achieve economic recovery. But the report
also shows that many challenges remain. First of all,
the security situation for Kosovo Serbs and others is
not satisfactory, despite the considerable efforts of
UNMIK and KFOR. The task of ensuring a viable
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo cannot be left to the
international community alone. The Kosovar leaders
themselves must more actively confront the sources of
insecurity. They must make further efforts to prevent
violence and extremism and to publicly and actively
promote the return and integration of Kosovo Serbs and
members of the other communities that belong in
Kosovo.

The Kosovo-wide elections on 17 November will
be a milestone in the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). But it is up to the Kosovar leaders to
make them meaningful and successful. Norway fully
agrees with the Secretary-General that the participation
of Kosovo Serbs and other minorities is critical to the
legitimacy of these elections. Non-Albanians represent
about 200,000 voters out ofa total of 1.2 million.

Norway commends the efforts of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities, in particular
President Kostunica, to encourage Kosovo Serbs to
register. We must now look to Belgrade for continued
constructive engagement to convince the Serbs that it is
in their interest to vote in November and to assume
their share in the running of Kosovo.

Time is short. The election campaign has already
begun. Lists of candidates should be submitted within a
week. We must therefore work to achieve rapid results.
The provisional self-governing institutions will not be
representative without the broad participation of all of
Kosovo's various ethnic groups.

Our intention behind today's presidential
statement is to give a positive impetus to this process.
The statement will provide a clear signal that the
Council is sensitive to the interests of all and remains
fully committed to all provisions of resolution 1244
(1999) as the only basis for building Kosovo's future.

Nobody must be in doubt that after the elections
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
will continue to hold considerable authority, as stated
in the Constitutional Framework, so as to ensure that
the objectives of resolution 1244 (1999) are achieved.

A close and constructive dialogue between
UNMIK and the Yugoslav authorities is crucial in order
to realize these objectives. We welcome regular
meetings between the Special Representative,
Mr. Haekkerup and Deputy Prime Minister Covic' as a
good basis for enhanced cooperation between UNMIK
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbia Joint
Coordination Committee for Kosovo.

We must also look beyond these elections,
towards longer-term confidence-building and
reconciliation among the communities in Kosovo. In
this regard, it is important that UNMIK prepare for
cooperation and dialogue between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia authorities and the elected self-
governing institutions in Pristina.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Norway's
appreciation of the excellent cooperation between the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Haekkerup, and the former KFOR commander,
General Skiaker, who handed over command two days
ago, and of the tireless efforts of the women and men
of UNMIK. They are now entering a critical and
defining phase in the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), not only for Kosovo, but also for the
entire region.

