Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We would first like to express our gratitude
to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock and the Executive Director of
the World Food Programme, Mr. Beasley, for the very
detailed briefings they just delivered and the ongoing
efforts of their teams in Yemen. Equatorial Guinea
supports and commends such efforts.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has closely
followed the developments in Yemen. The signing
of the Stockholm Agreement last December, under
the sponsorship and auspices of the United Nations,
was an unusual event since the conflict broke out,
which has been going on for almost five years now.
My delegation welcomes the momentum being
spearheaded by the United Nations in that new process,
as evidenced by the early deployment in Yemen of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah
Agreement (UNMHA), as well as the various calls for
its implementation.

It gives us more hope to hear that, since
18 December 2018, the relative ceasefire has been
maintained in the governorate of Al-Hudaydah, given
that none of the parties seems to have attempted any
major offensive actions to seize new territory. In
the context of the progress needed to implement the
Stockholm Agreement, we cannot overlook the fact
that the Houthi movement ordered the withdrawal of
its uniformed elements from the ports of Saleef and
Ras Isa and the strategic city and port of Al-Hudaydah
last May. In that regard, we commend the Office of the
Special Envoy and UNMHA on those very significant
strides, which we consider to be the fruit of successful
cooperation between the two offices. At the same time,
we would like to encourage them to continue working
with the parties in that direction, so as to ensure that
the process proceeds.

Despite the improvements observed so far this year,
we cannot fail to be concerned, bearing in mind that
the very reports that we take up indicate that there are
places that should have enjoyed the progress achieved
up to this point but, unfortunately, continue to be the
subject of serious, violent incidents, such as direct
exchanges of fire and the use of snipers. Attacks with
drones and other such acts must cease.

We believe that the Yemeni parties to the conflict
must ensure full compliance with all the commitments
set out in the Al-Hudaydah agreement, as that is the key
to unblocking and advancing this delicate process. They
must take into account the strategic importance of that
enclave in guaranteeing the delivery of humanitarian
and commercial supplies to the population. However,
we are confident that the active presence of UNMHA,
through its monitoring patrols, can defuse such tension
and create a climate worthy of praise.

Millions of people continue to face serious and
significant difficulties in accessing basic supplies, such
as is the case with the lack of food and drinking water,
which exposes the people, particularly children, to the
threat of diseases such as cholera, among others. To
all that we must add the enormous difficulties faced
by humanitarian agencies in trying to reach the people
most in need; the panorama is bleak and chaotic. We
therefore hope that the Government of Yemen and the
Houthi leaders will take note of that serious concern
and that they will remove the protocols that hinder and
obstruct that process.

Finally, as we have said before, Equatorial Guinea
expresses its full support for the efforts of the United
Nations in Yemen, with the hope that the gains made
in Stockholm will be increasingly productive and serve
as a reference for future meetings. In that regard, we
encourage the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen and all intermediaries in Yemen to continue
working towards a political solution to the conflict. The
countries with influence in the region must participate
unambiguously in that process. The unity of the Council
is similarly key.

Equatorial Guinea reiterates that this conflict
has no military solution, which is why the parties to
the conflict, namely, the Government of Yemen and
the Houthis, must continue to work together with
the United Nations in the quest for the only possible
solution, which is a political one, and that must lead to
reconciliation in Yemen.

