Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Many congratulations,
Mr. President, on assuming the post of Council
President, and with such an important world issue at
the very start of your tenure.

The problem in Syria has assumed dimensions
that are not only regrettable but condemnable. We have
to understand that while we have made civilization, we
have also condoned expressions like "collateral
damage", and so many others, which it is not my
intention to name here today. But I believe that we
accept too much too easily. It reminds me of when, two
thousand years ago, Pontius Pilate washed his hands
and said, "I have nothing to do with this." Two
thousand years later, we still see that humanity suffers
from that particular viewpoint.

Pakistan had some serious concerns, mainly
against killings, the massacre of innocents. But also, on
a point of principle of the Charter, we were not happy
about any infringement on the sovereignty or integrity
of Syria.

There was a very spirited attempt, as related by
Sir Mark just now as well, to take care of issues and
concerns, and we are thankful for that. I believe that it
became important to be able to end killings by asking
both sides - in fact, forcing both sides - to
acknowledge that it is unacceptable, and based on the
strong moral point that the Arab League draft
introduced into this.
There was a question of amnesty. I also believe it
was an accepted fact that everyone has to get involved
to stop it. Do not forget that nothing succeeds
anywhere in the world against a government without
external help. That is a point of history that cannot be
ignored.

It is easy for those of us who today voted in the
majority to sit back and say, "Well, we have done our
bit." No, we have not. We cannot wash our hands of this.
We must continue and seek - as the Russians and the
Chinese have stated that they will continue to seek -
the way forward. I believe that the best vehicle is the
Arab League plan and the very substantial moves that
have been accepted over the last few days.

I believe that the offer of no regime change, of
plurality, and the promotion of democracy are
important aspects of this situation. We have stood by
that. I believe that even today our system has indeed let
us down. We have been very clear, without taking
political benefit out of it, that this aspect of the veto is
always a heart-wrencher. It cuts both ways, benefitting
one side at one moment and the other at another
moment. Either everyone should have the veto, and
then see how the world gets on, or perhaps we should
all consider not using it whatsoever.

I also think we have arrived at a situation that
demands we persevere in our efforts to strengthen the
relationships among us. Today our decision mattered a
great deal to our Arab brethren, who have been so
important to us. We had to stand with them on principle
because they wanted our support pretty unanimously. I
raised a question a couple of days earlier, noting that I
did not then see present either Tunisia, Egypt or others
that are such strong proponents on this issue; and I am
glad to see their presence today. That is a great plus, in
my mind.

I would like to close with a few words of
reminder that all this was done with good intentions on
all sides. I am not going to beat anyone with a stick. I
believe consensus was achieved, though there were
some drop-outs from it, and I believe we can still work
towards that consensus. There is a visit to Syria
scheduled in the next few days. I am sure that some
more points may arise.

This matter should not be allowed to die. The
draft resolution should remain an active matter before
this Council, and we should address it again as soon as
possible, with the help even of those that decided today
not to vote for it. By keeping the matter active, we
would give hope to those who are expecting action
from us. Having made these few remarks, I urge the
Council to keep its engagement on this matter alive.

