Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Let me congratulate
Argentina on its assumption of the Security Council
presidency for October. We thank you, Mr. President, for
the excellent concept paper (8/2014/725, annex), which
has facilitated our preparations for the discussions
today.

My delegation also appreciates the insightful
briefings by Ms. Kimberly Prost, Ombudsperson of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.

It is in the interest of all Member States to see
improvements in the working methods of the Security
Council. Such issues as efficiency, effectiveness,
transparency, participation, accountability and
decision-making continue to be the centrepieces of our
discussions. My delegation will confine our discussion
to the issue of the enhancement of due process in the
sanctions regime, as clearly outlined in the concept
paper.

Under Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Security Council is given authority to apply
measures to prevent or respond to what is perceived as
threats to international peace and security. Sanctions
are one of the tools frequently used and have long been
at the centre of debate. Thailand's views on this point
are the following.

First, we support the imposition of targeted
sanctions against individuals or entities rather than
sanctions against an entire State. Targeted sanctions
generate a more direct impact in terms of changing an
individual's behaviour, and they minimize unintended
consequences on a country's overall social and
economic development.
Secondly, we attach the highest importance to
the issue of criteria and procedures for listing and
delisting with regard to sanctions. What is required is
an independent, accessible and transparent mechanism.
Such a mechanism must apply to all subsidiary bodies
of the Council with listing and delisting powers. The
inclusion of individuals and entities on the list needs
to be carried out with utmost care. Unclear evidence
and insufficient information may lead to an erroneous
placing of individuals and entities on the list. On the
other hand, the issue of delisting is no less important
and requires our equal attention. Thailand therefore
encourages the respective sanctions committees,
panels of experts and the Office of the Ombudsperson
to continue interacting with all relevant parties and
stakeholders to refine the process in order to ensure
fairness and transparency.

Thirdly, after targeted sanction are imposed,
it is necessary to put in place effective monitoring
mechanisms to ensure that the measures are fully and
effectively implemented.

Fourthly, sanctions need to be time-bound. They
cannot be indefinite. There must also be periodic
assessments and revisions. However, when sanctions
fail to serve their original purpose, the Council needs
to modify its approach and find alternative measures.
Once the objectives of the sanctions are achieved, such
sanctions regimes should be terminated. But that opens
the question of who will decide if the objectives have
been met and when would be the best time to lift the
sanctions. In our view, the answer requires a collective
assessment, one best undertaken by respective sanctions
committees, United Nations entities, key stakeholders,
the Council itself, relevant regional organizations and,
in some cases, the targeted States.

Fifthly, without full implementation by Member
States and relevant stakeholders, sanctions regimes
will not succeed. Therefore, the wider United Nations
membership should have an increased role in the
discussions prior to the imposition or renewal of
sanctions. The discussions of subsidiary Council
bodies should be made more accessible to non-Council
members. More information regarding their operations,
including various reporting, reviewing, monitoring and
evaluation mechanisms, should be made available in
order to increase transparency and accountability.

My delegation commends the work of the Council's
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, chaired by Argentina,
particularly in terms of substance, but, equally
important, on the Council's working methods. As the
President said this morning, that concerns the way, and
not the how or the why. For our part, Thailand is fully
committed to continuing our active participation in this
important issue.

