Mr. Ntakirutimana (Burundi) (spoke in French):
It is an honour for me to be able to speak before the
members of the Security Council on an important
topic, peacebuilding in post-conflict countries. This
subject is today of concern to the various stakeholders
determined to offer space for stability, development
and hope to countries shattered by conflicts.

On behalf of my delegation and on my own
account, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having invited Burundi to this debate. I would also like
to express my gratitude, and that of the people of
Burundi, to all the members of the Peacebuilding
Commission for the extensive support and
encouragement they provided during the country-
specific meetings where Burundi was on the

Commission's agenda. Similarly, I would also like to
express appreciation for the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Support Office, which, in a new and
difficult context, is trying to make the Commission a
success.

In July 2006, the delegation of Burundi was able
to offer to the members of the Peacebuilding
Commission a comprehensive View of the situation in
Burundi. Commission members were able to become
familiar with the desolation and poverty through which
my country is struggling after more than 10 years of
civil war.

During the country-specific meeting on Burundi
last October, the delegation of Burundi offered a
detailed picture of the effects of war in several areas of
national life. The members of the Commission were
able to see for themselves the immense needs facing
the Government of Burundi. Our delegation was also
able to stress the many efforts being made by the
Government in order to help Burundi emerge from an
economic, political and social situation that is
significantly impacted by the adverse consequences of
conflict.

Those efforts were also noted and welcomed by
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund,
which have been tracking the evolution of the
Burundian economy and which were also invited to the
same meeting.

Following the October meeting, the delegation of
Burundi returned home with the task of preparing a
presentation for the country-specific meeting on
Burundi that was planned for December 2006. The
Government of Burundi had to establish a list of urgent
priorities, formulate the technical specifications of
those priorities, and so on. My Government
immediately set up a national peacebuilding
commission, which has worked day and night,
untiringly, in synergy with the United Nations
Operation in Burundi (ONUB), the diplomats on the
ground and civil society.

Following that country-specific meeting on
Burundi on 12 December 2006, the Peacebuilding
Support Office pledged to the Burundian delegation a
package designed to finance the projects presented at
that meeting. We are extremely grateful for that.

Once again, I would like to thank all of the
countries that have already contributed to the
Peacebuilding Fund. By doing so, they have made it
possible for the new Commission to be operational and
to get down to brass tacks.

While welcoming the work that has already been
done by the Commission, my delegation would like to
make the following observations. First of all, seven
months after its creation, the Commission should
finally become operational and deal with the
implementation of projects that were selected in
December 2006. Secondly, my delegation would like to
understand the mechanism or mechanisms for
disbursing the allocated funds and would especially
hope that these mechanisms might be made more
flexible.

Thirdly, my country is organizing a donor round
table in March 2007, for which I would like to request
the support of the Commission at three levels. First, we
would like to see members of the Commission attend
the donor round table, which we plan to hold on 14
March 2007. Secondly, we would like the
Peacebuilding Commission to provide ongoing support
to the Burundian Government so as to galvanize
donors, ensuring the success of the round table.
Thirdly, given the fact that most of the donors are
members of the Peacebuilding Commission, we urge
each member to be present at the March meeting and
possibly to announce a contribution.

