Mr. Corr (Ireland): On behalf of my delegation, I
should like to thank you, Madam President, for your
attendance at this morning's important meeting of the
Security Council. I also wish to welcome the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway and to thank
him for Norway's work in the area of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. In addition, I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Oshima and Director General
Gnaedinger of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their important statements this morning.

We in the United Nations have made considerable
progress in recent years in addressing a moral and
political challenge of the first magnitude: the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We still have a
long distance to travel. And we must begin, as the
Secretary-General emphasized in his statement this
morning, with a commitment of political will, here in
the Security Council and by all Member States. The
basis for progress has to be awareness and
understanding by Member States of their obligations
and responsibilities in that area.
Ireland fully associates itself with the statement
that will be made later in the debate by the
representative of Denmark on behalf of the European
Union. We also associate ourselves with the statement
that Austria will make on behalf of the Human Security
Network.

Statistics of life and death - arbitrary life or
death - can mask realities of very dark dimensions.
Two-and-a-half million civilians have been killed
directly in conflict situations over the past decade.
Over 30 million have been uprooted or displaced.
Countless others have died or suffered from
malnutrition or disease as a consequence of conflict.
Each was an individual human being with a right to
live. The loss of each was a violation of the moral
imperative described by Kant - that human beings
must be treated not as means but as ends in themselves.
That is a doctrine of moral universality that is at the
core of everything that the United Nations stands for.

It is right today to make a clear political point:
the catastrophes of two world wars that devastated
Europe and the world in the first half of the twentieth
century and led to the loss of millions of civilian lives
led to actions that reshaped the world, including the
founding of the United Nations. Today we should show
the same determination with regard to the loss of
millions of lives and the terrible humanitarian suffering
resulting from conflicts that have ravaged much of
Africa, as well as other parts of the world, in recent
years.

Here at the United Nations we are making some
real progress at an institutional level. This includes the
aide-memoire developed by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) on key
civilian protection issues; closer cooperation between
Secretariat departments and OCHA; regular and
systematic briefings by OCHA of the Security Council
on civilian and humanitarian issues, including recently
on the situation in Ituri in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; and the development of the road map for
the protection of civilians, a provisional version of
which is attached to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2002/l300). All these are valuable steps. We now
need to further strengthen cooperation within the
United Nations family, especially the Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. We need to build on the positive steps already
taken, including strongly promoting the use of the aide-
memoire and the road map throughout the United
Nations system and by Member States.
There is now a moment of real opportunity, as
many conflicts - such as those in Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi,
Afghanistan and Sierra Leone - have either ended or
are, hopefully, about to end. All of these conflicts point
to what we must now do if, at a time of relative hope,
we can summon the necessary political will and
determination. And that is to regard the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as an imperative to shape
the work of the United Nations in the years to come.
Unless we do so, safeguarding international peace and
security will rest on shallow foundations and we will
have failed people around the world who look to the
United Nations when no other hope exists for them.
This political will must also be, literally, political. We
must strongly work, for example, with the African
Union and support the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) in building new hope in Africa.

In his report, the Secretary-General focused on
central themes that must shape this work. Ireland
warmly endorses all of the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General. Access to vulnerable
populations is an indispensable and absolute
requirement for the protection of civilians. The United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies, including
non-governmental organizations, must have access to
those in need. They must have full freedom to
negotiate access issues with non-State actors. As the
Secretary-General points out, significant bilateral
pressure on warring parties by Security Council
members and others to obtain access can play a vital
role. The aide-memoire is a valuable instrument for
structuring and shaping negotiations on access and
related issues that need to be addressed.

The grave humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, highlighted by Ms. Bertini in her
report last August, underscores all of these themes. It is
also right today to pause and mourn the recent loss of
three brave staff members of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, while serving others in humanitarian work: Ian
Hook, Osama Hassan Tahrawi and Ahlam Riziq

Kandil. The role of protectors of civilians in conflict
bears special honour; its violation deserves special
dishonour.

On the separation of civilians and armed
elements, the Secretary-General points to successful
relocation exercises over the past year, such as in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My Delegation
welcomes the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Agenda for Protection
proposals and the practical steps now being considered
by United Nations agencies. These include issues
relating to the location of refugee camps and problems
deriving from the intermingling of combatants and
civilians. The suggestion of the Secretary-General of a
roster of experts who could be seconded by
Governments to assist in overcoming a lack of
resources and capacity by States in conflict areas is to
be welcomed. So is the proposal for the rapid
deployment of United Nations multidisciplinary
assessment teams to assist and support the separation
of combatants and civilians.

The restoration or establishment of the rule of
law, justice and reconciliation is a foundation for
assured protection of civilians in situations of conflict
and when conflict is ending. The entry into force last
July of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court represents an important deterrent against war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. An
important light has been lit in the fight for justice for
innocent people who suffer injustice. Such injustice is
not the work of fate, it is the result of acts of human
beings against other human beings.

At the conclusion of his report, the Secretary-
General highlights three themes - "global issues", as
he rightly describes them - that must especially shape
our work in the protection of civilians.

Gender-based violence in humanitarian and
conflict situations is an issue of the utmost gravity and
seriousness. Such abuse is endemic in situations of
mass displacement and conflict. We must continue to
place this issue at the forefront of our agenda,
including full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), and build on progress already achieved, not
least in the mandates of United Nations field
operations.

Secondly, the commercial exploitation of
resources has led to devastating consequences for
civilians. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is an
especially graphic example, as we know from the
recent report of the Panel of Experts. Here, I would like
to add my delegation's strong view about the need for
early action and follow-up by the Council on the Panel
report.

Finally, the rise of terrorism has added a new set
of challenges to the work of protecting civilians. Here,
as we in the international community pursue the work
of combating terrorism, let me simply wholeheartedly
endorse the words of the Secretary-General in
paragraph 62 of the report: "to pursue security at the
expense of human rights will ultimately be self-
defeating".

There is one final point that I would like to make.
The question of adequate funding for United Nations
agencies involved in the protection of civilians -
Agencies dealing with food, refugee protection and

shelter - is an immediate practical issue that we
should not ignore. Yet all too often United Nations
country appeals - even in dire situations - remain

partially or even substantially under-funded. We as
Member States need to look at this as an indication of
seriousness of purpose. The present situation is
haphazard and can be excessively prone to media focus
on the last atrocity, rather than the considered views of
OCHA or the Secretary-General. This is something we
as Member States must consider urgently if we are
serious about conflict prevention, protecting the rights
of civilians where they are in peril, and addressing dire
needs, whether or not they are at the centre of world
attention.

In a speech during the Second World War, Albert
Camus spoke of the innocent who suffer and who need
help and, in words of challenge and humanism, asked,
"if you will not help us to do this, then who will?"
People around the world today ask this of Member
States here in the United Nations. We owe them an
answer and we owe them action.

