Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf ofFrance, I sincerely thank Prosecutor Bensouda
and her team for the important work they have been
doing for six years in the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). France appreciates
the importance that such a mission represents for her and
her team, who are engaged on a daily basis in rooting
out and identifying culpability; for the victims, who
await recognition and reparation; and for witnesses,
who have chosen to place their trust in justice in a
context that is anything but simple. That is why it is
important that we steer a clear course. Our focus is on
combating impunity for crimes committed in Darfur.
Our biannual debate today is a clear reminder of that.

When the Security Council, in resolution 1593
(2005), referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC
Prosecutor 13 years ago, it was because members were
collectively convinced that they must act to ensure that
no further atrocities were committed in Darfur and that
there would be no reconciliation or stability in the Sudan
without justice for the victims. Those objectives have
not yet been achieved. It is the Council's responsibility
to take resolute action to combat impunity in the Sudan
and to put an end to the crimes committed in Darfur.
Ensuring that justice is served is essential to any long-
term stabilization in Darfur and the Sudan.

Certainly, the overall improvement in the security
situation makes stabilization possible, which is an
encouraging development. However, many challenges
remain. That is particularly true in Jebel Marra,
where people continue to suffer. France also remains
concerned about the persistence of intercommunal
conflicts and militia activities, which remain a major
cause of concern for the populations, in particular for
the most vulnerable. Too many women still fall victim
to sexual violence in Darfur. We must also remain
attentive to the plight of the displaced populations.
There are still nearly 2 million displaced people in
Darfur, for whom lasting solutions have yet to be found.
That requires continued efforts to end the fighting
and violence against civilians, in particular in Jebel
Marra, including by reaching a cessation of hostilities
agreement.

Addressing the root causes of the conflict is also
essential, in particular with regard to land, access to
natural resources and restoring the rule oflaw. It is also
imperative to pursue efforts to advance the political
process. In all these areas, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur plays an important
role. It must continue to implement its mandate in the
course of the ongoing reconfiguration. In particular, it
is essential that the mission has access to areas where
the protection of civilians and humanitarian access are
critical, be it in Jebel Marra or elsewhere.

The fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes and respect for human rights are also
fundamental to achieving long-term stabilization in
Darfur. In order for people who have suffered to regain
confidence in their environment and return to a normal
life, it is essential that the perpetrators of crimes be
identified and held accountable for their actions.

France recalls once again the importance of the
obligation to cooperate with the Court, in accordance
with the resolutions adopted by the Council. That
applies to the implementation of the arrest warrant
against President Al-Bashir and the four other suspects
identified by the Court. France rejects the trivialization
of non-cooperation on the part of States Members of
the United Nations, especially States parties to the
Rome Statute. Of course, that obligation is primarily
incumbent on the Sudan, which must execute arrest
warrants against its nationals for acts committed on
its territory and cooperate with the Court pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).

The judges of the International Criminal Court
have repeatedly recalled the obligation of States parties
to the Rome Statute to cooperate with the Court and to
execute arrest warrants when the people against whom
they are issued are on their territory. Therefore, France
regrets that persons subject to arrest warrants have not
been arrested, in defiance of resolution 1593 (2005),
the Rome Statute and the decisions of the International
Criminal Court.

We must fulfil the Court's legitimate requests
so that it may fully carry out its mandate. We must
ensure that cooperation with the ICC is effective and
that arrest warrants are executed. The same applies
to the implementation by the Council of its own
resolutions, in particular resolution 1593 (2005).
In that connection, France reiterates its proposal that
States which, according to the Court, have not complied
with their obligations to cooperate with the Court be
invited to address the Security Council. It will then
be up to the Council to determine, on the basis of that
exchange of views, what action to take.

