Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): At the outset, let me hail
the men and women who, under the United Nations flag,
continue today to serve in the field in a dedicated and
selfless manner. Between 1992 and January of this year
a total of 184 United Nations personnel were killed in the
field. These are fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, uncles
and aunts who served the United Nations and who have
made the supreme sacrifice for international peace and
security. For their sake it is only befitting, therefore, that
the Security Council re-examine on its part what is to be
done to help ensure the safety of United Nations and
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel.

Let me thus add my voice to those of my
colleagues who have spoken before me in expressing my
delegation's appreciation to your delegation,
Mr. President, for having arranged this meeting. Your
personal participation in this meeting, Mr. Minister, is
testimony to the seriousness your Government attaches to
this very important issue. Our gratitude also goes to the
Deputy Secretary-General and to the Executive Director
of the World Food Programme for their statements. They
presented us with comprehensive and up-to-date
information on the status of the protection of United
Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel, and we are very grateful.

The subject the Council is considering today is
undoubtedly one of the gravest concerns of and
challenges to the Security Council as the principal organ
charged with the maintenance of international peace and
security. In 1989, the men and women of the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) were
welcomed with open arms in Namibia. SWAPO, the
liberation movement then, cooperated with the United
Nations, and its military wing disarmed. There are lessons
to be learned from there - lessons that will enhance the
safety of United Nations personnel today.

Contrary to the 1980s, however, today we have a
mushrooming of rebel movements on the African
continent - rebel movements and other armed groups
who are targeting United Nations personnel persistently.
In the Angolan situation, for example, UNITA, under
specific and strict instructions from Mr. Savimbi, shot
down two United Nations chartered aircraft on
26 December 1998 and 7 January 1999, respectively, over
the territory it controlled. In addition, a plane piloted by
a Russian crew was shot down by UNITA, and the fate
of its crew remains unknown. It is therefore important
that a clear message be sent to the rebel movements in
Africa and elsewhere that lawlessness will no longer be
tolerated.

 

The international community should not only
condemn these barbaric acts but should also make sure that
those responsible are brought to justice. In this regard,
Namibia welcomes the entry into force of the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel. We encourage Members of the United Nations
to become parties to the Convention as soon as possible,
with a view to ending the culture of impunity in which
flagrant violations of human rights and humanitarian law
continue to go unpunished.

Furthermore, it is important that, when United
Nations observers are deployed, there is an adequate
protection force, under an appropriate mandate. In addition,
there is a need to explore meaningful ways of effectively
disarming rebels and other armed groups. This needs to be
further examined, as it is linked to the continuous illegal
flow of arms into conflict situations.

One other important confidence-building measure
which we in Namibia used during the transition in our
country was the code of conduct to which all the parties
adhered. The mechanism used then can be duplicated today.
Every mission of the United Nations must thus build on
another in terms of lessons learned.

Namibia fully agrees with the notion that primary
responsibility for the security and protection of the United
Nations personnel and humanitarian personnel rests with the
host Government. It is clear that under Article 105 of the
United Nations Charter and relevant agreements entered
into between the United Nations and the host Government,
the United Nations is entitled to enjoy such privileges and
immunities that are necessary to the fulfilment of its aims
and objectives. However, for the Governments to be able to
fulfil their obligations, it is fitting that United Nations
personnel and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel do observe and respect the national laws and
avoid all acts which are incompatible with the nature of
their duties.

We look forward to the report of the Secretary-
General pursuant to General Assembly resolution 54/ 192 of
17 December 1999, which is expected to be submitted in
May 2000, addressing the scope of legal protection under
the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.

