Ms. Kyung-Wha Kang: I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the Security Council for
this opportunity to deliver this statement on behalf
of Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator.

It has been six months since resolution 2139 (2014)
was adopted with the aim of pressing the parties to the
conflict in Syria to abide by basic international legal
obligations and reduce the suffering of ordinary people
caught up in the conflict. Over those six months, the
plight of people in Syria has worsened rather than
diminished. The violence and conflict continues
unabated, with more deaths of women, children and
men. The social and economic fabric ofthe country has
been ripped to shreds. According to data collected by
human rights organizations from various sources, July
2014 was a particularly harrowing month for civilians
since the start of the conflict in Syria, with more than
1,000 civilian deaths and injuries. On 22 August, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights issued updated
casualty figures on the conflict. By April 2014, more
than 191,000 people had been killed since it began. As
appalling as it is, that number is a minimum. The real
death toll is likely to be much higher.

In Aleppo governorate, a marked increase in the

indiscriminate use of barrel bombs by the Government
was registered in residential neighbourhoods, Where
civilians, including women and children, with no means
to leave, still struggle to survive. The governorates of
Dar'a, Hama and Idlib continued to be particularly
affected by barrel bombs. In Dar'a, for example, more
than 30 barrel bombs were reportedly dropped on
Da'el city between 22 and 31 July, killing 10 civilians,
including 5 children. Opposition and extremist groups
continued to attack residential areas with mortars,
shelling and vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices, killing and injuring scores ofpeople, including
children. In Damascus, approximately 225 mortars and
missiles targeted the capital between 3 and 7 August,
killing more than 17 people and injuring at least 100,
including children.

The collective punishment of civilians continues,
in flagrant violation of the most basic principles of
international humanitarian law. Almost 1 million people
in Aleppo are deprived of water because of attacks on
vital infrastructure. The Islamic Front has several times
cut the water supply to an area for displaced people in
Aleppo. Medical facilities and personnel also continue
to be targeted, and the number of people fleeing Syria
in search of safety continues to increase. Almost one
Syrian in two is either internally displaced or a refugee.

The advance of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) into central Syria is taking the violence
meted out to unprotected civilians to a new level. The
group continues to commit horrific atrocities against
those opposing its rule. In Deir ez-Zor, for example,
community sources report that as many as 700 members
of the Arab Al-Sheitaat tribe, whom ISIL accused of
apostasy, have been killed or kidnapped over the past
two weeks, with some beheaded or crucified. Reports
also indicate that women from the tribe are being sold
in markets in Iraq.

In the face of total impunity, grave human rights
violations have become the norm in Syria. The parties to
the conflict are oblivious of their obligations to protect
civilians and abide by international humanitarian law,
as they continue to commit terrible crimes against
civilians, young and old, women and men. The
perpetrators must be held accountable. The impunity
must end.

For the first time in six months, there was some
improvement in the past month on humanitarian
access. We are reaching more people in need in hard-
to-reach areas as a result of the Council's adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014). The monitoring mechanism is
now operational at the three border crossings of Bab
al-Hawa, Bab al-Salam and Ramtha. The deployment
of monitoring teams to Iraq is still pending, due to
insecurity in the north-western part of the country, but
the situation is constantly being assessed.

Access across borders has resulted in broader
coverage in hard-to-reach areas in Aleppo, Dar'a, Rif
Dimashq, Idlib, Quneitra and Ladhiqiyah governorates.
The United Nations has now sent nine shipments
to Syria from neighbouring countries pursuant to
resolution 2165 (2014). Those included seven shipments
from Turkey - four through the Bab al-Salam crossing
and three through the Bab al-Hawa crossing - and
two from Jordan, through the Ramtha crossing. The
shipments included food assistance for some 69,500
people, non-food items for approximately 120,000
people, water and sanitation supplies for around 82,500
people and medical supplies for some 190,000 people,
including surgical supplies for 700 people. All the
shipments crossed without incident, and the distribution
of relief supplies is ongoing.

Those shipments were made possible due to the full
cooperation of the Governments of Turkey and Jordan.
The Government of Syria was notified 48 hours in
advance of the crossing of the shipments and of their
humanitarian nature. More shipments are planned
over the next month in close coordination with the
humanitarian team in Damascus, in line with the United
Nations whole-of-Syria approach, through which cross-
line access and cross-border access complement each
other to maximize our reach to those in need.

There have also been new openings in access
across conflict lines, notably in the eastern rural area
of Aleppo, Dar'a and the Rif Dimashq governorates,
including to besieged areas. Food was dispatched to
approximately 97,500 people throughout the Aleppo
governorate and to 10,000 civilians trapped in rural
opposition-held areas ofDar'a that had not been assisted
since the beginning of the crisis, notably in Yadudeh,
Tal Shihab and Zayzun.

Of particular note, medical supplies, including
surgical items, reached a number of opposition-held
areas this month, mostly through cross-line access.
Approximately 10 metric tons of surgical supplies
and chronic-disease medicines for 22,300 people were
delivered to hospitals in eastern Aleppo city. In the
Yarmouk camp, the Syrian authorities authorized the
distribution of medical supplies, including antibiotics
and medicines for non-communicable diseases. On
28 July, the World Health Organization and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent delivered five metric tons of medical
assistance to the besieged area of Madamiyet Elsham
in Rif Dimashq to support a population of 24,000
people in need. Other deliveries were made to hard-
to-reach areas of Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor and the Hasakeh
governorates.

Despite those developments, much more needs to
be done by the parties to ensure that access is rapid,
regular, safe, and unhindered. There are still 241,000
people under siege. Administrative hurdles imposed
by the Government of Syria continue to hamper the
delivery of aid. Governors are still not allowed to
approve the delivery of humanitarian assistance in their
governorates without first consulting Damascus. The
operational constraints placed on non-governmental
organizations have not been removed. Designated
terrorist groups, as well as armed opposition groups,
continue to block access to the hard-to-reach eastern
governorates of Syria. ISIL and the Nusra Front are
advancing towards the border crossings of Bab al-
Salam and Bab al-Hawa along the main access routes in
Syria. That could threaten the additional cross-border
operations authorized under resolution 2165 (2014).

I must highlight that the funding situation for
humanitarian operations in Syria is dire. The Syria
Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan is severely
underfunded, with only 30 per cent of the requirements
met. The Syria Regional Refugee Response Plan is
45 per cent funded. That adds to the challenges we face
with regard to our ability to help those in need.

Insecurity poses a serious risk to our operations
and our staff. Last week we commemorated World
Humanitarian Day. It was an occasion to remember the
humanitarian workers in Syria who put their lives on the
line every day to deliver assistance to those in desperate
need in Syria. On 6 August, an 18-truck convoy of
World Food Programme food en route from Deir ez-Zor
to Raqqa came under attack from an unknown group.
Two truck drivers were killed and two were injured, and
the content of four trucks was damaged or destroyed.
Sixty-two humanitarian workers have been killed since
March 2011, including 38 Syrian Arab Red Crescent
volunteers, 15 United Nations staff members - 13
from the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East alone - and 2 staff
members from non-governmental organizations.

Humanitarian workers should not have to risk their
lives to save others. I remind the Council that all parties
have a responsibility to ensure the safety and security
of those engaged in humanitarian operations.

The progress in access during the past month has
shown that where there is political will, there is a way
to improve the situation for millions of civilians in
Syria. We must all redouble our efforts until we reach
everyone in need with humanitarian assistance.

Each day results in more lives lost and more
families and communities destroyed. The rise of
extremist groups with complete disregard for even the
most basic norms of humanity threatens what remains
of secularism and tolerance in Syria. Now more than
ever before, the Council must do all it can to end the
conflict and ensure that humanitarian access increases
so that we can reach all those who are desperately in
need in Syria. United Nations humanitarian agencies
and our partners are doing everything we can to meet
those needs, but - as we have repeatedly said - the
solution to the crisis does not rest with us.

