Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Sir, my delegation would like to welcome your
initiative to hold a debate on the implementation of a
comprehensive strategy for peace and security in
Somalia. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and Mr. Boubacar Diarra for their briefings. I
welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abulllahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of Somalia, and of
Mr. Henry Bellingham.

On 20 August, we will see the end of the
transition period in Somalia. Despite the efforts of the
international community to restore peace in that
country, many challenges remain. Given the picture of
the situation that has been painted for us today, my
delegation believes that a comprehensive strategy in
Somalia that incorporates the political, security, socio-
economic and humanitarian aspects would be the most
effective way to settle the crisis in the country
definitively.

We share the concerns raised with regard to the
political situation in Somalia. The Transitional Federal
Government needs to further expand its political base,
and we take note of the efforts highlighted by the

11-2583]
Prime Minister. The reconciliation process needs to
take deeper root. The new constitution remains a
priority. The slow progress in these areas fuels the
prevailing uncertainty, which requires the authorities to
Show greater political will and commitment.

Gabon shares the wish to see more effective
action on the ground on the part of the Government. Its
primary goal should be to finalize the constitutional
process, which is key for the completion of the
political process. It is equally urgent to complete the
other tasks of the transition, particularly providing
basic services to the people of Somalia, who continue
to bear the brunt of the crisis. I believe that it is also a
priority for the Transitional Federal Government to
strengthen cohesion within the institutions under its
authority. We believe that the unilateral decision
recently taken by the Parliament to extend its mandate
for three years may be a departure from this notion.

It is from the standpoint that my delegation calls
on all parties to conclude as soon as possible the post-
transition arrangements in accordance with the
Djibouti Agreement, to which Gabon remains
committed. To that end, my country supports a
compromise solution that would guarantee the
legitimacy of the political arrangements in place and
control over the Somali forces that are being trained.

Moving the peace process forward in Somalia
requires strengthening both the political and the
military strategy in order to first improve the security
situation on the ground. In that respect, my delegation
pays a well-deserved tribute to the troops of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for
their tireless efforts to ensure security, as seen in the
meaningful improvements in the situation in
Mogadishu. In this regard, my delegation expresses its
solidarity to Uganda and Burundi for the sacrifices
they continue to make to restore peace and stability in
Somalia.

AMISOM. is still facing many challenges on the
ground. Rebel movements, including Al-Shabaab,
continue to pose a real threat. That is why it is urgent
for the international community to put an end to the
illicit financing of these groups and of the supplies of
men and weapons that they receive at the borders. We
therefore need to strengthen the current sanctions
mechanisms of the Council by focusing on targeted
measures.

11-2583]
Similarly, it is increasingly necessary to increase
the operational capacities of AMISOM. For this, the
Security Council needs to do its utmost to follow up
the recommendations contained in resolution 1964
(2010), particularly with respect to the dispatch of
4,000 additional troops. It also needs to ensure the
effectiveness of both their deployment and their
financing. This measure will be key with respect to the
precarious situation on the ground. We also need to
recall that the lack of predictable financing for
AMISOM. and the failure to reimburse the sums due for
its equipment restrict its ability to fulfil its mandate.

In this respect, my delegation highlights the need
to take into account the recommendations made here in
October 2010 by the African Union, aimed at making
AMISOM. more effective on the ground. It would also
be appropriate for donor countries to increase their
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund set up
to support the operations of AMISOM.

The humanitarian situation is deteriorating in
Somalia. Without robust action by the international
community, drought and fighting will continue to cause
further loss of human life. My delegation therefore
urges greater mobilization by Somalia's partners to
provide the necessary assistance to the people who
need it. In this process, the Council must be able to
ensure compliance by the parties with international
humanitarian law, specifically the obligation to protect
civilians, the non-use of minors in fighting and the free
movement of humanitarian assistance.

One cannot address the situation in Somalia
without taking up the serious threat of piracy. We share
the evaluations and conclusions of the Jack Lang report
(S/201l/30, annex) on this issue. I recall that my
delegation has always underscored the need to address
piracy in tandem with the security threats on land in
the country. This is why we support the initiative for a
comprehensive strategy.

From this same standpoint, we commend the
adoption by the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia, together with AMISOM, of a regional joint
strategy. The interdependent nature of the challenges to
be met in terms of political, security and humanitarian
issues justify this comprehensive strategy, which we all
support.

My delegation supports the presidential statement
to be adopted by the Security Council at the conclusion
of this debate.
