The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes ongoing
efforts aimed at national reconciliation in the
Central African Republic based on the Libreville
Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 2008 and the
commitments contained in the Sirte Agreement of
February 2007 and the Birao Agreement of April
2007. The Security Council encourages the
Government of the Central African Republic to
continue to ensure that the recommendations of
the inclusive political dialogue are expeditiously
and fully implemented.

"It reiterates its call on the Government of
the Central African Republic to strengthen and
accelerate efforts to reform security sector
institutions, which is a crucial element for the
peacebuilding process in the Central African
Republic and for addressing widespread impunity
and increasing respect for human rights. It also
reiterates its call on the Government to carry out
without delay a transparent and accountable
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process and ensure the completion of
disarmament and demobilization before the 2010
elections. In these efforts, transparent funding
and coordination of reintegration programmes is
critical to the programmes' long-term success.
The Security Council encourages the
international community, including the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic (BINUCA), to provide
timely and adequate support to the process.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the ongoing attacks by the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) in the Central African Republic and
calls for the countries of the region and the
United Nations missions to coordinate and
enhance information-sharing regarding the threat
posed by the LRA to the population.

"The Security Council demands that the
Government of the Central African Republic and
all political stakeholders ensure free, fair,
transparent and credible preparation and conduct
of the 2010 elections, and that the elections take
place within the time frame set by the
Constitution. The Security Council calls on the
Government, the United Nations and other
stakeholders to support timely election
preparation with adequate resources.

"The Security Council welcomes the
establishment of BINUCA on 1 January 2010 for
the period of one year. The Security Council
urges the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to take all necessary steps so that
BINUCA will be fully operational as soon as
possible after 1 January 2010, in accordance with
its mandate as set out in the statement of its
President of 7 April 2009 (S/PRST/2009/5). The
Security Council confirms its full support to the
efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sable-Work Zewde, in
this regard. The support of the BINUCA, together
with the United Nations country team, to national
and local efforts to consolidate peace, enhance
governance and complete DDR process is crucial
and needed.

"The Security Council also requests the
Secretary-General to propose in his next report a
set of clear and measurable benchmarks to guide
the progress of the mission and enable BINUCA
to evaluate its progress against its mandate.

"The Security Council welcomes the
support provided by the Peacebuilding
Commission to the Central African Republic, and
reiterates its call on the donor community to
enhance their support to sectors identified as
critical for sustainable peace and development in
the Central African Republic, as set out in the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding developed
by the Peacebuilding Commission."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
09-66042
