Mr. Suarez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen; Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; and
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs.

We must acknowledge the fact that the Security
Council's efforts regarding the situation in Yemen
have been ineffective, since resolution 2216 (2015),
which we adopted in April, has failed to bring about
any significant resolution of the armed conflict there.
Venezuela is still convinced, however, that only
dialogue and negotiations can lay the groundwork for
ending the conflict so as to promote a peaceful and
orderly political transition. In that regard, we commend
the peace talks that took place in Switzerland last week.
The Special Envoy's new initiative demonstrates the
importance of the leadership of the United Nations in the
political negotiation process and its role as a mediator
in the conflict. That process should be conducted in
good faith, without conditions, and should include
representatives of civil society, including women, with
the aim of outlining public policies that benefit the
population of Yemen as a whole.
Unfortunately, despite the fact that the parties
agreed to suspend hostilities before the talks began,
there have already been violations of the ceasefire,
which have a damaging effect on the dialogue and
put obstacles in the way of a peace agreement. In
that regard, we urge the parties to comply with their
commitment in order to facilitate concrete progress for
the good of the people of Yemen.

Achieving a political, peaceful and definitive
settlement in Yemen has become correspondingly
more difficult as the conflict has been prolonged.
It is regrettable that a lack of political will among
the parties to end hostilities has resulted in a chaotic
situation that has had a terrible effect on the civilian
population. We therefore call once again on the parties
to commit to specific goals with a View to settling the
crisis as quickly as possible. We reiterate that we will
see positive results from the negotiations only to the
extent that the parties demonstrate flexibility and a
willingness to compromise in order to reach a secure
and lasting peace in Yemen.

Thanks to the armed conflict, Yemen is dealing
with a serious humanitarian crisis that is shaking it
to its foundations. According to a number of reports,
80 per cent of the population - more than 20 million
people altogether - is in urgent need of some form
of humanitarian aid to meet their desperate needs for
food, medicines and fuel. Yemen has thus become one
of the worst, if not the worst, humanitarian crises in the
region, despite the silence of the media about this fact.

It is deeply regrettable that the conflict has so far
resulted in about 6,000 deaths, half of them civilians,
and more than 27,500 wounded. According to UNICEF,
those numbers include 637 children killed and 927
injured. To that tragedy we must add the 1.3 million
children under five who are at risk of malnutrition and
2.3 million people who have been forced to leave their
homes, while hundreds of thousands more have fled
the country. We hope the parties to the conflict can
guarantee access to the country's more remote areas for
humanitarian workers so they can provide assistance
to relieve the people's most urgent needs. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the World Food
Programme, UNICEF and the various humanitarian and
volunteer agencies, among others, for their invaluable
efforts to relieve the adverse impact on the civilian
population in the wake of the conflict.

I would also like to take advantage of this occasion
to firmly condemn the assassination earlier this month
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) of
the Governor of Aden, Mr. Jafar Mohamed Saad. We
reiterate that the only beneficiaries of the conflict in
Yemen are Al-Qaida and ISIS, which feed on chaos
and violence in their efforts to achieve their objectives.
As Mr. Ahmed said in his briefing, those terrorist
groups have expanded their activities into Yemen,
further complicating what was already a precarious
political situation. As we have already said, effectively
combating terrorism in Yemen requires the existence of
a State with solid institutions, but that can be achieved
only when the armed conflict ends and peace and
stability are restored, with the participation of every
sector of society.

As we have said before and say again, we
reject violence and terrorism in all their forms and
manifestations. Given the devastation caused by this
conflict, Venezuela appeals to the parties to take
urgent steps aimed at reaching an agreement that can
end the hostilities. We call on all concerned to respect
international humanitarian and human rights laws,
which are being violated repeatedly and systematically
by the parties to the conflict. Dialogue is the only way
we can achieve peace and stability. We reiterate that
the solution must be political, negotiated and peaceful.
Countries that have any influence on the parties should
do all they can to help achieve progress in this process.

The situation in Yemen is tragic. We should see
the prolonged crisis as an urgent wake-up call, telling
us that we cannot abandon our efforts to help reverse
the prevailing climate of violence. The international
community has an obligation to support any peaceful
political efforts to protect Yemen's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the country,
and in particular to work to ensure the protection of
Yemenis affected by the war.

Finally, we believe the Council should act
constructively to address the political crisis affecting
our brothers the people of Yemen and to help its millions
of citizens overcome the hardships the war has caused.

