Mr. Serry: Ten months after negotiations were
re-launched at Annapolis, and with just over three
months left until the end of the year, the Middle East
peace process stands at a crossroads. While there are
some positive developments, there are also several
factors that cause concern. The important period ahead
must see decisive advances towards peace.

Bilateral negotiations between Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization have continued.
Israeli Foreign Minister Livni and Palestinian Chief
Negotiator Qureia met in the presence of Secretary of
State Rice on 26 August. President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert met on 31 August and again on
16 September, in advance of Prime Minister Olmert's
anticipated departure from office. It appears so far that
no agreement has been reached on the core issues.
However, it also appears that there have been
substantive discussions, whose potential must be built
upon through a continuation of intensive negotiations.
Yesterday, members of the Kadima party elected
as their new leader current Foreign Minister Livni, who
has announced her intention to form a new Israeli
Government. We look to an urgent continuation of the
negotiations and for all parties to honour their
Annapolis and Road Map commitments.

Notwithstanding the prevailing uncertainties
surrounding the political process, the largely unsung
success story is the gradual but systematic process of
Palestinian self-empowerment that has taken place in
the West Bank under the leadership of President Abbas
and Prime Minister Fayyad. Those Palestinian efforts
are incomplete and imperfect, and they face many
obstacles, but they are real. They reflect a
determination to build the institutions of a future
Palestinian State despite the unresolved conflict.

The Palestinian Authority continues to make real
strides in the implementation of its security plan. This
includes action against militants in accordance with
obligations under phase I of the Road Map. For
example, I visited Nablus at the end of August and saw
how stability and a degree of normality have returned
to the city. Several militant groups have disbanded, and
armed men have left the streets. Smuggling has been
severely curtailed. Law and order has returned, and
with it the beginnings of a resurgence of economic life.
That pattern is also apparent in many other cities and
towns that the Palestinian Authority administers in the
West Bank.

During the reporting period, for example,
Palestinian Authority police raids near Hebron led to
the arrest of 55 Palestinians on charges of drug and
weapon's smuggling, and Prime Minister Fayyad has
informed me that further improving the security
conditions in Hebron is a high priority for his
Government. Donors are demonstrating their support
for the Authority's efforts: this month, a joint
agreement was concluded between Germany and the
Palestinian Authority to establish 55 new police
stations in the West Bank.

In pursuing its reform and development plan, the
Palestinian Authority has also made notable gains in
other areas, including public finance and the initiation
of microfinance projects. Budget and planning
procedures are being further integrated. Those efforts
will be highlighted when the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meets on 22 September here in New York.
Significant hurdles remain, however. Reports by the
08-50997
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
describe a stagnant economic climate as a result of
continued restrictions on movement and access.

The Palestinian Authority also faces a looming
liquidity crisis, with neither enough funds nor enough
borrowing capacity to pay salaries unless additional
budget support is secured in October. Despite recent
transfers of donor funds, the previously reported fiscal
gap of about $400 million for the last quarter of 2008
persists. We therefore urge donors that have yet to
fulfil their pledges to do so urgently.

A reflection of improved security is that the
casualty rate from Violent clashes this past month is
one of the lowest in recent years. There were, however,
several clashes, leaving two Palestinians, including one
child, dead and 128 Palestinians injured, 84 of them
children, in addition to 11 Israelis injured during the
reporting period, including one child. Thirty per cent of
the Palestinian injuries occurred from tear gas and
rubber-coated metal bullets fired during anti-barrier
protests in Ni'lin and Bil'in villages.

I am pleased to note that the Government of
Israel released 198 Palestinian prisoners on 25 August
as a goodwill gesture to President Abbas prior to the
start of Ramadan. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
dismantled a manned checkpoint in the central West
Bank, thereby allowing over 40,000 Palestinians living
in an enclave surrounded by the Barrier to travel to and
from Ramallah without delay.

However, over 600 obstacles to movement remain
across the West Bank, together with a weekly average
of 65 random so-called flying checkpoints. The action
taken to ease closure to date is not enough to enable
the Palestinian Authority's security and economic
efforts. On his recent visit to the region, Quartet
representative Blair highlighted the need for
checkpoints to work effectively, ahead of their eventual
removal, and it is clear that insufficient progress had
been made in that regard. In an illustration of the
problems that persist at checkpoints, a baby was
stillborn at a checkpoint on 4 September. Her mother,
who was in premature labour, had been kept waiting
for over an hour by IDF soldiers whilst trying to reach
a hospital in Nablus.

Settler Violence intensified this month, with a
gang of armed Israeli settlers from the settlement of
Yitzhar attacking a Palestinian Village on 13
September, firing at residents and destroying and
08-50997

vandalizing property and agricultural land. We note the
Israeli Government's condemnation of that lawless
violence, which cannot be justified by the earlier attack
in the settlement by a Palestinian man, which left an
Israeli child injured. However, credible action to bring
perpetrators of such crimes to justice has been lacking
and is essential.

Settlement activity continues to take place across
the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Construction is
ongoing in the majority of approximately 120
settlements on both sides of the barrier. A further
tender was announced on 7 September for 32 more
units in Betar Illit in the Gush Etzion bloc adjacent to
Bethlehem. Today, Israeli security forces reportedly
evacuated settlers from the settlement outpost of Yad
Ya'ir in the West Bank.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly stated that
all settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is contrary to the
Fourth Geneva Convention and Israel's commitments
under the road map and the Annapolis process. His
repeated calls, and those of the Quartet as a whole,
have not brought about significant action. Rectifying
that unacceptable situation should be the urgent
priority of any new Israeli Government.

Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem remain
closed by Israeli order, contrary to the road map.
Barrier construction continued around East Jerusalem
and within the West Bank, in deviation from the Green
Line and contrary to the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice.

The Secretary-General is also closely monitoring
developments concerning the site of the Mughrabi Gate
in the Old City of Jerusalem and encourages all parties
to cooperate in the ongoing process, under the auspices
of UNESCO, and to refrain from any unilateral
measures.

I now turn to the situation in Gaza, where the
United Nations continues its efforts to address the
complex humanitarian, human rights, political and
security factors underlying the ongoing crisis.

The one area where there is positive news is
security. The ceasefire has continued to hold during the
reporting period. Hamas has made efforts to prevent
the launching of rockets and mortars into Israel and,
during the reporting period, two rockets and one mortar
were launched. No IDF incursion or air strike was
3
reported during this period; the IDF has responded to
isolated rocket fire by closing crossings for a period.
One Palestinian was injured by IDF fire in southern
Gaza.

On all other fronts, there is little positive to
report. The humanitarian situation is extremely grim,
given continued closure. The Rafah crossing was open
for two days at the end of August, and patients and
businessmen with permits are allowed through Erez
crossing. Otherwise, movement into and out of the
Strip remains largely restricted. During the reporting
period, imports decreased by 21 per cent compared
with the previous four weeks. Whilst the amount of
truckloads carrying cement almost doubled, it still
represents a small percentage of market demand. The
import of all types of fuel remains below previous
levels, particularly for diesel and petrol, which disrupts
the provision of basic services, such as electricity and
water.

United Nations priority projects in Gaza - a
subject which the Secretary-General has raised with
Prime Minister Olmert - remain stalled as a result of
the shortage of materials, in particular cement, in the
Strip. Other vital commodities, such as spare parts
needed for the maintenance of the public health and
water infrastructure sectors, raw industrial materials,
furniture, electronics and school uniforms, have been
allowed into Gaza in very limited quantities. The
shortage of raw materials, combined with the total ban
on exports, has kept more than 95 per cent of Gaza's
local industry closed. We continue to support all efforts
to bring about the controlled opening of the crossings
through the presence of the Palestinian Authority.

Hamas' actions are compounding the problems
facing Gazans, increasingly divorcing Palestinian
institutions from the Palestinian Authority itself and
interrupting basic service delivery. Following Hamas
decisions to replace head and deputy head teachers
with Hamas-affiliated staff and to reallocate thousands
of teachers to new schools, a teachers' strike has led to
major disruptions in the education sector since the start
of the new academic year on 24 August. On 30 August,
health workers joined the strike after the dismissal of a
number of employees in that sector, forcing hospitals
to postpone elective surgery and many health centres to
close or suspend services. There are reports of Hamas
marching doctors to their hospitals at gunpoint to
ensure continuity of critical services. Despite the active
efforts of my office to resolve this crisis for the welfare

of the population, Hamas' unwillingness so far to
restore the status quo ante is blocking a resolution.

Palestinian interfactional Violence during the
reporting period resulted in the death of 14 people,
including two children, and the injury of another
52. Most of the casualties occurred on 15 and
16 September in Gaza City during armed clashes
between security forces and militants affiliated with the
Hamas authorities and members of one armed clan,
after a member of the clan was held responsible for the
killing of a Hamas policeman.

It is clear that the only way to begin addressing
the overall crisis, and indeed to lay the basis for a
two-State solution, is for Gaza to be peacefully
reunited with the West Bank within the framework of
the legitimate Palestinian Authority and in a manner
which allows the peace process to advance. In that
context, Egypt has started a consultation process with
each of the Palestinian factions to formulate a proposal
that could serve as a common national platform, and
Egypt's efforts were strongly supported at the Foreign
Ministers' meeting held in Cairo by the League of Arab
States on 9 September. The United Nations strongly
welcomes and supports that important initiative.

We also continue to support Egypt's efforts to
secure the release of Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit, now
in his twenty-fifth month of captivity, and a number of
Palestinian prisoners, on which no progress has been
reported.

The United Nations continues to support efforts
under way to further negotiations between Israel and
Syria. We note with interest the four-way summit held
in Damascus on 4 September among Syria, France,
Turkey and Qatar in support of the political process.
While no further rounds of indirect talks have been
held in the reporting period, we hope that these will be
resumed as soon as possible. The situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan remained quiet during the
reporting period, although Israeli settlement activity is
ongoing.

Let me now turn to developments in Lebanon,
where both efforts to establish dialogue and security
incidents continue to occur.

President Sleiman chaired the first session of the
national dialogue on 16 September to discuss a
national defence strategy. The next session is scheduled
for 5 November. We welcome that process and
encourage all parties to approach the dialogue in a
spirit of cooperation, and to exert every effort towards
a positive outcome.

On 8 September, in the presence of Prime
Minister Siniora, representatives of the Sunni and
Alawite communities in the northern city of Tripoli
signed a reconciliation agreement aimed at halting
armed clashes in the city, which have claimed the lives
of 23 people since May. On 29 August, the
Government appointed Brigadier-General Jean
Qahwaji as Commander of the Lebanese Armed
Forces. The United Nations looks forward to working
closely with him.

Despite those positive developments, the security
situation remained precarious. On 28 August, Army
First Lieutenant Samer Hanna was killed when his
helicopter was fired upon over Sojoud Hills in south
Lebanon. Hizbullah admitted responsibility for the
incident and surrendered one of its members to judicial
authorities. The military prosecutor has opened an
investigation into the incident. On 10 September, Saleh
Aridi, a member of the Lebanese Democratic Party,
was killed by an explosion that tore through his car.
The Secretary-General and the Security Council
condemned the attack.

On 16 September, there were clashes in the Bekaa
Valley and renewed fighting in the Palestinian refugee
camp of Ain el-Helweh. The day before, several
explosions occurred in several areas of Beirut;
fortunately, there were no casualties. On 17 September,
two people were killed in Bsarma, northern Lebanon,
when rival Christian groups clashed.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has remained generally quiet. On 6 September, south of
the Blue Line, the Israel Defense Forces apprehended a
Lebanese civilian carrying a pistol who had been
involved in a drug smuggling operation. South of the
technical fence, Israeli police also apprehended three
Israeli citizens involved in the same operation. Israel's
air violations continued on a daily basis throughout the
reporting period.

In the first days of September, the Lebanese
Armed Forces undertook a temporary redeployment of
troops from southern Lebanon in order to address
security concerns in and around the northern city of
08-50997

Tripoli. Having informed UNIFIL in advance, the
Lebanese Armed Forces redeployed one light infantry
brigade to the north of the country. Meanwhile, the
majority of troops who had been redeployed north
previously were returned south. Coordinated activities
between the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL
continue in the area of operations.

President Abbas Visited Lebanon on 28 and
29 August for the first time since 2005. President
Abbas met President Sleiman, Prime Minister Siniora
and members of all Lebanese factions and religious
leaders, in a positive and important step forward in
Palestinian-Lebanese relations.

Looking ahead, in the coming days, a number of
important meetings hosted by the Secretary-General
will take place to review the peace process and chart
the way ahead: the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee will
meet next Monday and the Quartet will meet on
26 September; Quartet members will also attend an
iftar with Arab partners. The Secretary-General will be
doing all he can to ensure that those meetings
consolidate the gains made and address areas where
more must be done - in terms of the Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations themselves, efforts to achieve
Palestinian reconciliation, the all-important situation
on the ground in both the West Bank and Gaza and the
broader regional picture. We must continue to strive for
agreement on all core issues in accordance with the
agreed time frame of Annapolis. Based on that
framework and on the decisions taken at the last
Quartet meeting, in May, the Quartet will discuss the
way ahead and next steps in international support for
the process when it meets next week.

The Secretary-General will continue to work to
secure the implementation of international law and
Security Council resolutions in order to achieve the
vision of two States living side by side in peace and
security, and a just and lasting comprehensive regional
peace in the Middle East.

