Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Belgium for its initiative to convene today's meeting. We also thank His Majesty King Philippe for his encouraging and powerful statement, and Their Majesties for their efforts in the area of child protection. We further thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their contributions to today's discussion. The topic of child protection is of paramount importance to the Russian Federation. We attach great importance to the activities of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. It is a unique mechanism, currently headed by Belgium, which, for 15 years now, has facilitated more effective protection of children in conflict and has helped ensure accountability for violations and _ prevent future violence. In various countries around the world engulfed in hostilities, children continue to endure brutal violence. Terrorists do not shy away from using even small children and bringing them into their ranks. Systematic recruitment of minors, denial of access to education and violence against children have become commonplace. The international community must not tolerate this situation. The hostages of terrorists' criminal activities also include their own families, their wives and children, who are stigmatized and discriminated against by society. No children caught in that devastating maelstrom should be marginalized by society. They have the right and should become full members of society once again. Their rehabilitation and reintegration is a crucial aspect of the children and armed conflict agenda today. This is an area where different state actors, civil society and international organizations can cooperate successfully and effectively, while complementing each other's efforts. The Russian Federation fully understands the importance of reintegrating children affected by conflict. Of course, the priority here is our citizens, who, by a twist of fate, have found themselves in an exceedingly difficult situation. Since 2018, the Russian Federation has spared no effort to ensure the return of Russian children from battlegrounds in Iraq and Syria and to ensure their ongoing rehabilitation. Many of those minors are trapped in prisons alongside their mothers, under investigation or having had prison terms of varying lengths handed down for participation in terrorist activities the ranks of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. More than 150 Russian children have already successfully been evacuated from Iraq and Syria. Just a few days ago, the Russian ombudsman on children brought 26 children out of Al-Hol refugee camp. Another nine children will be brought back to the motherland in the very near future. These efforts are ongoing. Today a number of States are beset by armed conflict and are making meaningful efforts in this regard. Their positive example should serve as inspiration for others, yet they need support from the international community in the form of respectful, constructive dialogue in a manner that fully upholds the principles of State sovereignty. The Special Representative, Ms. Gamba, at the request of the Security Council, has crafted voluntary guidance, which should undergird the efforts of the United Nations and its Member States both in addressing reintegration issues and, on the whole, incorporating child-protection issues in conflict resolution and post- conflict recovery. Our hope is that, with this new mechanism, there will be more examples of the successful reintegration of child combatants, addressing the plight of children in conflict and improving the protection of children. Our overall efforts in the Security Council should foster progress to that end, for the benefit of children and our future.
