Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and Executive
Director Fedotov for their briefings today. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/462) on
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security. I would also like
to thank our colleague Ambassador Tanin for his
statement.

The adoption of resolution 2041 (2012) by the
Security Council in March and the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan mandate were a clear indication of the
United Nations long-term commitment to the security,
stability and prosperity of Afghanistan. The commitment
of the international community to that goal was further
solidified by the outcomes of series of international
events, among which of particular significance was the
Chicago summit of the Government of Afghanistan and
the contributing nations of the International Security
Assistance Force. The declaration on Afghanistan
adopted at the summit marked an important milestone,
reconfirming the continuation of close and robust
international partnership with Afghanistan beyond the
end of the transition period.

The Government of Afghanistan continues to make
great progress towards the stabilization and development
of the country. It is of paramount importance to keep
the steady pace of progress attained so far, which
requires an equal level of continued determination
from both Afghanistan and its international partners.
The conclusion of landmark strategic partnership
agreements between Afghanistan and its bilateral
partners will further reinforce individual commitments
towards a stable, secure and prosperous Afghanistan.

We welcome the positive developments in the
political realm in Afghanistan. The appointment of a
new head of the High Peace Council will undoubtedly
reinvigorate the work of that important body and
will further contribute to taking forward a broad and
inclusive peace process at the central and local levels. An
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process,
in accordance with the Constitution of Afghanistan
and with the support of the international community,
is an essential element of overall stabilization and an
absolute prerequisite for achieving durable peace in the
country.

Although the overall security situation in the
country remains precarious - with continued armed
clashes, assassinations and suicide attacks by insurgents,
which pose a serious threat to the overall peace and
stabilization effort in Afghanistan - we nevertheless
observe a decrease in a number of security incidents
during the reporting period. Meanwhile, we also take
positive note of the general progress and tranquillity
in the areas undergoing the process of transition to full
Afghan security responsibility.

Afghanistan's enhanced political dialogue and
cooperation with its immediate neighbours and other
regional counterparts on a broad spectrum of issues
based on a common vision and mutual confidence is
an imperative for the peaceful and stable future of the
country and the region. We welcome Afghanistan's
and its regional partners' continuous efforts and
achievements in that regard.

That being said, we stress the particular
importance of the decisions of the follow-up Heart
of Asia ministerial conference held in Kabul on
14 June - on the establishment of annual high-level
political consultations between Afghanistan and its
near and extended neighbours concerning all issues of
common interest, as well as on the implementation of
confidence-building measures covering the areas of
political and security and economic cooperation.

As the transition period continues towards the
eventual withdrawal of international military forces
and the assumption of overall security responsibility
by Afghan authorities by the end of 2014, the scope
and gravity of the security and development tasks that
the Government of Afghanistan has to deal with are
growing, and the need for the international community's
enhanced support to the Government of Afghanistan is
becoming even more vital.

Azerbaijan has for many years actively contributed
to the international efforts in Afghanistan. My country
joined ISAF almost at its beginning and has steadily
increased its military contribution to it. We believe
that capacity-building for Afghan institutions must
remain at the heart of international assistance in order
to enable the Government of Afghanistan to exercise its
sovereign authority in all its functions. At present, we
are expanding our engagement in non-military spheres
by contributing to the development of capacity-building
in Afghanistan. We recently contributed €1 million to
Afghanistan's National Army Foundation as part of
our non-military engagement, and we have pledged
additional financial support.

Azerbaijan has also decided to participate in the
confidence-building measures on counter-terrorism,
counter-narcotics, chambers of commerce, commercial
opportunities, regional infrastructure and education. In
addition, we have expressed our willingness to lead the
implementation of the confidence-building measures
on counter-narcotics and on regional infrastructure.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my country's
commitment to Afghanistan's sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity, and I reassure the Council of my
Government's determination to remain an active
contributor to collective efforts in Afghanistan.

