Mr. Riecken (Austria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor in order to speak on behalf of the
group oflike-minded States on targeted sanctions. That
group is comprised of Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and my own country,
Austria. As is well known, our group aims to support
the efforts of the Security Council to enhance the
fairness and transparency of its various sanctions
regimes, thereby contributing to their credibility and
effectiveness.

We thank the Committee Chairmen for their
informative briefings. We welcome this biannual
occasion to engage on this important set of Council
measures, which are binding and have significant
implications for the entire membership of the United
Nations. It is therefore important to note that all
Member States, most recently during the High-level
Meeting on the Rule of Law in September 2012, have
recognized the need to further develop fair and clear
procedures for United Nations sanctions regimes. The
like-minded group commends the concrete actions
taken to date by the Security Council to address serious
due process concerns regarding the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. In particular, we congratulate the Council on
its decisions to establish and subsequently to strengthen
the Ombudsperson process.

We would like to reiterate our full support
for the work of the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly
Prost. She continues to fulfil her mandate with the
required independence and impartiality, as well as
with remarkable integrity and commitment. The
Ombudsperson has made a substantial contribution to
the fairness and effectiveness ofthe Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. In particular, the Office of the Ombudsperson
has enhanced listing and delisting procedures and
improved the accuracy of the Al-Qaida sanctions list.

The Ombudsperson process is a success story.
Within a few years, it has envolved from a necessary
initiative to a well-established safeguard for due
process. Nonetheless, challenges persist on the way
forward.

First, the judgement of the European Court of Justice
in the case of Commission, Council, United Kingdom v
Yassin Abdallah Kadi of 18 July has made it evident that
the existing listing and delisting procedures cannot be
the end of the line. It is important to keep in mind that
other regional and domestic courts have come to similar
conclusions. All of those judgements show that the
Security Council needs to explore additional measures
in order to improve the quality of listings and, most
importantly, to increase the available information on
reasons for listings. In that regard, further avenues for
increased exchange of information between Member
States and the United Nations must be explored. We are
convinced that the higher the quality of listings and the
standard of review at the level of the United Nations,
the less likely legal challenges will be at the regional
and domestic levels.

The group of like-minded States on targeted
sanctions has made various proposals in recent years.
In our view, it is crucial to encourage designating
States to make all relevant information available.
Since the Ombudsperson has in-depth knowledge and
experience on sanctions matters, listed individuals and
entities should be encouraged to petition the Office of
the Ombudsperson before or at least while seeking legal
remedies in regional or domestic courts. Generally
speaking, the Ombudsperson procedure will provide
much more expeditious review of listings than courts
in most jurisdictions.

Secondly, we would like to recall that the question of
fair and clear procedures is not limited to the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime; rather, due process standards and the
rule of law apply in all situations in which the actions
of the United Nations and its organs directly affect
individual rights and fundamental freedoms. In this
regard, we note yesterday's judgement of the European
Court of Human Rights in the case of Al-Dalimi and
Montana Management Inc. v. Switzerland, which
concerns sanctions against Iraq. In that judgement, the
Court considered that as long as there is no efficient
and independent judicial review within the United
Nations system, national courts will need to review the
measures taken in implementing the sanctions.

We reiterate our insistence that every individual
or entity included on a Security Council sanctions list
should have the right to be informed of the reasons
for listing, the right to be heard, and the right to an
effective remedy. Security Council sanctions regimes
that grant fair and clear review procedures will benefit
from improved credibility and effectiveness.

We once again put forward that the Ombudsperson
process should, on a case-by-case basis, be gradually
extended to other appropriate sanctions regimes, in
particular those with broad criteria for listing. We are
of course fully aware that each sanctions regime and
its underlying political situation is unique, and that
some sanctions regimes are more suitable for such
extension than others. We have already identified the
Somalia/Eritrea and the Liberia sanctions regimes as
opportunities to make such progress. We would like
to respectfully invite Council members to consider
this step when they renew the Liberia sanctions in
December.

The group of like-minded States reiterates its
standing offer to further discuss any of the steps
identified, both in the interest of strengthening the rule
of law and fair and clear procedures, and in the interest
of effective sanctions implementation. We look forward
to continuing our dialogue with the Security Council in
this regard.

