Mr. Rock (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes this open debate on children and armed
conflict, which provides an important opportunity to
advance the normative framework for action and its
effective implementation.

It is our duty to protect children in war-torn and
post-conflict societies. To fulfil that obligation we
require the support and the cooperation of the entire
international community. The Security Council also
has a central role to play in that regard.

Every day the rights and well-being of children
are violated aggressively, despite the multitude of
international legal instruments which are supposed to
protect them, and despite the existence of a solid
programme to prevent the involvement of children in
armed conflict. The actors concerned at all levels must
make progress in order to prevent violations of the
rights of children or to respond to such violations.

(spoke in English)

It is for that reason that Canada welcomes the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General's call
for an "era of application" to pursue the practical and
daily implementation of the norms already adopted. As
noted by the Secretary-General, important progress has
been made in terms of advocacy and in terms of norm
development. We must now pass to the next stage: to
the effective implementation and assessment of those
efforts, in order to ensure concrete changes in countries
heading towards, or emerging from, crises where
children are at risk.

We welcome the analysis that has been provided
on specific situations in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2005/72), and we remain concerned about the lack
of commitment and progress demonstrated by armed
groups, particularly those places such as in northern
Uganda, Sri Lanka and Nepal. The inclusion of
reporting on all abuses against children is an important
development and helps to provide a more
comprehensive picture of violations and of efforts by
Governments, armed actors and United Nations
country teams to respond.

We remain deeply preoccupied by the continued
evidence of sexual exploitation and abuse of girls and
boys, including by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel, aid workers and other international actors.
Zero tolerance must be advanced, not only in word, but
in deed. Abuse of children by United Nations
personnel undermines local and international support
for peacekeeping missions and threatens any positive
contribution to conflict resolution that an intervention
may make.

We call upon the Secretary General to ensure that
accusations of sexual exploitation and abuse of
children by United Nations personnel are thoroughly
investigated and, where appropriate, prosecuted in
accordance with domestic and international standards
of human rights.

We have consistently emphasized the importance
of effective monitoring and reporting as follow-up to
Security Council resolutions in any domain. It is an
issue of accountability.

An important effort has been made in this report
to outline a possible reporting format that would
include all relevant United Nations actors and non-
governmental organization (NGO) staff responsible for
child protection issues. The decision to establish child
protection task teams also has merit.

The reporting mechanism being proposed is
wide-ranging and covers a number of issues, some of
which overlap with the protection of civilians agenda
and the women, peace and security agenda. It is
important that we acknowledge the hard work and the
contribution of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Otunnu, and of the United Nations
agencies and funds with whom he worked in
developing these recommendations.

On the subject of overlap, Canada would suggest
that this overlap be taken into account and that
consideration be given by the Secretary-General to
encouraging consolidated reporting and assessment
requirements where overlap is apparent. For example,
many of the Violations noted in the Secretary-General's
report are of relevance to civilians more broadly and
not just to children.

We also suggest that attention be devoted to the
fostering and development of the local capacity of
States and civil society organizations, so as to prevent
Violations and abuses of children within a given
country. Such efforts will enhance preventive action
and will reduce the need to resort to intergovernmental
action at the regional or international level.

As the mechanism of monitoring and reporting is
intended to be a trigger to action, genuine
commitments by national Governments and by the
Security Council must be made to enact targeted and
concrete measures of response. The Security Council
must be responsive to the monitoring and reporting
process, beginning with the inclusion of child
protection advisers in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Canada also supports the recommendation
of the Secretary-General for targeted measures against
non-compliant parties or where insufficient progress
has been made by parties identified in the report. But
we suggest that this be coupled with the establishment,
as soon as possible, of base indicators and standards. In
addition, the Security Council will need to commit to
ensuring that an adequate monitoring and enforcement
mechanism is put in place for such targeted sanctions.

On a different but related point, the insecurity of
children and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in conflict areas have been proven to be
inextricably linked. We strongly believe that the
protection of children should be a priority in small
arms programmes and action plans, and that that would
increase the security of children affected by conflict.
We suggest that this is especially so within
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes. Action on the Secretary-General's
recommendations for the incorporation of best
practices in DDR programmes for children is long
overdue.

The application of children-specific DDR
programming in recent campaigns is evidence that
lessons learned regarding children are indeed being
incorporated into the planning of new programmes. But
gaps still remain in adequately addressing the issues of
girl combatants and girls and boys in their roles as non-
combatant labourers. We suggest that Member States
should continue to support research, evaluation and
improvement of DDR programmes for children,
including culturally sensitive post-traumatic stress
treatment options, with particular attention being paid
to the disadvantaged position of girls in relation to
access to DDR programmes.

Let me conclude by saying that this issue of
children affected by armed conflict must remain an
international priority. It is the focus of regular Security
Council debates and resolutions, as well as being on
the agenda of numerous intergovernmental
organizations, including the Human Security Network.
The challenge, though, as always, is to move from
concerned rhetoric to concrete application. It is a
challenge we must meet if we are to fulfil our
responsibilities to those who are most vulnerable and
to whom we owe the highest duty of care.

