Mr. Percaya (Indonedia): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate on a very important subject.
My delegation also thanks the Secretary-General for
his statement and recognizes the presence of high-
level representatives of small island developing States
(SIDS), including the Prime Minister of Samoa, the
Prime Minister of Jamaica and the Minister of Finance
of Seychelles.

As a country whose territory includes small islands,
Indonesia knows only too well the vulnerabilities of
SIDS and many aspects of the security challenges they
are facing. As the concept paper (S/2015/543, annex)
before us highlights, the vulnerabilities of SIDS are
heightened by their remoteness, narrow resource,
economic and export bases, limited capacities and
finances. Furthermore, the impact of climate change,
along with sea-level rise and other challenges such as
piracy, organized crime, illicit exploitation of natural
resources and illegal fishing, with inadequate capacity
to monitor exclusive economic zones, present major
problems affecting the security and stability of SIDS.

Without a doubt, SIDS face serious challenges in
the field of peace and security. In this interconnected
world, the security challenges faced by SIDS may
have an impact on regional and even global security
and stability. My delegation therefore believes that it
is only logical that the security issues relating to the
specific situation faced by SIDS should be an integral
part of our collective efforts to promote global peace
and security. Indeed, SIDS should be equal partners in
our collective efforts in the field of peace and security.

The security perspective of SIDS requires our
Organization, including the Security Council, to
broaden its approach to dealing with international
peace and security. Our Organization must continue
to develop strategies that are integrated and better
coordinated among its various organs in dealing with
security and sustainable development in a mutually
reinforcing way.

Indonesia attaches great importance to many
areas relevant to tackling security challenges faced
by SIDS, including maritime conservation, illegal,
unreported and unregulated fisheries, and disaster-
risk reduction management through a reinvigorated
maritime policy and mainstreaming it into the national
planning programmes. My delegation is of the view
that security issues related to SIDS are closely related
to development challenges. Therefore, if issues like
poverty, unemployment, climate-change adaptation
measures and institution building in SIDS are not
addressed effectively, opportunities for resentment,
instability and conflict will arise. We must not let that
happen.

In that context, we should continue to enhance
our cooperation with SIDS in the Pacific through
bilateral and regional platforms. The United Nations
and the international community should support
SIDS in a strengthened, more comprehensive and
sustained manner. The post-2015 development agenda
must therefore provide robust and tangible means
of implementation for SIDS to clearly reflect this
intention. It is also vital for SIDS to get their resource
requirements adequately met by the relevant regional
and international financial institutions since their
small economies may face a greater number of issues
in obtaining financing through purely market-based
mechanisms.

Taking urgent action to mitigate climate change is
a global necessity vital to responding to the security
challenges for SIDS. Many SIDS have already
confronted dangerous floods and natural disasters as a
result of climate change and lost hard-won development
gains. There must not be any illusion in this regard:
the deterioration of quality of life on the planet will
lead to chaos. Therefore, a central pressing task in the
climate response would be to better integrate disaster
risk reduction in the development framework.

In this regard, my delegation reaffirms the
significance of the United Nations as the universal
forum for providing a common platform to strengthen
international cooperation in promoting sustainable
development that increasingly takes into account the
specific needs and challenges of SIDS. My delegation
also reiterates the importance of the ongoing collective
endeavours within the United Nations to strengthen
international cooperation, coordination and coherence
in the implementation of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the unmet Millennium
Development Goals and the future post-2015
development agenda.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that today's
debate will assist the Security Council in further
integrating the SIDS perspective on peace and security
into its work and provide a platform for the international
community to identify further practical and coherent
steps to take in supporting SIDS as they tackle the
specific challenges within their national efforts to
promote sustainable development, peace and stability.
My delegation would like to underscore the necessity
for all of the entities within and outside the United
Nations, including all countries, to work together with
greater common purpose and cooperation to engender
peace, security and prosperity for everyone.

