Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President for inviting
the Government of the Republic of Haiti to present
its views and observations on the first report of the
Secretary-General, dated 20 March 2018 (S/2018/241),
on the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH).

On 15 October 2017, we turned a page. After
taking stock of the 13 years of its presence in Haiti,
with its successes but also its dark times, the Security
Council decided to end the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
in the light of the major advances made in the three
key areas of security and stability, building the rule of
law and promoting human rights. In fact, MINUJUSTH
was established to address a situation that in no way
corresponded to the one that existed in 2004 and which
the Council considered a threat to international peace
in the region. A new order of things has emerged in
Haiti today.

The Government of Haiti is pleased that the
Secretary-General has underscored the positive
developments in the country over the past 14 months,
rightly highlighting the progress made by President
Jovenel Moise in implementing his programme of
reform for promoting sustainable development. Haiti
is at peace today. In the wake of the democratic 2017
elections, institutional stability and the rule of law
have been restored and the democratic achievements
consolidated. The institutions provided for in the
Constitution are functioning normally. The process of
establishing a Permanent Electoral Council is moving
forward. Human rights are respected and guaranteed.
This is the new reality for a country that, while it is
facing major challenges, nonetheless is enjoying a
secure and stable environment, as anyone can see.

In this context of stability and renewed political
certainty, significant results have already been achieved
in various key areas, including the improvement of the
security environment, progress in good governance,
respect for the rule of law and the relaunching of the
development process. Among the indicators of progress
that the Secretary-General mentions in his report, I
am pleased to note the sharp decline in violent crime,
which has fallen by almost 50 per cent compared
to the same period last year; the strengthened fight
against corruption in the Administration, including
in the PetroCaribe Fund matter, which has been
officially referred to the Superior Court of Audits and
Administrative Disputes by Parliament, in accordance
with the Constitution and for the purposes of the law;
the priority given by the Government and the Parliament
to institutional reforms aimed at strengthening the
rule of law and, in particular, modernizing the justice
sector, including the prison system. In that regard, the
adoption of a new criminal code and code of criminal
procedure is high on the legislative agenda. Other
indicators of progress worthy of our attention today
are the ongoing establishment or re-establishment of
key institutions provided for by the Constitution; the
appointment of a national Ombudsperson, through the
process provided for by the new Constitution; and the
increased professionalization of and capacity-building

in the Haitian National Police.
Furthermore, with regard to structural reforms, the

initiative of the Etats generaux sectoriels launched by
the Head of State aims to promote inclusive political
dialogue at the national level with a view to carrying
out the necessary social contract renewal and the
recovery of the Haitian economy, in tandem with the
strategy of the Caravane du changement initiative, the
results of which aim to open up regions, increase the
participation of rural populations in changing their
destiny and future and promote local development
based on national production.

The Government is aware that there remains work
to do. It intends to continue along the path of reform.
It took note of the observations made in the Secretary-
General's report, as well as the conclusions and the
recommendations. It is sensitive to issues relating
to access to justice, the strengthening of the judicial
system and the lack of respect for human rights, of which
prolonged pretrial detention and prison overcrowding
are deplorable manifestations. Answers are being
given. Those problems are the result of decades of
neglect, structural handicaps and bottlenecks that local
Governments are striving to gradually, consistently and
methodically correct. It will, in any case, take time to
complete, which calls for ongoing and persevering action
over the long-term. In that sense, the Government of the
Republic of Haiti believes that a technical assistance
mission to strengthen justice would therefore represent
an alternative that is more in line with the evolution of
the situation on the ground.

The Government noted the concerns raised in
relation to the isolated cases of human rights abuses
perpetrated by law enforcement officials. The rule of
law is not divided. The two incidents mentioned in
the report - like all incidents attributable to State
bodies - are receiving the most serious attention
from the competent authorities. Once responsibility
is established, justice will take its course. Pending
the outcome of the judicial process, the public
officials concerned are subject to the relevant
administrative penalties.

In accordance with the commitments undertaken
by the Republic of Haiti within the framework of
international and regional treaties to which it is party,
the Haitian Government is making every effort to
ensure full respect for fundamental rights and freedoms
by all State institutions, without exception. The
appointment, last October, of the Ombudsman was part
of the commitment to make the promotion, protection
and defence of human rights a reality. It goes without
saying that the plan of action of that structure includes
the implementation of the various recommendations
made by the relevant United Nations bodies, including
the Human Rights Council.

The Government greatly welcomes the major
advances made in recent months, in particular the
implementation of a legal provision requiring it to
financially contribute to the institutionalization of
political life in the country by granting a financial
sum to legally recognized political parties that
have a certain number of elected representatives in
Parliament and local authorities. That measure, which
has been acknowledged by the stakeholders and to
which most of the political groups have subscribed,
aims to provide them with the necessary resources for
their modernization.

The stabilization achievements of recent
months must, of course, be consolidated within the
framework of broader cooperation, more in line with
today's realities and the real needs of the country. In
that regard, the Government wishes to reiterate the
importance and value it attaches to the mandate that
the Council has entrusted to MINUJUSTH, namely, to
assist the Government of Haiti to consolidate rule-of-
law institutions, support and build the capacity of the
Haitian National Police and monitor the human rights
situation.

MINUJUSTH, as we understand it and as its
parameters have been clearly defined, has a different
perspective from the previous stabilization-focused
mission. Above all, it is intended to be a mechanism
to complement and consolidate the gains already
achieved. Its time frame therefore can only be limited.
Consequently, the Government is taking into account
the withdrawal strategy proposed by the Secretary-
General, in accordance with the timetable to be
established by both parties, based on agreed milestones
and benchmarks. Similarly, as the Government has
stated, it supports an evolution of the Mission towards
a United Nations presence within a capacity-building
framework as part of peacekeeping.

As resolution 2350 (2017) sets forth, MINUJUSTH
is essentially intended to provide technical assistance
to strengthen Haitian institutions that guarantee the
rule of law - primarily the justice system - it being
understood that national institutions have primary
responsibility for development and all aspects of
governance, security, justice, the protection of human
rights and the fight against corruption in all its forms
and in all components of society.

In that spirit, the Haitian Government wishes to see
continued cooperation between Haiti and the United
Nations, within the framework of a strong partnership
that truly promotes new progress in all sectors of the
rule of law, as well as the promotion of all human
rights - civilian, political, economic, social and
cultural - while making a powerful contribution to
reaching the country's sustainable development goals.
None of that will be possible Without scrupulous respect
for each other's obligations and without a genuine spirit
of solidarity, mutual respect and trust, as the Secretary-
General has rightly stressed in his report.

The sustainability of peace and sustainable
development go hand in hand. Therefore, for lasting
stability in Haiti, it is essential to simultaneously
advance the consolidation of the rule of law, the
promotion of human rights, reconstruction and the
social and economic development of the country. The
Government of the Republic of Haiti is channelling
all its resources and energy into addressing urgent
humanitarian challenges and addressing the underlying
problems of extreme poverty and insecurity. As always,
it welcomes all support from its technical and financial
partners, as called for in the 2005 Paris Declaration
on Aid Effectiveness and the 2008 Accra Agenda for
Action. That is why the Government reiterates its
hope for support from the international community to
promote the conditions for vigorous growth, poverty
reduction and the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030.

The Government enthusiastically welcomed
the Secretary-General's initiative on the Haiti
transformation retreat. It fervently hopes that this
promising initiative will bear the expected fruits,
and that it will pave the way for new prospects for
development financing in Haiti, especially of the
essential infrastructure that is so needed.

I cannot fail to mention the cholera epidemic, the
terrible consequences of which everyone knows and
which continues to rage despite the significant recent
progress in preventing and combating that scourge. My
delegation hopes in particular that the new initiative of
the Secretary-General will finally enable the new two-
pronged United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti
to be realized. Let us recall that to date, the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund has raised only a little more than $7 million, which
is clearly well below the $400 million required. The
Haitian Government calls for a burst of goodwill and
the exploration of innovative and predictable funding
to establish the Fund, as planned, so that the victims,
their relatives and their beneficiaries can receive just
compensation, which is their due, and the health-
care, drinking-water and sanitation infrastructure,
acknowledged as essential to the complete elimination
of cholera and other water-borne diseases, can
be established.

In conclusion, I wish to assure the members of
the Council of the full readiness of the Head of State,
Mr. Jovenel Moise, the Prime Minister, Mr. Jack Guy
Lafontant, and the Government of Haiti to deepen the
dialogue and to strengthen the many cooperation links
with the Security Council, the Secretariat and all United
Nations bodies with a view to making further progress
in ensuring the rule of law, strengthening justice and
promoting human rights, which are at the heart of the
mandate of MINUJUSTH. The Haitian authorities will
continue to work consistently and decisively to ensure
that the diversified cooperation, to which they attach
the highest priority, delivers on its promises and fully
meets the national aspirations of the Haitian people and
the shared expectations.

