Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Permit me to welcome to
the Chamber the President of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadic', and the Foreign Minister of the
Republic of Kosovo, His Excellency Mr. Skender
Hyseni, and to thank them for their statements. I would
like also to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, and to thank
him for his update.

During this reporting period, Europe's youngest
State, Kosovo, celebrated its first anniversary. Today, a
year after proclaiming its independence, Kosovo is at
peace. The Republic of Kosovo is steadily making
headway in the international arena. Kosovo's
parliament continues to pass necessary laws on the
basis of the constitution of the Republic of Kosovo,
and its Government is increasingly proving its capacity
to deliver to its citizens. We welcome also the
progressive building of State institutions in Kosovo.

The European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) has been deploying efficiently, for
which we commend its leadership and its contributing
countries. EULEX is reaching its full operational
capacity and will bring the expertise needed by the
Kosovo Government and its people to implement the
reforms that will bring Kosovo closer into line with
European Union standards. That attains a dual goal. It
is to the benefit of all of Kosovo's people and
communities and, secondly, it begins the process
required for Kosovo's desired European Union
integration.

In his report (S/2009/ 149), the Secretary-General
describes the security situation as stable and without
major security incidents, and he appropriate lists both
Pristina and Belgrade, together with all international
stakeholders, as deserving praise for this.

We believe that the only realistic way in which
the Serb community in Kosovo can protect its rights in
a sustainable way is through direct participation in the
political process, by claiming its allocated spots in the
Kosovo legislature and in the police and judiciary, and
through the use of other mechanisms that have been set
up with that goal in mind and that are in line with
Kosovo's constitution and other laws. As many here
will remember, one of the main preconditions for
Kosovo's international recognition by many of the
world's leading democracies one year ago was that its
constitution and other laws address that very issue. We
call upon the Serb community in Kosovo to make full
use of all the constitutional guarantees provided for
the, for their own benefit and for the benefit of Kosovo
as a whole.

Kosovo's second year should bring a continuation
of its integration into international financial institutions
and trade associations, which would make it possible to
attract investment and improve the business climate.
We also hope that Kosovo's second year will allow the
remainder of Kosovo Serbs and members of other non-
Albanian communities to fully realize their civic and
democratic rights and use them to pursue a political
dialogue to improve the position of their respective
communities throughout Kosovo.

Finally, I would like to reiterate once again that
Croatia stands ready to offer its help, knowledge and
expertise with regard to the process of integration into
the European Union to Serbia, Kosovo and other
countries in South-East Europe. We keenly look
forward to their advancement on the Euro-Atlantic
integration path.

