Mr. Pascoe: Before you, Mr. President, is the
first report issued pursuant to resolution 1770 (2007),
and it reflects the expanded nature of the new mandate
and preparations made by the United Nations for that
role. The report before you also illustrates the
magnitude of the challenges facing Iraq and the efforts
of the Government of Iraq, neighbouring countries, the
United Nations and the wider international community
to address them.

Iraq is faced today with an exceptionally complex
series of overlapping sectarian, political and ethnic
conflicts that have proved beyond the capacity of any
one actor or policy initiative to resolve. Violence aimed
at civilian populations and members of the Government
continues to impede efforts to establish stability in the
country and makes national dialogue challenging.
Increasing levels of displacement add to an already
alarming humanitarian crisis. Current conditions,
therefore, greatly impact the ability of the United
Nations to perform its duties and provide assistance to
those in need.

However, as the Secretary-General noted in his
report, there is an opportunity today that should not be
missed. September witnessed the lowest number of
Iraqi casualties for the year. The ceasefire declared by
the Mahdi Army, the Sunni insurgent alliance against
Al-Qaida, the pact reached by the Supreme Islamic
Iraqi Council and the Sadrists and the efforts by the
Multinational Force in Iraq and the Iraqi security
forces all appear to be contributing to this effect. These
events represent a political opportunity to transform
military-political development into a basis for
achieving broad national reconciliation.

With the adoption of resolution 1770 (2007), the
Council recognizes the need for an enhanced effort to
assist the people and the leadership of Iraq. In
particular, the new mandate creates the basis for
broader United Nations efforts in advancing national
dialogue, and the Secretary-General's new Special
Representative will immediately explore possibilities
when he reaches Iraq in two weeks.

While it has proven difficult to strike a mutually
acceptable balance between the competing claims on
the basic issues of Iraq's future amid ongoing violence,
mistrust and bitter memories, Iraqi leaders must move
beyond rhetoric and mere statements of intent. The
challenge now is to make progress on the constitutional
review and major legislation which is central to the
07-55351
process of reconciliation, such as that relating to oil
and the law to reform de-Baathification.

To truly make a difference on the ground,
however, these developments will need to form part of,
and contribute to, a wider political reconciliation
process in Iraq. This is primarily the responsibility of
the Iraqi Government, and the United Nations stands
ready to assist to that end. The United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) also remains
committed to supporting Iraqi preparations for future
electoral events by working to build the capacity of the
Independent High Electoral Commission and advising
on key electoral legislation.

Resolution 1770 (2007) envisions a strengthened
United Nations role in assisting the Government of
Iraq in promoting the constructive engagement of
regional countries, and the high-level meeting on Iraq
co-hosted by the Secretary-General and Prime Minister
al-Maliki on 22 September reinforced support for the
United Nations role in this area.

Iraq's neighbouring countries, and others in the
region, remain vital for the stability of Iraq. While
competing views and national interests exist, all of
Iraq's neighbours have an interest in limiting the
deterioration of the situation in Iraq, and no one wishes
to see instability engulf the region or spread to their
country. There is a need for neighbouring countries to
embrace a responsible and measured approach to Iraq's
challenges. As the report highlights, the dialogue
among Iraq's neighbours and other key international
actors initiated at Sharm el-Sheikh is encouraging. The
three working groups have convened and have
discussed concrete issues. The United Nations has
offered to support a mechanism to ensure adequate
follow-up on the expanded meetings of Iraq's
neighbours and the working groups. It is our hope that
the next expanded meeting of Iraq's neighbours, to be
held in Istanbul, Turkey, in early November 2007, will
address this matter in a constructive manner.

The high-level meeting on 22 September also
highlighted progress made in the implementation of the
International Compact with Iraq and in other aspects of
development and reconstruction assistance. The
Compact secretariat continues to oversee the work of
thematic working groups and to make progress on a
six-month work plan intended to move all aspects of
the Compact forward.
07-55351

The humanitarian situation in Iraq continues to be
alarming and provides ample evidence of the impact
violence in Iraq has on civilians on a daily basis. The
estimated number of Iraqi refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) rose to 4.2 million, with
monthly displacement rates climbing to over 60,000
persons. The Iraqi Cabinet decision to provide
financial assistance to refugee host countries, in
accordance with the commitment made in Geneva last
April, is a welcome and much-needed development.
Now it is time to finalize the delivery mechanism for
that support so that vital assistance to the refugee
population is immediately bolstered. The international
community also has a large assistance role to play, and
I hope that all commitments are honoured in a timely
manner. The ultimate solution to the humanitarian
crisis, however, will only be realized when the
political, economic and security situation inside Iraq
permits the safe return of refugees and IDPs to their
homes.

The Secretary-General's latest report once again
expresses serious concern about the current human
rights situation in Iraq. The Government of Iraq has a
particular responsibility to bring perpetrators of human
rights abuses to justice, as well as to strengthen the
institutions that promote the rule of law, particularly
the security forces and the judiciary. The United
Nations welcomes the commitment of the Iraqi
Government to that goal. UNAMI and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
are committed to working closely with the Government
on how best to realize an early improvement in the
human rights situation.

Taking into account the current security situation,
the United Nations is working to create the necessary
preconditions to fulfil an enhanced role in Iraq. The
Secretary-General has increased the staff ceilings in
Baghdad from 65 to 85 and in Erbil from 29 to 35; an
outreach programme that places national liaison
officers in each of the Governors' offices has begun,
and we are looking into re-establishing the United
Nations presence in Basra. UNAMI and the country
team have also adopted an area-based approach that
expands activities where circumstances are more
permissible. The Mission continues to work to become
increasingly self-sufficient in areas of logistical
support and security, and plans for a new integrated
headquarters in Baghdad have been developed.
3
In the light of the tasks and challenges before us,
the United Nations will continue to rely on Member
States for support. It is important that the United
Nations be afforded the necessary political and
humanitarian space to implement the new mandate, and
the ability of the Organization to talk with all sides
must be protected and respected. Security
arrangements and financial and logistical backing are
also essential for the success of the United Nations
Mission in Iraq.

We are grateful to those Member States that have
provided protection and logistical support to the United
Nations presence in Iraq, including those providing air
support and troops for the Distinct Entity to provide
security for UNAMI. Given the new mandate in Iraq, I
urge Member States to provide additional financial and
logistical resources for the Mission. That includes
funding for dedicated air assets, support for funding for
the new integrated United Nations facility in Baghdad
and additional required security arrangements, such as
the provision of military advisers.

Of immediate concern is the status of the trust
fund established to support the Distinct Entity that
provides protection for the United Nations in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1546
(2004). This security arrangement will be required at
least through 2008. However, the trust fund will be
exhausted next month. Without immediate financial
assistance, the ability of the United Nations to operate
in Iraq could be severely compromised.

In conclusion, strong international efforts to
counter the unfolding crises in Iraq are critical. The
international community not only has a vital security
stake in the stability of Iraq; it also has a responsibility
to encourage and enable the Government of Iraq to
build inclusive and cumulative processes that can bring
about stability. While the Government of Iraq
acknowledges that it has the primary responsibility for
this task, the magnitude and number of challenges
confronting the Government entitle it to call upon the
international community for necessary assistance. It is
our belief that the new United Nations mandate,
matched by strong international support, provides the
necessary framework to move towards building a more
stable Iraq.

