The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic.

Grief has engulfed the United Nations and the
Security Council in the wake of the horrendous attack
on the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad, killing
many innocent people, including the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello.

The Government of Syria immediately denounced
this despicable act, stressing the importance of a
continued and enhanced role for the United Nations in
Iraq. Furthermore, President Bashar Al-Assad
conveyed his condolences to the President of Brazil, in
which he denounced and deplored this heinous criminal
act. Mr. Farouk Al-Shara', Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Syria, addressed a
message to the Secretary-General expressing his shock
over this criminal act of aggression against the United
Nations headquarters in Baghdad and extending his
heartfelt condolences over the loss of Mr. Vieira de
Mello.

The Syrian leadership has first-hand experience
of his dedication to the pivotal role which the United
Nations should play in assisting Iraq to recover its
independence and freedom. Syria supports the beliefs
and vision which the late Mr. Vieira de Mello so
faithfully upheld and which stressed the importance of
ending the occupation of Iraq and of that country's
recovery of its freedom, sovereignty, political
independence and control over its natural resources. He
called on the Secretary-General to implement this
vision and to make it a reality, which, in his view,
represented the way out of Iraq's current dilemma.

The suffering of the Iraqi people is a source of
concern to all peoples throughout the world. The
Syrian Arab Republic, through various institutions, has
made every possible effort to alleviate the suffering of
the Iraqis by extending medical, food and other
material assistance, supplementing similar efforts
undertaken by Arab and other States and by the United
Nations and its various programmes providing
assistance sorely needed by the Iraqi people.
The Arab ministers for foreign affairs, members
of the Follow-up and Action Committee of the Council
of the League of Arab States, held an important
meeting in Cairo on 5 August at which they discussed
the situation in the Arab sphere in all its aspects. The
Arab ministers reaffirmed the need for Iraq to recover
its sovereignty over its land and resources, for an end
to the occupation and for the rapid establishment of a
national Government in accordance with a clearly
defined schedule. The Arab ministers stressed the need
of a pivotal role for the United Nations in the political
process in Iraq and for the Organization to cooperate
with the League of Arab States and with other regional
and national actors to that end, under the aegis of the
Security Council.

At the meeting, the ministers also agreed to
establish a committee - to include Syria, Egypt, Saudi
Arabia, Bahrain, Jordan, Qatar, Tunisia and the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States - to

follow up developments in Iraq and to establish the
necessary international contacts in this regard.

In conclusion, we wish to affirm that Iraq,
throughout its time-honoured history, has overcome
many challenges and emerged victorious. Iraqis have
contributed to building an Arab civilization in which
we all take pride. We are confident that Iraq will
overcome its current hardship and ultimately succeed,
despite the destruction and grief, thanks to the unity of
its people and the support of its Arab brethren, the
international community and the United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50 pm.
