Mr. Nesho (Albania): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council and to wish you every success.

The Albanian delegation welcomes the presence
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, at this Security Council meeting and
commends the work and great efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and KFOR in achieving their important goal
of a free, democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo.

The negative events of March 2004 in Kosovo
should not deny or dispute the progress and overall
success already achieved there, such as the creation of
an open and free society, the building of democratic
institutions and the new prospect for the people of
Kosovo to integrate themselves into the European
family.

UNMIK should face the problems created by the
events of March 2004 with realism, not only by
condemning the perpetrators of the violent acts, but
also by identifying the responsibilities of all the parties
involved and programming in advance all the tasks and
obligations that must be carried out by all the
institutions in Kosovo.

We welcome and encourage UNMIK to continue
vigorously implementation of resolution 1244 (1999)
and the decisions of the international community,
regardless of nationalistic pressures and interference
and destabilizing actions carried out by extremist
groups. The determination to go ahead with the plan of
action and to achieve the goals of the standards will lay
the groundwork for full discussion of the final status of
Kosovo.

The realistic evaluation of the situation in
Kosovo gives incentive to the need to transfer more
social and economic powers from UNMIK to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. It also
demonstrates the necessity for a faster privatization
process and for strengthening the rule of law by
sharing responsibility with local authorities. It is the
right time, and it would be very useful as well, to find
the solution to the problem of parallel structures so that
they will no longer continue to challenge the vision and
the ideas of UNMIK regarding the country's future.

The Government of Albania reaffirms its
appreciation for the work of UNMIK and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
and reiterates its continuing support for their mission
in Kosovo.

The Albanian Government has followed
attentively the latest developments in Kosovo and has
condemned the violence exercised by extremist
elements to destabilize the situation. The perpetrators
of violence have jeopardized the democratic process
and the future of Kosovo. For these actions they should
be brought to justice. The citizens of Kosovo should
realize that their free and democratic future will be
achieved only when a multi-ethnic society is
functioning, when the rights and freedoms of
minorities are protected by law and when civil society
and democratic institutions, through heightened
conscience and mature action, will help the existing
reality become more effective.

Dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade on
technical issues of mutual interest should restart as
soon as possible. This is an important time - a time
when Kosovo's democratic Provisional Institutions
should take a leading role and collaborate closely with
UNMIK and KFOR to implement the standards. It is
important that Kosovo's Institutions be open and that
they assist in the process of returning displaced
persons, strengthen the rule of law, create an impartial
justice system and work to establish the right
conditions and environment for all people in Kosovo to
work together towards their common future.

For a relatively long period of time, this body and
the international community have promoted the
creation of a multi-ethnic society as the only solid
foundation for a democratic culture in Kosovo. We
acted to give life to that idea when hate and division
were at their most extreme, yet we still achieved
considerable success. This process of building a multi-
ethnic society cannot be held back by new proposals
based on old ideas of division and cantonization,
provided with legal cover and introduced as a
democratic process aimed at decentralizing power.

What we should offer to Kosovo is freedom, not
isolation; peaceful coexistence, not division along ethnic
lines. We should offer Kosovo the opportunity to become,
as quickly as possible, part of the European family and a
place where aspirations and opportunities are shared
equally by all. Kosovo is not an experiment that can take
shape according to the tenor of the old nationalistic rhetoric
of the Balkans. Kosovo needs the political will of all
interested parties; it needs them to understand and evaluate
the irreversible realities and to contribute positively to
finding a democratic solution that is acceptable to all and in
the interest of peace and stability in the region.

