Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We listened attentively to the statement by
our British colleague, who had promised to provide
new information on the investigation of the so-called
Skripal affair. We have also carefully studied the
statement by Britain's Prime Minister, Theresa May,
to Parliament on the same topic. To be frank, we had
very much hoped that today we would hear something
convincing that could shed light on this mysterious
incident. Unfortunately, our hopes were once again
disappointed. In today's statement we heard the same
litany of lies about so-called double agents being
legitimate targets for murder by Russian special
intelligence services; about the training of Russian
special services in the handling of toxic chemicals;
about Russia's development of military-grade chemical
agents in Russia; about cyberattacks and attempts
to engineer a coup d'etat in Macedonia, and a whole
lot more. I will not list this whole crazy cocktail of
unfounded lies. Similar insinuations were heard from
the British Prime Minister yesterday.

We learned only yesterday that the heroic British
investigators released photographs of two individuals
suspected of poisoning Sergei and Yulia Skripal.
Today the British authorities are trying to proclaim it
a sensation and a turning point in the investigation.
Those individuals supposedly have Russian surnames
and citizenship, and with that degree of certainty that
is now so familiar to us, it is said to be "highly likely"
that they are part of Russia's intelligence services. At
the same time, it was immediately assumed that the
names given were aliases. Furthermore, unlike in the
situation with the previous unsubstantiated provocation
of this type, the Litvinenko affair, the British have
stated that they do not intend to request the suspects'
extradition from Russia. Just as they have no intention
of cooperating with the Russian authorities. Indeed,
why bother with that? It does not suit London's game
plan. In their statements today, many delegations urged
Russia to cooperate with Great Britain. But in actuality
the situation is precisely the opposite. It is we who are
asking London to cooperate, not London asking us. And
London is refusing that cooperation. London needs this
affair for one reason and one reason only, which is to
unleash hateful anti-Russian hysteria and drag other
countries into it.

The number of inconsistencies and open questions in
connection with Britain's new so-called evidence is off
the charts. For example, the stamps on the photographs
of the suspects supplied by London in which they are
shown walking along an identical corridor, allegedly at
Gatwick Airport, are timed to coincide to a fraction ofa
second. According to the data cited by Theresa May, the
suspects appeared at the Skripals' house around noon
on 4 March, although all the earlier police reports stated
that the Skripals had left the house early that morning
and did not return. So how did they come in contact
with their house's allegedly poisoned doorknob? It is
also hardly convincing that the suspects transported
the mythical Novichok in an ordinary perfume bottle.
According to the published reports of experts from the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) specifically with regard to the incident in
Amesbury, the substance is so toxic and dangerous
that special protective containers have to be used to
transport it, or the person carrying it would inevitably
be the first to fall victim to it.

There is a popularjoke in Russia about a character
named Uncatchable Joe. He is uncatchable not because
no one can catch him but because nobody needs him or
is even looking for him. I have a distinct feeling that
we have been presented with two such uncatchable
Joes, allegedly acting on orders from Moscow. Perhaps
someone here finds this play convincing, but to me this
new act seems just as cooked up and far-fetched as the
previous acts, some of which unfolded in this Chamber.

Our British colleagues have taken a very convenient
position. The verdict has been pronounced, the guilty
party - Russia - has been declared, the suspects'
real names are unknown, but it is alleged that they are
employees of the Russian Military Intelligence Service.
Although how that can be determined without their
names is a big puzzle to us.

We have been called on to cooperate. As I said, it
was we who asked London to cooperate, which was
categorically refused from day one. Yesterday the
British Ambassador was summoned to the Russian
Foreign Ministry, where in answer to a request, he said
that the British authorities would not hand over the
information to the Russians that the suspects would
have had to submit to the Embassy when applying
for a visa. And yet that information even includes
fingerprints, which would make identifying them much
easier than from a picture on the Internet. Not that
there is anything surprising about that. In the post-truth
world created by our Western colleagues, a world of
delirium and fakery, it is quite sufficient to pronounce
sentence before bringing a verdict and even to begin
punishment. London is not about to see this affair
through to the end. It does not need to.

Since we have met here once again to listen to
revelations from London, let us go over the broad
outlines of what we have been presented with since
the attempted murder in Salisbury on 4 March. We
have two Russian citizens who have been exposed to a
mysterious nerve agent, who are being held somewhere
and to whom neither Russian consular employees
nor close relatives are permitted access, in violation
of all sorts of international legal and humanitarian
norms. That is a fact. All we saw was Yulia Skripal's
television appearance, which aroused a lot of questions
and suspicions about the possibility that she was under
serious moral and psychological pressure.

There is a letter in the form of an ultimatum to
Russia demanding that it admit to the attempt on the
Skripals' lives. There are also several letters from
Russia to the British authorities proposing that it be
included in the investigation and with an impressive
list of specific questions that have gone unanswered.
Lastly, there is the conclusion by the OPCW experts
that a nerve agent, whose country of origin they were
unable to establish, was used in Salisbury on 4 March.
They were unable to establish it because it is impossible
in principle.

And this is where the facts end. All the rest is
mere speculation generated by the rich imagination
and Russophobic fantasy of London officialdom. Our
British colleagues simply pay no heed to the obvious
contradictions in the investigation's conclusions, leaked
out in calculated doses by the media, spinning new and
ever more absurd versions. I will not list them, since I
value my own time and that of Council members. I will
only say that six months down the road, it is impossible
to comprehend why Russia might want to poison the
Skripals or why it should have done it in such a strange,
recherche and illogical way. We were told that a gel was
applied to the handle, but now Theresa May says that
apparently the suspects brought it with them and used a
perfume bottle. There are a ton of such inconsistencies.

The unfounded conclusions that it was Moscow
that did all this were abundant, and were followed by
concrete sanctions. It appears that in this continuing
theatre of the absurd, the only winner is the Nina
Ricci company, whose products are getting free
advertising in their capacity as the container for the
mythical Novichok. Anyone who has not yet lost hope
of finding the perpetrators realized long ago that the
British authorities still have no evidence of Russia's
involvement in the Salisbury incident, or in fact any
reasonable versions of what happened at all. To be
honest, we have already lost hope. For us, therefore,
the question is only what new ploys they will come
up with in London in order to avoid a really serious
investigation of the Skripal affair, rather than a
politically motivated one. Unfortunately, the so-called
sensation we were presented with today fits that simple
scheme perfectly. By the way, we have no problems
with ordinary English citizens, for whom we have
sympathy and respect, and who were able to see that
during the World Cup in Russia. Our problem is only
with the British Government, which is misleading not
only the international community but its own citizens.

In conclusion, I would like to switch to more formal
language and, in summary form, state the following.
The Russian Federation firmly rejects all the groundless
accusations of its involvement in the poisoning with
toxic chemicals in the city of Salisbury in March 2018
of the Russian citizens Sergei and Yulia Skripal, as was
again reiterated by Britain's Prime Minister Theresa
May in a speech in Parliament on 5 September. We urge
the British to show restraint. We affirm our willingness
to hold consultations in accordance with the bilateral
Consular Convention of 2 December 1965 and the
European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal
Matters of 20 April 1959. We demand consular access
to Russian citizens who have been illegally detained by
the British authorities.

We once again in full responsibility declare that the
statements by the authorities in London, misleading the
international community, to the effect that Russia alone
could have possessed and now possesses the technical
means, practical experience and motive for the
commission of such acts using poisonous substances,
are groundless. The Russian Federation has never
developed, produced or stockpiled the toxic chemicals
referred to in the West as Novichok. The very word
"Novichok", as well as information about the structure
and spectrum of this chemical compound, began to
appear in foreign specialized scientific literature and
applied databases based on information provided by
Soviet defectors with only indirect connections to the
former military chemical-weapon programme of the
Soviet Union. Moreover, similar development was
also being conducted in a number of other countries,
including the United Kingdom, the United States and
other Western States, and with the direct involvement
of the Porton Down laboratory in the United Kingdom.
There are volumes of specialized literature in the West
about this research. The involvement of Porton Down
is particularly important to an understanding of what
happened in the Skripal case, as used by London against
Russia and in the most recent incident, in Amesbury, in
which the victims were British citizens. The Russian
Federation appeals to all States to consider what has
occurred with full responsibility and due understanding,
and to support our call to the British Government to

begin consultations with the Russian Federation in the
context of the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
other two aforementioned conventions.

In conclusion, what is clear from London's
statement is that it already had all the information
presented yesterday as long ago as May. If they had
not determined the possible suspects and established
the fact that they had been in Salisbury, there would
have been no reason to search the hotel where they
stayed. Clarly, if all the so-called evidence were as
important as is claimed, it would have been published
four months ago, before the tragic events in Amesbury.
We can conclude only one thing from all of this, which
is that Downing Street is governed not by the interests
of seeing justice done but by other motives, which we
have already mentioned.

The incident on 4 March became a useful pretext
to whip up anti-Russian hysteria, and was used
to undermine our authority as a State party to the
Chemical Weapons Convention on the eve of the staged
use of chemical weapons in the Syrian city of Douma.
We are seeing a similar picture today. The statement
by Theresa May on 5 September took place on the eve
of what we might call the new political season, and
around the situation in Idlib, which is being actively
discussed, and the chemical-weapon provocation that
the militants, together with the White Helmets, have
been preparing there, and which we have warned about
more than once. We will circulate the relevant materials
on the topic of today's meeting to the States Members
of the United Nations.

