Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, let
me express my delegation's delight in seeing you, Sir,
the Foreign Minister of a sister African country,
chairing this meeting. We are also happy to join other
speakers in welcoming the other foreign ministers and
dignitaries who are here this afternoon. We thank them
for that noble and invaluable gesture of support for the
peace process in Darfur.

At the same time, I wish to take this opportunity
to convey the sincere apologies of the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Ghana for his inability to participate
in this meeting, due to the rather short notice and
earlier commitments. Nonetheless, Ghana deeply
appreciates the significance of this meeting, which
lends critical support to the Abuja peace accords. It is
our hope, therefore, that the outcome of today's
meeting will be manifested in greater unity of purpose
and stronger resolve on the part of the international
community to bring to a speedy end the intolerable
human suffering in Darfur.

Above all, this meeting should lead to increased
understanding and cooperation between the
Government of the Sudan and the international
community in seeking lasting peace and security in
Darfur. The Sudan must resume its place as a force for
positive change in Africa and deserves every
encouragement and support to do so.

It is most appropriate on this occasion to pay
special tribute to the many leaders and eminent
personalities who actively helped in brokering the
Abuja accords. In particular, we owe a debt of
gratitude to President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria,
the host of the inter-Sudanese peace talks; to President
Denis Sassou-Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo,
the current Chairman of the African Union (AU); to
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, the AU Special Envoy for
Darfur and Chief Mediator; and, not least, to our
international sponsors from the United States, the
United Kingdom and the European Union, and a host
of other benefactors who must share in the pride of our
success.

We also congratulate the Government of the
Sudan and the larger faction of the Sudan Liberation
Army (SLA) on signing the accords. We urge the
factions that did not sign the agreement to seize the
opportunity to become part of the solution to the crisis
in Darfur, rather than remain a hindrance. Clearly,
those factions that still believe in a military solution
instead of a negotiated settlement to the problem are
merely deluding themselves.

The signing of the Abuja peace accords truly
signifies the possibility for a new beginning not only
for the people of Darfur but, in fact, for all Sudanese.
Nonetheless, as has been pointed out time and again,
the signing of the accords merely provides a launching
pad for further progress.

Difficult and protracted as the negotiations were,
we should brace for the more challenging task of
implementing the agreements. We share the view that it
is only through a faithful and effective implementation
of those accords that the political, economic and social
root causes of the conflict can be addressed.

It is now the duty of the Sudanese Government
and people to give the agreements practical meaning by
working together with the international community to
change their country for the better and make life worth
living for all. The recent contacts between the
Government of the Sudan and United Nations officials
have been a source of great encouragement to my
country. The participation of the Sudanese delegation
in this meeting is indeed a strong sign of the growing
confidence between the authorities of the Sudan and
their international counterparts.

We believe that, having taken this huge step
forward, the parties to the Abuja accords must remain
faithful to their respective commitments and
demonstrate a resolve worthy of leaders who genuinely
have the interests of their people at heart. Ghana hopes
that the Security Council mission to the Sudan next
month will enhance the confidence as well as the
growing partnership between this Council and the
Government of the Sudan.

While welcoming the Abuja accords, we should
recognize that they were signed only by the
Government of Sudan and the larger faction of the
Sudanese Liberation Army. The smaller faction of the
SLA and the Justice and Equality Movement still
remain outside the peace process. The international
community should therefore exert pressure and make
strenuous efforts to bring all interested parties and
groups into the peace framework. Only such a course
of action would make possible the Darfur-Darfur
dialogue and conciliation, which is a critical
component of a comprehensive peace process in
Darfur.

For my delegation, early proof of the viability of
the accords - indeed, their first dividend - would be
a quick improvement in the humanitarian situation on
the ground. We are informed that, so far, only about 20
per cent of the $648 million needed has been pledged
to the United Nations. The humanitarian agencies need
funding to be able to reach many more needy people.

Ghana is also of the view that that the time bas
come to take concrete steps towards strengthening the
African Union Mission in Sudan in anticipation of the
transition to an expanded United Nations operation
with a strong African participation and character. We
therefore support the early holding of the pledging
conference planned by the Secretary-General and look
forward to a generous response.

The joint African Union-United Nations technical
assessment mission is a key part of that transition, and
we urge the Sudanese Government to embrace it as a
partner in the search for peace. Trust and cooperation
will serve the cause of peace better than mistrust and
confrontation. So much time, energy and resources
have been invested in this crisis because we all have a
common stake in the dignity and security of humanity.

The international community at large, and the
United Nations in particular, should, in partnership
with the Government of the Sudan and the African
Union, monitor and remain actively engaged in the
implementation of the Abuja accords. This Council
should also live up to its responsibilities by not
hesitating to hold accountable those who either violate
the accords or impede their smooth and effective
implementation.

Finally, we thank the United States delegation for
preparing the draft resolution, which we fully support.

