Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): It gives me great
pleasure to brief the Security Council today on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). The most recent
briefing was held in November 2012 (see S/PV.6862).

The Committee continues to be guided in its work
by the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010),
and continues to play a critical role in promoting and
facilitating their implementation.

In accordance with its programme of work for 2013,
the Committee is organizing a special meeting, open to
the wider United Nations membership, and two other
special events focused on key aspects ofthe Committee's
mandate. The first special event, to be held on 24 May,
will focus on countering terrorism through the use of
new communication and information technologies. In
organizing the event, the Committee seeks to explore
with Member States recent technological advances,
good practices and effective measures taken, in
particular, in the areas of the movement of persons,
mobile telecommunications and the Internet, within
the framework of implementing resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1624 (2005). The Committee looks forward to the
participation of all Member States in that interactive
discussion.

The Committee will also organize a special meeting
on enhancing cooperation and technical assistance to
States in the Sahel region to strengthen their capacity in
the global fight against terrorism. That special meeting
is expected to take place in the last quarter of 2013.

The Committee has agreed to hold a third special
event, on enhancing the capacity of States to counter
terrorism at their borders through technical assistance
and the sharing of good practices. The Committee will
further explore a possible link between that topic and
the one selected for the special meeting.

Furthermore, as part of its outreach efforts, the
Committee will continue to explore the possibility of
collaboration with the Inter-Parliamentary Union.

In December 2013, the Committee will submit
to the Security Council a report on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) for consideration by the Council as part of its
comprehensive review of the Executive Directorate.
In accordance with Security Council resolution
1963 (2010), the Committee will submit the report to
the Council prior to the expiration of the Executive
Directorate's mandate, on 31 December.
Through CTED, the Committee has completed
the replacement of the preliminary implementation
assessment by the detailed implementation survey, and
the overview of implementation assessment. The new
diagnostic tools were the object of a briefing to Member
States that I had the pleasure to chair last week. They
will allow for an enhancement ofthe Committee's work
in identifying challenges faced by Member States and
facilitate the delivery of targeted technical assistance
in that regard.

The Committee continues to focus on region-specific
discussions and on issues identified in the 2011 global
survey. The Committee also continues to organize and
participate in discussions and workshops on thematic
issues. Some of the major thematic issues considered
by the Committee during the past six months
include the facilitation of technical assistance by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED, alternative
remittance systems and the Committee's cooperation
and dialogue with the relevant international and
regional organizations, in particular the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism.

CTED has also been active in conducting a number
of workshops on specific topics. Important workshops
organized during the period under review include
the initial global meeting on effective international
cooperation by central authorities, which took place in
Cartagena, Colombia, from 19 to 21 February; the fourth
seminar of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on the
theme "Bringing terrorists to justice: policy challenges
in the prosecution and prevention of terrorism", which
took place in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania, from 26 to
28 February; the final workshop led by CTED on behalf
of the Working Group on Tackling the Financing of
Terrorism of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF), aimed at protecting non-profit
organizations from terrorist financing abuse, which
took place on 5 and 6 March; the conference on border
control cooperation in the Sahel and the Maghreb,
which took place in Rabat from 13 to 15 March; the
sixth regional workshop for police officers, prosecutors
and judges in South Asia on effectively countering
terrorism, which took place in Kathmandu from 18 to
20 March; and, lastly, the first regional workshop for
law enforcement officers and prosecutors in East
Africa on effectively countering terrorism and bringing
terrorists to justice, which took place in Kampala from
7 to 9 May.

Upcoming workshops that CTED is active
organizing or co-organizing in the coming weeks include
the joint Council of Europe, Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and CTED workshop on
special investigative techniques, which will take place
in Strasbourg, France, on 14 and 15 May; the regional
workshop on controlling the cross-border movement of
cash and bearer-negotiable instruments, to take place
in Pretoria on 27 and 28 May; the East Africa regional
workshop on assets-freezing requirements of resolution
1373 (2001), which will take place in Dar-es-Salaam
from 4 to 6 June; and the second regional workshop on
international joint investigations, which will take place
in Langkawi, Malaysia, also from 4 to 6 June.

In addition, the Committee and CTED continue to
enhance their ongoing dialogue with Member States,
donors and beneficiaries on the facilitation of technical
assistance for capacity-building at the national and
subregional levels. Since the most recent briefing to the
Security Council (see S/PV.6862), CTED, on behalf of
the Committee, has conducted four assessment missions
to Member States: Qatar, Morocco and Serbia, as well
as a fact-finding mission to Angola.

I would like to emphasize that the Committee and
CTED have continued and will continue to pay close
attention to the question of respect for human rights and
the rule of law in the counter-terrorism measures taken
by States, in accordance with the relevant mandates
conferred by the Security Council.

The Committee and CTED continue to work
closely with the relevant working groups of the CTITF,
United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism and the
Global Counter Terrorism Forum in order to support,
coordinate and complement one another's counter-
terrorism endeavours.

The Committee will continue to play a critical role
in the global fight against terrorism, and will strive to
do so in a more strategic and transparent manner so that
it can more effectively contribute to the global counter-
terrorism effort within the scope of its mandate. I
would like to conclude by expressing my sincere
appreciation and consideration to Mr. Mike Smith,
Executive Director of CTED, and to his able team for
their excellent work on the Committee's behalf, and to
thank the Secretariat for its valuable support.

