Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Yesterday, as I looked at the images coming out of
Khan Shaykhun, I felt physically and mentally ill.
The words used by Joseph Conrad in his novel Heart
of Darkness, and subsequently placed by Francis Ford
Coppola in the mouth of Marlon Brando in his film
Apocalypse Now - "the horror, the horror" - came
to mind. That is what one perceives and feels in the
face of these horrors. These are not acts of war. These
are barbaric acts, and Uruguay condemns in the
strongest terms yesterday's attack, which resulted in
a huge loss of life, including of women and children.
We saw children dying as they tried to breathe. We saw
women - already dead - clutching their children.
And this is not the first time because, unfortunately,
we have seen these images coming out of Syria time
and again.

The use of sarin gas or other nerve agent indicates
that the culprits intended to cause as much damage
to the residents of that area as possible. They lost
their lives in horrible circumstances, choking. Once
more, we are witnessing a display of a complete lack
of humanity on the part of combatants in Syria. The
hospital in which the wounded were being treated was
bombed just a few minutes after the initial attack. That
is becoming a recurring model in Syria, in Yemen,
and other countries. First, civilians are attacked, and
then minutes later, all those trying to aid the victims
are attacked.

As Secretary-General Guterres so aptly put it
yesterday, no one is winning this war. Everyone is losing
it, especially the millions of Syrians who continue to
see their lives destroyed on a daily basis. These horrific
crimes should not and cannot remain unpunished,
whoever is responsible for them. For the time being,
we do not have the information that would allow us
to categorically confirm who is responsible for this
action. However, we need to recall that it is the primary
responsibility of the Syrian Government to protect its
population, and it is also the Syrian Government that
has the main responsibility to provide the maximum and
unhindered access to Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons experts who arrived in Syria
yesterday to investigate the circumstances of the attack
and to collect evidence. We hope that, unlike previous
cases, the investigation will take place expeditiously
and in such a way as to allow us to understand who
was behind these deeds and to demand that they be held
accountable for their actions.

This is not an isolated event; it occurred amid the
intensifiedbombing and fighting ofpastweeks-in spite
of the ceasefire that is supposed to be in effect - and
the recent terrorist attacks that have also caused many
deaths. All of this threatens the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura
to bring the parties together to reach an intra-Syrian
political solution that would make it possible to put an
end to this conflict.

Unfortunately, the Security Council remains part
of the problem and not part of the solution. There is
little time, and with every day that passes we see an
increasing number of people wounded or killed and the
entire country being destroyed. The money collected
during donors" pledging conference will be useless if
the destruction of Syria and other countries continues.
It might certainly be possible to rebuild the physical
infrastructure, but it will never be possible to give life
back to the thousands of innocent civilians. The total
cessation of bombings and hostilities has re-emerged
as a necessity.

