Mr. Seger (spoke in French): In my capacity as Chair
of the country-specific configuration on Burundi of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council. I
should like to thanksto the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for
his briefing here today - which I fully endorse - and
for his relentless efforts in assisting Burundi.

I shall structure my remarks around the three
following points. First, I will briefly cover the main
messages of the Conference for Burundi's Development
Partners, held in Geneva on 29 and 30 October 2012,
and its aftermath. Secondly, I will offer a briefing
on my most recent trip to Bujumbura, which took
place from 14 to 16 January, where I met a wide
variety of stakeholders who gave me a general sense
of the situation in the country, to see for myself how
the follow-up process to the Geneva Conference is
unfolding, and to discuss further PBC engagement
with the relevant authorities. Thirdly, I will explain
to the Security Council why a one-year extension of
the political mandate of the United Nations Office
in Burundi (BNUB), with the option of prolonging it
beyond that, would be of great help to me in my task
of supporting Burundi in my capacity as the country-
specific configuration.

I will try to limit my remarks on the Geneva
Conference to a minimum, which Council members
will certainly remember as I have already described
it in depth a letter sent 28 November 2012. Seeking
to promote Burundi's second-generation Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP-II), the Geneva
meeting in late October 2012 was a success. It also
marked a critical phase in the strengthening and
institutionalization, on the basis on the PRSP-II, of the
partnership between the Government of Burundi and
its international partners, traditional and new alike.

The reinvigorated partnership rests upon two
assumptions. On the one hand, the international
community, through its strong financial and political
commitment, clearly acknowledged the far-reaching
and impressive progress achieved by Burundi so far. On
the other hand, the trust shown by the partners present
in Geneva should encourage the Burundi Government
to redouble its efforts to implement much-needed
reforms in the political, institutional and socioeconomic
spheres. In that regard, during my meeting with Burundi
President Nkunrunziza in Bujumbura last Wednesday,
I was encouraged by the President's message that he
regarded the commitments of Geneva as reciprocal. I
recommended that he announce a number of concrete
steps in the coming weeks and months to follow up on
Burundi's engagements. At the same time, I have asked
all donors to honour their pledges and to continue to
follow Burundi in its reform efforts.

I visited Bujumbura last week, where I met with
the main governmental representatives, including
the President, representatives of all political parties,
including the extra-parlimentary opposition. I also
met with civil society members, the private sector,
the President of the National Independent Electoral
Commission, the President of the Independent National
Human Rights Commission, the Burundi Revenue
Authority and international partners.

The main purpose of my visit, as I mentioned,
was to discuss the future steps of the Configuration's
engagement with Burundi, including the follow-
up process to the Geneva Conference. Building on
the dynamics of the conference, I proposed to the
governmental authorities that we continue with our
political, institutional and socioeconomic engagement.
The latter relates to the Geneva follow-up process.
From my conversations with the representatives of
Burundi, both in New York and Geneva, I gather that
the Government wants the Burundi configuration of the
PBC to maintain its commitment support until 2015 and
beyond, which I consider to be very positive. I reiterate
my willingness to continue advocating and counselling
Burundi, and I will try my best to ensure that the
pledges made in Geneva will be kept.

From my meetings with the relevant stakeholders, I
learned that the Government, starting in April, intends
to organize sectoral conferences on infrastructure,
transportation and security, the development of the
private sector, health care, good governance and the
environment. While I welcome the Government's plans,
I urged it to prepare the conferences with utmost care,
even at the price of having to postpone them. Setting
priorities, identifying one's target audience, and
defining expectations and needs will be crucial aspects
for the success of the conferences. The international
community lend Burundi a strong helping hand in that
regard. Geneva was but the first step; the challenges of
implementing the PRSP-II have only just begun.

At the political and institutional level, I recommend
concentrating the configuration's efforts on the areas in
which we have already been cooperating with Burundi:
dealing with the past; national reconciliation and
transitional justice; widening the political space and
the democratic culture, including political dialogue,
the return of exiled opposition leaders and the 2015
elections; the rule of law, human rights and reform
of the justice sector; and good governance, fighting
corruption and promoting transparency. In all of those
areas, the Peacebuilding Commission can constitute
an important platform for dialogue and exchange and
thereby support the efforts of other actors, such as BNUB
and the United Nations Development Programme. The
strengthening of important institutions, such as the
Independent National Human Rights Commission and
the Ministry of Good Governance, which are doing
terrific work, is also a crucial factor.

Further progress in those four areas is needed and
indispensable. This year will prove decisive for the
consolidation ofpeace in View ofthe 2015 elections. An
open and inclusive atmosphere will be essential for the
return of genuine multiparty democracy. The success of
the electoral process depends on the opposition and the
Government alike; all must contribute.
In Bujumbura I sensed a genuine interest from
both sides in not repeating the errors of 2010.
Government representatives emphasized that they want
a real competition in 2015. The extra-parliamentary
opposition is keen on participating, although they
realize that at this stage, victory in 2015 amounts to
wishful thinking, which therefore puts participation in
the elections in a long-term perspective.

Those developments are very positive, but risks still
exist. Maintaining and expanding the political dialogue
between the Government and the extra-parliamentary
opposition will be key in avoiding those risks.

Similarly, the process of dealing with the past is also
critical. It is up to Burundi itself to decide on how the
matter is to be approached; that is clear. Nevertheless,
I urge the Government to be especially sensitive to the
opinions of Burundian society on the issue.

I intend to communicate those priorities to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Laurent
Kavakure, in a formal letter. If this procedure is
agreeable to Burundi, my letter and his reply could
henceforth form the basis of mutual commitments
between the PBC configuration and Burundi. It could
replace our outcome document, which has now become

obsolete because, as of June 2013, all the peacebuilding
review processes will be incorporated in the monitoring
and evaluation of the first pillar of the PRSP.

My visit last week also marked an important
step in expanding the Peacebuilding Commission's
partnership with other relevant actors, particularly
with the international financial institutions. Building
on the success of the Geneva conference, Mr. Philippe
Dongier, Regional Director of the World Bank, and I
met with high-ranking representatives of the Burundian
Government together, including the President and the
Second Vice-President. We explained to them that
socioeconomic development was inseparably linked
to political and institutional progress, which forms the
basis of the Peacebuilding Commission's work.

In the future, we envisage a continuing increase in
our partnerships. In that connection, I also travelled to
Nairobi to meet with the Director of the World Bank's
Global Center on Conflict, Security and Development,
Mr. Joel Hellman.

Let me now turn to my third and last point. The
effectiveness of my work as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission is to
a large extent based on the excellent role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his
team. The collaboration with BNUB, for example, has
been key for the success of the Geneva conference. For
bilateral and multilateral partners, BNUB represents
an institutional guarantee that their money is being
well spent. I have also conveyed that message to the
President himself.

Consequently, from my point of view, a continued
presence of BNUB on the ground is essential. I am
aware that the Government of Burundi would like
its mandate to be extended for another year before it
is transformed into a country team. That decision of
course has to be taken by the Security Council. For my
part, I also strongly argue i and all Steering Group
members have delivered this message to me - for a
sustained BNUB presence, ideally until 2015.

We all know that Burundi is not one of the primary
concerns of the Security Council, but it is often the
"silent" countries that represent the true success stories.
Let us not jeopardize this opportunity by prematurely
withdrawing.

If the Government should sense a certain unease
about a prolonged political presence of BNUB and

have the feeling that being on the Security Council's
agenda may create the impression that Burundi is
not a "normal" country, let me offer a response. The
only "abnormality" regarding Burundi - and on this
I agree completely with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General - is the impressive progress it has
achieved in such a short time. Being on the Council's
agenda does not give the country a negative image; to
the contrary, it is another aspect of its success story.

Let me conclude with an urgent appeal to all donors
present here today. Due to its difficult economic and
financial environment, Burundi risks encountering
considerable problems in meeting even the most basic
budgetary expenses. That concern has been brought
to my attention not only by the Government, but also
by international partners. I therefore urge all donors
to seriously consider increasing their development
assistance in the form of budgetary support.

I remain at the Council's disposal for any questions.

