Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Iwould
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Farid Zarif for his briefing. I would also like to
welcome to the Security Council today Prime Minister
Ivica Dacie of Serbia and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci
of Kosovo. I thank them both for their comments. I
would like to make five points.

First, the United States commends the Republic of
Kosovo for several positive developments during the
reporting period. We especially welcome the facilitation
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) of peaceful Serbian parliamentary and
presidential elections for dual nationals in Kosovo. The
OSCE enabled dual nationals to exercise their right to
vote without infringing upon Kosovo's sovereignty.
Kosovo and Serbia worked effectively with each other
and with the international community to promote
the development of strong democratic institutions.
It is unfortunate that two Serb municipalities in the
north flagrantly ignored Kosovo and Serbian law by
improvising a parallel voting process. We welcome
Belgrade's rejection of those actions. Parallel structures
have no legitimate role in Kosovo. They should have
been dismantled long ago, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999).

Now that the new Serbian Government is in place
in Belgrade, we hope to see the resumption of the
European Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue. That includes
implementing agreements previously reached, including
on integrated border management. We welcome the
commitments today of both Prime Ministers to pursue
constructive engagement through that mechanism. The
United States continues to support the EU's efforts to
foster dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia, with the
goal of normalizing relations between the two States in
order to enable both countries to fulfil their European
aspirations. As we have stated previously, the European
Union is uniquely placed to lead that dialogue.

Secondly, the United States congratulates Kosovo
on the upcoming end of supervised independence. We
join our colleagues in the International Steering Group
in recognizing the enormous progress that Kosovo
has achieved, including upholding its commitment
to implement provisions embodied in Special Envoy
Ahtisaari's proposal and enshrining them into law.

The United States commends the International
Civilian Office, which has worked with the Government
of Kosovo to achieve those gains. The decision to end
supervised independence in September is a vote of
confidence in Kosovo's dedication and ability to build a
multi-ethnic, democratic nations.

Thirdly, the United States remains concerned
over threats to security and the freedom of movement
in northern Kosovo. The report (S/2012/603) of the
Secretary-General touches on that. However, more
focus should have been given in the report to the lack
of cooperation and attacks and threats to international
personnel from hardliners in the north. Blockades
continue to be erected, troop movements continue to be
restricted and officials of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission (EULEX) and troops of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) continue to be threatened. The principal threats
to peace in Kosovo come from the nexus of hard-line
criminal elements in the north. We look to Belgrade
to set a positive tone, cooperate fully with KFOR and
EULEX, and encourage Kosovo Serbs in the north to
cooperate. KFOR's efforts in support of EULEX to
close illegal border crossings and remove roadblocks
are most definitely part of its mandate. The Council
expects all parties to support those efforts.

We commend the Government of Kosovo for opening
the administrative office for northern Mitrovica. The
international community should not impede the Kosovo
Government's natural prerogative and capacity to
provide services to its citizens in the north. We hope to
see cooperation on the part of UNMIK with the Kosovo
Government on that issue. A significant number of
northern Kosovo Serbs have applied for, and were
granted, positions at the new administrative office. We
condemn all violence against Kosovo Serbs working in
the office and using its services. We hope to see those
acts covered in the Secretary-General's next report.

I commend the Kosovo police and EULEX for
their efforts to protect the local population, and we
remain confident of their investigative capacity and
professionalism. We note the collaboration between
EULEX and the Kosovo police in investigating the
recent double murder of a Kosovo Serb couple.

We share the Special Representative's concern
that, as in previous years, hard-liners used the Saint
Vitus Day celebrations to incite inter-ethnic tension.
We condemn attacks, both on the Kosovo police and
on pilgrims.

Fourthly, with regard to the allegations raised in the
Marty report on alleged organ trafficking, the United
States takes seriously all allegations of serious crimes
committed in the region. We underline our full support
for EULEX's work in that regard. We also commend
the significant progress made by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force. We again underscore our
staunch support for Ambassador Williamson, the Task
Force and the countries cooperating with the Task Force
in its crucial work on all of the cases currently under
investigation, especially those related to allegations of
organ trafficking in connection with the 1999 conflict.

Finally, we are concerned about the violence that
returnees continue to experience. Managing the returnee
process is difficult. The looting of returnee houses, the
stoning of vehicles and acts of physical violence are
unacceptable and block reintegration. We commend the
Kosovo Government for its commitment to supporting
returning populations through its municipal offices for
communities and returns. As is true elsewhere in the
region, more needs to be done to create conditions for
voluntary returns.

The United States remains committed to advancing
peace, stability and prosperity in the entire Balkan
region. We look forward to continued cooperation
with both Serbia and Kosovo towards realizing their
aspirations for European and Euro-Atlantic integration.

