Mr. Romero-Martinez (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation, Sir, joins others in
congratulating your delegation on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and, today, on
having organized this important debate on the role of
regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The delegation of Honduras attaches great
importance to this topic, whose discussion will
strengthen the activities of the Organization. Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter establishes the
parameters for cooperation and recognizes the
existence of agreements with regional arrangements or
agencies for dealing with such matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security as are
appropriate for regional action, provided that such
arrangements or agencies and their activities are
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.

In its resolution 1631 (2005), the Security
Council clearly stated its determination to take
appropriate steps to further the development of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security, consistent with
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.
Furthermore, it invited regional and subregional
organizations that have a capacity for conflict
prevention or peacekeeping to place such capacities in
the framework of the United Nations Standby
Arrangements System.

And, in its presidential statement of 28 March
(S/PRST/2007/7), the Council wisely recognized that
regional organizations are well positioned to
understand the root causes of many conflicts closer to
home and to influence the prevention or resolution,
owing to their knowledge of the region.

My delegation acknowledges the progress that
has been made in this area and firmly believes that
strengthening these contacts, meetings and efforts will
benefit international peace and security.

In our region, this has yielded positive results,
demonstrating that interaction among all actors
promotes a climate of trust and cooperation, leading to
the possible resolution of conflicts.

We appreciate the role played by the European
Union in Europe and other regions, the African Union
in Africa, the League of Arab States in the Middle East,
the Organization of American States in the Americas
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in Asia.
We can certainly add subregional actors as well, such
as the Central American Integration System, which
contribute to the creation of a climate of integration
and collective cooperation. My delegation believes that
appropriate breadth in our objectives and a more active
inclusion of non-governmental organizations and of
civil society are necessary.

We view type of debate as imperative. It allows
us to reassess the role of our Organization and, above
all, as the Charter tells us, to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. We thank you
very much, Mr. President, for this initiative.

