Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Today the Security Council is once again
considering the question of Lebanon in order to issue a
response in this regard. We believe that it is imperative to
do so in order to demonstrate the hope of the international
community in general, and the Security Council in
particular, that there will be an immediate cessation of
hostilities in this region, so as to avoid any further
suffering on the part of civilians.

 

The Chinese delegation expresses its profound concern
at the large-scale military offensive launched by Israel in
recent days in southern Lebanon, which has resulted in the
loss of innocent civilian lives, the massive destruction of
property and a large number of civilians' becoming
homeless or refugees, consequently further escalating the
conflict in southern Lebanon and aggravating the already
tense situation.

We wish in particular to express our shock at the large
number of casualties suffered by civilians as a result of the
shelling that took place on 18 April in Lebanon. We
strongly condemn any action that violates international law.
We call upon all parties concerned to exercise restraint and
put an immediate end to all hostilities in order to achieve
a cease-fire, in an effort to ease the tense situation and
safeguard peace and stability in that region.

We believe that Lebanon's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity within internationally recognized
borders should be fully respected, and that the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 425
(1978), should be implemented.

The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) should not be obstructed in the implementation
of its mandate. The security and safety of its members
should be guaranteed by all parties concerned.

We call upon the international community, including
the United Nations and its agencies, to provide immediate
humanitarian assistance to the civilians of Lebanon in order
to alleviate their suffering.

On the basis of these considerations, we voted in
favour of the two draft resolutions.

The progress in the peace process in the Middle East
has not been achieved easily; therefore, it should be
treasured by the parties concerned. At such a sensitive and
critical moment, we hope that all the parties concerned will
exercise restraint and refrain from any action that may
further intensify the conflict and undermine the peace
process in the Middle East, so as to create conditions for
the achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the question of the Middle East at an early date.

