Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on China's
accession to the presidency of the Security Council this
month, and to welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
El Hadi Dayri, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Libya; His Excellency
Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt; and His Excellency Mr. Abdelkader
Messahel, Minister Delegate for Maghreb and African
Affairs of Algeria. Algeria, Egypt and Libya are three
brotherly countries.

I am also grateful to Mr. Leon for his briefing via
video-teleconference from Tunis.

I welcome your decision to convene this meeting,
Sir, demonstrating the United Nations determination
to address the threat posed to Libya by terrorism, in
particular in the light of recent developments and the
dangerous upsurge of the phenomenon, which threaten
the security and stability of Libya and have negative
repercussions for its neighbours, including Tunisia.
Against that backdrop, I reiterate Tunisia's firm
condemnation of the heinous massacre perpetrated by
terrorist groups against innocent Egyptian citizens, as
well as its solidarity with the people and the Government
of Egypt following that detestable crime.

It goes without saying that this painful incident
only reaffirms the growing threat posed by terrorist
organizations operating across borders, which leaves
no country unscathed, including my own. Tunisia
has suffered from this phenomenon. A dastardly
terrorist operation took place close to our western
border yesterday, resulting in the death of four heroic
national guardsmen. I take this opportunity to offer our
condolences and commemorations to their families.
May they rest in peace.

We reiterate Tunisia's firm and ongoing commitment
to condemning all forms and manifestations of terrorism.
We are determined to participate in international and
regional efforts to earnestly and decisively address
this phenomenon and halt its further spread, which
threatens international peace and security and requires
coordinated efforts.

Tunisia maintains close relations with the brotherly
country of Libya through our shared history and
geographical proximity, as well as through our social
links and common civilizational affinities. We also
have close ties with other neighbouring States and those
of the western Mediterranean basin, and are concerned
about their situation in the face of extremism, terrorism
and radicalism, which impact the security and stability
of Libya and the entire region.

Tunisia understands that, in response to the growing
activity of terrorist and extremist groups in Libya, the
Security Council is working to address the threats posed
to peace and stability. Given the deteriorating situation
in Libya, we must be united in our efforts to ensure
the precedence of a political solution. Any option that
circumvents a political solution will only exacerbate
and complicate the situation further. We believe that,
today more than ever before, this is a responsibility
that must be shared by all. We must strengthen our
support and ensure that there is reconciliation and
understanding between those Libyan political parties
that eschew violence and understand that dialogue is the
key to national unity. An end must be put to the crisis
and Libyan institutions built to meet the aspirations of
our Libyan brothers, with a view to enabling greater
stability, security and development.

I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express Tunisia's support for the mediation efforts made
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bernardino Leon and by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to bring together all Libyan partners
in a constructive dialogue to promote reconcilation and
pave the way for democracy.

We reiterate our call to the entire international
community to support efforts made by Libyan parties
to avoid divisive politics and promote dialogue.

Alongside neighbouring States, we have contributed
to strengthening political dialogue to resolve the Libyan
crisis. We will make every effort to help our brothers
in Libya achieve a peaceful solution that would ensure
the return to stability, through the promotion of the
State and the rule of law, and to once again revive their
hopes so that they may build a Libyan future based on
sovereignty, stability and prosperity.
