Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing. I wish him
a warm welcome to the Council in his new role. I also
thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Yury Fedotov, and the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, for their statements.

I align myself with the statement to be made during
this debate by the observer of the European Union.

Afghanistan has come a long way since 2001. The
path has been strewn with hardships and sacrifices,
but also remarkable advances. That is evidenced by the
progress made in the fields of education and health. It is
also evidenced by the regular holding of elections and
the first democratic transfer of power. The international
community must recognize the progress that has
been made and the credit that is due to the Afghans.
Nevertheless, it must not lose sight of the challenges
that remain.

Today it is absolutely necessary that the Afghan
ruling class put itself fully at the service of its people
and quickly agree on the formation of a National
Unity Government that reflects the diversity of the
country. Otherwise, the destabilizing effect of political
uncertainty will strengthen the power of those looking
to return Afghanistan to its old demons.

To meet the huge challenges ahead, the National
Unity Government, once formed, will need the
continued support of the international community,
which is willing to provide that support. At the London
Conference on 4 December, donors reiterated their
commitment to staying at the side of the Afghan people.
On the security front, the NATO Resolute Support
Mission, heralded by the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2189 (2014), will provide advice, training and
assistance to Afghan security forces. The international
community's support will continue to be manifested
through UNAMA's work on the ground. I will say more
on that in a moment.

While security efforts are essential to the stability
of the country and the protection of civilians, efforts
to improve human development will be critical to the
long-term stabilization of Afghanistan. Respect for
human rights is, in this respect, a crucial element,
and improving the status of women is an absolute
necessity. We are encouraged by the fact that President
Ghani Ahmadzai has expressed his support on many
occasions for the respect of human rights. For our part,
we would like to call on the new authorities to spare
no effort to prevent, report and denounce violence
committed against Afghan women. We also advocate
that the progress made in terms of the status of women
not be sacrificed on the altar of a possible national
reconciliation agreement.

In human development, the fight against poverty
must be another priority. The proportion of the Afghan
population living below the poverty line is still too
high. National resources must be allocated in a more
equitable manner. Large-scale economic reforms are
needed and will also have to address the growing
dependence of the country on the illicit economy linked
to drug trafficking.

Another key area is that of child protection. We
welcome the fact that the National Assembly has
passed a law criminalizing the recruitment of children
by the Afghan National Security Forces. That is an
important step in the implementation of the action
plan to counter the recruitment and use of children.
We encourage the authorities to persevere in those
efforts. We are nonetheless concerned at the continuing
reports of boys arrested and detained because of their
alleged association with armed groups or on charges
related to national security. Those children must first
be considered victims and immediately transferred to
child protection specialists.

I would like to conclude by reiterating our
appreciation for the outstanding work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
In the coming years, with the withdrawal of international
combat troops, the support role of UNAMA will
become even more important. Supporting the Afghan
authorities in strengthening the rule of law, shoring up

democracy and protecting human rights will continue to
be a the heart of the Mission's mandate. The important
role that the United Nations has to play in terms of good
offices and international assistance coordination should
also be taken into account. UNAMA should have the
adequate means to fulfil its mission in order to ensure a
field presence throughout all of Afghanistan.

There are many areas in Afghanistan that require
work. Some will lament that the progress made is not
being made fast enough or not going far enough. That
may be true. But not going far enough is still moving
ahead, and that alone is encouraging for those Afghans
who have demonstrated that they want to take their fate
into their own hands to shape a better future for their
country.

