Mr. Ladsous: I thank you, Mr. President, for putting
the numerous questions into focus. I would first like to
thank all the members for their comments. I think they
reflect a real interest in what our police components are
doing, as is fully justified.

As the Council knows, the Secretary-General has
proposed an external review of United Nations police.
That is a review in which we will engage thoroughly,
because it represents an important opportunity to
improve on a number of the points that were mentioned,
including intra-mission cooperation. As I said it in my
initial remarks, we have made a lot of progress. With
regard to the protection of civilians, for example,
the fact that police components interact on a daily
basis with senior protection advisers of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and with
specialists on children and women seems to me as it
should be. Protection can nevertheless be improved,
and it should be.
Taking up the specific question of women, let
me say that there has been progress. Clearly, though,
there has not been enough. At present, women make
up 12.2 per cent of the United Nations police, which
is substantial progress as compared to the situation
10 years ago, when they made up only 5 per cent. Two
questions, however, arise. The first one is the extent
to which 12 per cent reflects the make-up of police
forces throughout the world. Were we to use an average
country as an example - whether from the North, the
South, the East or the West - we would come up with
a similar statistic. That is a fact. It is easy to arrive at
a 20 per cent women component in terms of a national
contribution. However, as that relates to an extremely
small figure, I am not certain that it is convincing. I
completely agree that we have to continue to improve
on that count. We have increased that percentage over
the past four to five years, and we will continue to do so
to the extent that it is possible. Another topic has to do
with all-female police units, which, as I said previously,
have proved their worth. I am happy that, at the last
peacekeeping summit, several countries made offers of
all-female units. I remember that Nigeria, Bangladesh
and Rwanda made offers. I hope that by the time of
the next United Nations chiefs-of-police summit, next
spring, new pledges will have been made.

Let me address some ofthe issues raised. Two years
ago. we launched an initiative under which selection
assistance and assessment teams train and subsequently
select well-trained female officers with specific skill
sets. That initiative has already yielded 260 women
recommended for deployment, with 161 actually
deployed. There will be another such programme in
the Niger, where 187 women participants have already
been registered. As one can see, things are progressing,
although perhaps not to the extent that we would like.
The toolkits involving gender issues are proving their
worth in terms of mainstreaming, capacity-building
and eradicating sexual and gender-based violence.
The training package consisting of exercises that are
based on case studies and scenarios. It is essentially
e-learning, but it is proving effective and, moreover,
helps in building the capacity of the police of the host
State. We have gender focal points in all missions,
and they were here this week for the launching of the
gender toolkit. We have been able to put together some
extrabudgetary funding for a general adviser here
alongside Police Commissioner Feller, which I think
will be very worthwhile.

Finally, let me make a couple of very general
points. First, I want the police, as I want my entire
Department, to be constantly adaptable and innovative,
as we had to be in the case of new arrangements in the
Central African Republic, which were demonstrated
by the Bangui task force. Sometimes things work,
and sometimes they do not. While we need to make
adjustments from time to time, we need to persevere
in our efforts. A very important element in all of that is
technology, which not only relates to unmanned aerial
vehicle drones. It is also a question ofbetter information
and intelligence in order to know what is happening
around us. It is about better communications. And it
is also about specialized capabilities. We have created
the only forensic laboratory in Mali that is able to deal
with improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and mines.
In that regard, we are doing much better in terms of
finding those responsible for placing IEDs intended for
our units on the ground. That is only one example out
of many.

We have to continue in our efforts concerning
formed police units (FPUs). The concept is adapted to
the situation and basically works well, but I think that
it can be improved. I am often struck by the percentage
of staff members whose work is devoted to self-
sustainment in an FPU, which numbers approximately
140 individuals. That is to say that the number ofpeople
who do the actual work that the personnel of an FPU
are supposed to do is not at 100 per cent - in fact, it
is sometimes substantially less. We therefore need to
work on that issue.

Lastly, problems of sexual exploitation and abuse
are as unacceptable in police departments as they are in
the military and civilian components. We continue to
deal with those problems with increasing severity. Zero
tolerance is an absolute necessity, but the goal has to be
zero incidents. While we probably have some distance
to go before achieving that goal, all of my colleagues
and I are nevertheless fully committed to doing so.
We want to very substantially reduce the number of
deplorable situations we have had to face, including
some in the recent past.

