Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to acknowledge your
leadership, Mr. President, on this important topic.

Cuba supports a comprehensive reform of the
Security Council, including its working methods,
in order to make it a transparent, democratic and
representative organ, in keeping with the evolution of
the United Nations and international relations.

The enlargement of the Security Council should
be in both permanent and non-permanent categories
of membership in order to correct the inadequate
representation of developing countries. Its membership
should be no less than 26 members. Effective formulas
are needed to eliminate exclusive practices and to
ensure genuine participation and democratization of
the work and decision-making of the Council, including
the elimination of the veto.

Pursuant to Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, Members recognize that, in the discharge
of its functions, the Security Council acts on their
behalf and that the work of the Council is therefore
the shared responsibility of all Member States. Greater
transparency in the work of the organ will therefore
contribute to the effective exercise of that shared
responsibility. Informal consultations of the organ
should be the exception, not the rule, and a record
should be issued.

While we acknowledge the increase in recent
years in the number of public meetings, including open
debates and wrap-up sessions, as well as the innovative
practice of consultations and exchanges with Member
States for the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General, the Security Council continues to
work primarily in closed formats, to take decisions
without heeding the concerns of Member States and to
force decisions on draft resolutions even when there are
significant differences over their content.

Furthermore, Cuba reiterates the need for the
Council to adopt a definitive text that regulates its
work and puts an end to the provisional status that has
characterized its rules of procedure for more than 70
years. That is essential in terms of transparency and the
need for accountability.

We regret that the Security Council continues to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports that
are merely a descriptive overview of its meetings,
activities and decisions, rather than providing an
explanatory, comprehensive and analytical description
ofits work that enables us to assess the reasons for and
implications ofits decisions. The lack of special reports
on measures to maintain international peace and
security for consideration by the General Assembly, as
requested under Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter, is
another shortcoming that the Council must overcome.

In addition to a change in working methods, the
Security Council must align its functions with the
mandate entrusted to it by the Charter of the United
Nations. It must cease taking up issues beyond its
remit, in particular those that fall under the mandate
of the General Assembly. Pursuant to the mandate
entrusted to it under the Charter, the Security Council
should focus on the most urgent issues that threaten
international peace and security. As envisaged, Chapter
VII should be invoked as a last resort. We oppose the
selective manipulation of the Council's methods and
practices in terms of political agendas and control, in
particular attempts to introduce topics that are not on
its agenda, as well as politicization in the consideration
of other issues of which it is seized.

We reaffirm that there can be no genuine reform
of the United Nations until the Security Council
is reformed. We support the intergovernmental
negotiations in the General Assembly, which should
continue to be transparent and inclusive. The way
forward can be found only through debate, within the
established timelines and frameworks, on the basis
of consensus among all Member States. We reiterate
the need for a reformed, democratic, transparent and
efficient Security Council that represents the interests
of all States Members of the Organization in order to
preserve multilateralism and the long-term credibility
and legitimacy of the United Nations.

