The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf of
the members of the Council, I welcome King Carl XVI
Gustaf and Queen Silvia of Sweden to the Security
Council.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.

I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
briefing.

China has been closely following the current
tensions in Gaza, and is deeply concerned and
distressed about the escalation of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in the Gaza Strip and the resulting casualties.
The use of force, and of efforts to halt violence with
violence, does not help to solve problems. China
appreciates the mediation efforts of Egypt and the
United Nations and calls on both sides of the conflict
to meet halfway, end their military actions and work
to effectively promote the easing of tensions. Based
on the interests of preserving their peoples' safety and
maintaining peace and stability in the region, all the
parties should exercise restraint in order to avoid the
escalation of tensions. China has consistently advocated
for resolving the Palestinian-Israeli dispute through
peaceful negotiations, and we oppose any violence that
exacerbates tensions or targets civilians. The Security
Council and the relevant parties must focus on the
long term and strive to create the conditions necessary
for promoting stability and resuming dialogue. The
international community should ramp up its sense
of urgency, fully implement the relevant General
Assembly resolutions and protect Palestinian civilians
in ajoint effort to bring the Palestinian issue back to the
negotiation track in order to reach a settlement. I would
like to highlight the following points.

First, a two-State solution is fundamental
to resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The
international community should step up its mediation
efforts, while adhering to the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the
Arab Peace Initiative. All the parties concerned
should work to effectively implement resolution 2334
(2016), stop all settlement activities in the occupied
territories, cease the demolition of Palestinian houses
and the destruction of Palestinian property, and
take measures to prevent violence against civilians.
Secondly, promoting a resumption of the Palestinian-
Israeli peace talks is a shared goal of the work of the
international community. The international community
and the Security Council should embrace an elevated
sense of urgency and responsibility by launching a
new round of efforts to promote peace. All parties that
have significant influence with regard to the Middle
East issue should play a constructive role in exploring
new mediation mechanisms and breaking the impasse
facing Palestinian-Israeli peace talks sooner rather than
later. Thirdly, the final status of Jerusalem is key to
advancing the Middle East peace process. That issue is
as complex as it is sensitive, and it concerns the future
of a two-State solution, as well as regional peace and
tranquillity.

All the parties should be cautious when dealing with
related issues, refraining from imposing solutions lest
they trigger new confrontations. They should uphold the
principle of respect for diverse histories, maintaining
justice and fairness, implementing international
consensus and achieving peaceful coexistence and,
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international consensus, work to reach a negotiated
solution that accommodates the interests of all.

I want to reiterate that China has always been
committed to advancing the Middle East peace process,
supporting the just cause of the Palestinian people
to exercise their legitimate national rights and the
establishment of an independent and fully sovereign
Palestinian State, based on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. The international community
should step up its support for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East. China will continue to follow the four-
point proposal of President Xi Jinping for promoting
a political settlement of the Palestinian issue, and
we stand ready to work with the relevant parties and
the international community to play a positive and
constructive role in achieving peace in the Middle East.

The meeting rose at11.40 a.m.
