Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
your leadership and for your work as President of the
Council. I would also like to thank Mr. Robert Serry
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

Guatemala firmly believes that diplomacy and
dialogue are the best path to achieve a long-term solution
to all the conflicts that persist in the Middle East, even
though each situation has distinct characteristics that
prevent the use of one-size-fits-all formulas. With that
in mind, I will briefly touch upon two of the conflicts
that in our view are of particular importance - the one
in Syria and the Middle East peace process, including
the Palestinian question.

With respect to the conflict in Syria, Guatemala
continues to believe that the first step in any dialogue
must be the cessation of violence. Such a premise is
certainly beyond dispute in Syria. For more than three
years, that conflict has destroyed an entire people,
the value of human life, respect for human rights and
even the cultural heritage of that great country. Armed
struggle is simply not an option. We have viewed with
horror the constant news of human rights abuses that
have been committed in Syria. We cannot but add our
voice to the calls for all violations and crimes to be
investigated and brought to justice in due course.

Similarly, we are concerned by the call for
presidential elections that have been announced for
3 June. Given the current context of violence and
conflict in Syria, the concept of holding elections is
irrational. Indeed, without claiming to judge the legal
framework under which the elections have been called,
we believe that the present circumstances make it
impossible to convene a democratic process in which
all citizens can freely vote and be elected or express
their free will without fear of reprisals.

For that reason, we believe that conversations
between the parties must resume. The efforts to achieve
agreement on partial ceasefires are a first step that can
be replicated in other areas. It is also imperative for
there to be compliance with the resolutions already
adopted by the Security Council and, where relevant,
for the necessary measures to be implemented by all
parties.

With respect to the Middle East peace process,
recent developments are not encouraging. We commend
the efforts of the United States Secretary of State to
keep alive the hope of a two-State solution. In that
regard, we hope that it will still be possible to reach an
agreement to extend the deadline for negotiations.

We have watched with great alarm Israel's refusal
to continue to comply with the agreement reached at
the beginning of the negotiations, as well as the actions
to which that has led on the part of the Palestinian
State. The refusal to undertake formal negotiations, the
insistence on not modifying traditional positions and,
in general, the tendency to take unilateral decisions
that undermine all possibility ofprogress, suggest little
interest and will in reaching a two-State solution with
both sides living in peace within secure borders.

We believe that the recent agreement signed
between Fatah and Hamas putting an end to the
divisions that have separated them for seven years
could have a positive effect, so long as they maintain
the premise of an eventual unity Government that
will continue to respect the two-State solution as the
basis of all negotiations. Palestinian reconciliation has
the potential to lead to an environment of peace and
reconciliation in Palestine, so that any peace agreement
will yield its hoped for fruit.

We are aware of the enormous challenges that this
process presents for both sides, both nationally and
internationally. We therefore hope that they find a way
to work positively in order to comply with existing
agreements and commitments. At the same time, the
parties should make a serious commitment to advance
on all the issues that would constitute a possible final
agreement. We believe that the involvement of the
international community, in particular that of the
Quartet and regional actors, is indispensable throughout
the process. We urge both sides to refrain from any and
all acts that could endanger the discussions currently
underway.

