Mr. Wetland (Norway): Afghanization is
increasingly the mantra of our support for Afghanistan.
Rather than being a euphemism for exit, it underlines
the importance of an Afghan-led process that is
responsible, inclusive and transparent and promotes the
fundamental rights of the Afghan people. This is of
great importance for three of the key issues being
raised in today's debate: the follow-up after the
London Conference, President Karzai's political
agenda, and the issue of reconciliation. Furthermore, it
has implications for what we should expect from the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in Afghanistan.

First, we join other speakers in welcoming the
conclusions of the London Conference and the stated
need for greater Afghan leadership, supported by the
international community under the leadership of the
United Nations. At the Kabul conference, we must be
clear about our is readiness to transfer authorities to
Afghan ownership. And the Afghan Government
should present concrete national programmes with
tangible planning. Today, Norway provides almost
60 per cent of our $140-million annual aid through
Afghan budgets and programmes. We support UNAMA
plans for enhancing civilian coordination while
ensuring strong Afghan leadership.

Secondly, we should expect real progress from
President Karzai and his Government when it comes to
reform and delivery on the pledges made in London
regarding good governance, measures against
corruption, improvement of the electoral laws, and
other commitments relating to reform of the political
system. The Afghan authorities must also move
forward with reform in a way that addresses the rights
and interests of women; they must bring civil society
on board and they need to address adequately the
national call for justice, including transitional justice.

Norway is particularly concerned about laws and
decrees with far-reaching implications that recently
been adopted without a wide and inclusive consultation
process. Both the process and the content of the
adopted amnesty law give reasons for grave concerns.
Amnesty is one way of healing the wounds of the
country, but those wounds cannot be healed if there is
no accountability and if impunity prevails.

It is also important that the recent amendments of
the election law do not hamper constructive efforts to
reform the Afghan electoral institutions by ensuring
enhanced consultations across the political spectrum
and a credible and transparent process. The election
process towards September must be conducted in a way
that is seen as a step forward in comparison with the
2009 election. UNAMA should be allowed to play an
active role in this regard.

Thirdly, a process of reintegration and
reconciliation is necessary to achieving political

stability and peace in Afghanistan. In London, we
agreed to the broad principles of this process. Yet, we
see the complexities when it comes to both the design
and the implementation of a robust reconciliation
process. The upcoming advisory Peace J irga announced
by Karzai is an important step in the building
consensus to back such a reconciliation process. The
process must be shaped and led by Afghan authorities,
but only if there is buy-in to the process from
representatives of Afghan society can we avoid
national polarization and reach sustainable national
reconciliation. One cannot build a country on just
50 per cent of the population. Women - and what
women represent - must be taken into account, as
agreed upon by this Council in the resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1888 (2009). Furthermore, the involvement
of neighbouring countries cannot be neglected.

UNAMA should play a facilitating role, using its
good offices and confidence-building measures in
assisting with the advisory Peace Jirga and the larger
peace and reconciliation process. UNAMA should also
encourage closer regional cooperation economically,
socially and politically.

We welcome the extension of UNAMA's mandate
and the amendments proposed in the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2010/l27). It is important to
protect what has been UNAMA's strengths: its
legitimacy, political outreach, field presence and status
as guarantor for the integrity of the overall political
process. We need UNAMA to ensure unity among the
international partners, but we also need it to position
itself both close enough to the Government and far
enough to be able to speak out and to voice the
concerns of the Afghan society.

Norway would like to welcome the appointment
of the seasoned diplomat Staffan De Mistura as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, and look forward to cooperate with
him and his new team in Kabul. We pay tribute to the
men and women of UNAMA and will continue to
support their vital mission, especially with regard to
their budget, recruitment and security. Without certain
resources, UNAMA will not be able to implement its
mandate or meet our expectations.

