Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by conveying
Pakistan's appreciation to Egypt for arranging this
open debate today. This discussion is both timely and
relevant. It comes as we review and consider the reform
of the peace and security architecture of the United
Nations and examine ways of enhancing the efficacy
and effectiveness of tools of sustainable peace. United
Nations peacekeeping has always been the most cost-
effective tool for the maintenance of international
peace and security. As we all know, the fundamental
purpose of peacekeeping is to keep the peace, help
resolve conflicts and restore order.

Sustaining peace envisages conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacekeeping, post-conflict
peacebuilding and development as essential
components of one seamless process and as stages along
a continuum. Pakistan has always believed that and
been an advocate of that approach. It is no coincidence
that 12 of the 22 paragraphs of resolution 2086 (2013),
on multidimensional peacekeeping, adopted during
Pakistan's presidency of the Council, refer to those
concepts.

Peacekeeping is the pivot on which we build on the
dividends of preventive diplomacy and promote post-
conflict peace and nationbuilding. As one of the world's
top troop contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
over the past six decades, Pakistan can say from its
experience and the expertise it has acquired that the
realization of that objective requires mandates with
realistic tasks, the flexibility to adapt to changes on
the ground and a clear exit strategy. We need to ensure
that peacekeeping missions are effectively deployed
and that their operations are relevant to the realities
on ground, with clearly identified priorities, adequate
sequencing and, of course, well-equipped human and
material resources.

When lives are at risk - of peacekeepers as well
as those they are responsible for protecting - actual
requirements should drive peacekeeping, not narrow
cost considerations. A lack of adequate resources
results inevitably in non-implementation of the very
mandates that we fashion for our Blue Helmets. We
should be talking about enhancing capabilities, not
across-the-board cuts in peacekeeping budgets.

We believe in the full implementation of mandates,
but they require communication between those who
conceive and write mandates and those who implement
them on the ground. To achieve that we need to,
first, reinforce interaction among key stakeholders;
secondly, enhance information flow and exchange in
all directions and at all stages; and, thirdly, improve
capacities to generate accurate and objective analysis
and assessments and then channel them into the
decision-making processes. Obviously, consultation
with troop-contributing countries is essential for all
three tasks.

Effective partnership with troop contributors,
which are the Security Council's eyes and cars on
the ground, should extend from deployment and
operational aspects to a role in decision-making and
policy formulation. The Council itself must drive that
partnership. Dialogue is critical. It must take place on
a sustained and continuing basis. A one-off meeting at
the time of the renewal of a mandate does not really
serve that purpose.

There is need for a fuller interface between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities through the
early engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) as part of exit and transition strategies. The
PBC should promote coherent peacebuilding activities
along with the provision of timely, adequate and
sustained financing. Greater convergence between
the perspectives of development partners and host
countries, based primarily on the priorities of the
latter, is also essential. The objective should be
the development - and not the replacement - of
national capacities.

An ominous gap in peacebuilding strategies
is often the failure to comprehend and address the
root causes of conflicts. Eradicating poverty and
unemployment, ensuring socioeconomic development
and justice, addressing inter-State and intra-State
issues and resolving political disputes all require more
focused attention.

Finally, let me say that, if we are really serious
about making United Nations peacekeeping a
catalyst for peace and wish to empower it to respond
effectively to the conflicts of today and contribute to
the overarching goal of sustaining peace, then realities
on the ground rather than political expediency should
guide the Council's decisions. Sustaining peace
requires investing in peace. Assessing mandates is
welcome, but such assessments should be intended to
analyse the impact of missions in order to improve the
results. Saving lives, restoring order and maintaning
international peace and security should remain our
overarching objective.

