Ms. Ferreira (Angola): Allow me, at the outset,
to join my colleagues in congratulating you, Madam
President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August and wishing you
a successful and productive term. Allow me also to
commend you for holding this important and timely
open debate on such a critical issue, as well as to
thank the briefers for the very important information
they provided.

The problem of children in armed conflict is
very close to our hearts. Eliminating the inhumane
treatment of children trapped in armed conflict is of
paramount importance and something we can all agree
on, no matter our policy positions or how entrenched
our disagreements might be. Although steady progress
in reducing the number of child soldiers in the world
has been achieved through the development of a
monitoring and reporting system, an increase in the
implementation of action plans and refocusing on the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law, resulting in a safer world for children, several
challenges still exist.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/509) is a stark reminder of how the challenges
posed by the evolving nature of ongoing armed
conflict 4 through the deliberate targeting and
military use of schools, the indoctrination of children to
commit crimes, using them to carry explosive devices
and their abduction, sexual abuse, forced recruitment,
rape and deliberate maiming and killing 4 aggravate
the violence and abuse committed by extremists.
Excellent work has been done to address this matter,
with effective cooperation among the United Nations,

States and non-State actors, but parties to conflict and
the international community must do more to protect
children and young people affected by armed conflict.

As such, we must prevent conflicts from breaking
out in the first place by increasing efforts aimed at
conflict prevention; ensuring that children associated
with armed groups are reintegrated, not punished,
and provided with quality education and health-care
services; including young people in conflict resolution,
sustaining peace and development processes; and
stopping all forms ofviolence against children. We must
assist Governments listed in the annexes to the report
to adopt and implement the action plans suggested by
the Council.

On a positive note, we would like to underline the
progress made by the Children, Not Soldiers campaign
and the commitments of the Governments involved.
We also encourage the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, UNICEF and others to continue
implementing their agenda on children and their
engagement with non-State armed groups, which often
results in the surrender of child soldiers who belong
to armed groups and gives them opportunities for a
second life.

Angola remains committed to strengthening the
protection and empowerment of children affected
on the ground. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendations in his report in that regard, while
calling on the Security Council to reinforce its actions
and recognize the valuable contribution that regional
and subregional organizations and arrangements make
to ensuring the protection of children affected by armed
conflict

