Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Madam President, I
thank you for having convened this important meeting
and for presiding over it. Like earlier speakers, I wish to
convey our deepest condolences to the delegation and
the people of France in connection with the appalling
and repulsive terrorist attacks that took place in Paris
last Friday. We stand in solidarity with France in this
time of grief. In the same sentiment, our condolences
are also extended to Lebanon, Tunisia and Egypt.

Ithank Mr. O'Brien, Ms. Bangura and Ms. Zerrougui
for their respective contributions to this meeting, all of
which have underscored the desperate situation and
the need for urgent action in Syria. Alongside other
Council members, Malaysia is following the outcome
of the most recent talks in Vienna, and we note the
announced road map towards a peaceful settlement of
the conflict in Syria. My delegation stands ready to
engage and looks forward to substantive deliberations
by the Council on this matter.

Inasmuch as political will played a large part
in securing agreement in Vienna, we remain deeply
concerned by the astounding toll taken by the Syrian
conflict to date: more than 250,000 people dead, over
1 million injured, more than 7.6 million displaced and
roughly 13.5 million in need ofhumanitarian assistance,
including more than 5.6 million children. Average life
expectancy has been shortened by almost 13 years.
School attendance is at less than 50 per cent, and three
out of four Syrians now live in poverty.

The parties to the conflict remain indifferent to
the pain and suffering inflicted on the Syrian people.
Acts of impunity continue unabated. We would remind
all parties to the conflict of their obligations to adhere
to and respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

The Syrian conflict also continues to be characterized
by indiscriminate attacks and the deliberate targeting of
civilians and civilian infrastructure. The use of barrel
bombs and toxic chemicals by the parties to the conflict
is particularly abhorrent.

Malaysia remains deeply concerned by continued
reports of acts of sexual violence against women, girls
and children committed by parties to the conflict.
Women and girls not only face rape and sexual abuse;
they are also sold as sex slaves and forced into marriage
to foreign fighters. It is disgraceful that children are
stripped of their innocence and deprived of protection.

The recruitment and use of children is becoming
increasingly commonplace. Reports that children are
being used for forced labour, as sex slaves and even
as human shields are deeply disturbing. The siege-and-
starve strategy, aimed at ensuring the submission
and surrender of whole populations, adds a further
disconcerting dimension to the Syrian conflict. It is
appalling that in the twenty-first century such a method
has been employed as a strategy of war by the parties
to the conflict. The fact that even schools and hospitals
have been deliberately targeted is a reflection of the
absolute disrespect, disregard and contempt that the
parties to the conflict have for the values of humanity.

In the face of such misery and desperation, we
are heartened by the steadfast commitment of the
various United Nations agencies and partners in
providing much-needed humanitarian aid and support
to the civilian population in Syria, and we commend
their efforts. In this regard, we deeply regret the fact
that cross-line access continues to face security and
administrative obstacles. We are further concerned that
access to populations in hard-to-reach and besieged
areas remains critical. The Syrian Government must
do more to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.

On our part, my Government is currently taking
steps to honour its commitment to take in 3,000 Syrian
refugees. We call on the international community to do
as much as possible to help the Syrian people in their
time of need.

