Mr. Edrees (Egypt): (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month by wishing you every success. I also join
others in commending you on choosing this topic for
today's open debate, and I thank the briefers for their
statements, especially Ms. Virginia Gamba.

Today's briefings and the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/509) on children and armed conflict
contain horrifying statistics reflecting an increase in
grave violations committed against children. The United
Nations confirmed 24,000 such cases in 2018, while
killings have reached a record level. That concerns us
and should lead us to reconsider our response to ensure
that every one assumes responsibility in the protection
of children in armed conflict.

Children suffer twice as much owing to the
consequences of armed conflicts, for which they
bear no responsibility but nevertheless suffer the full
impact. Such suffering not only infringes upon their
right to life and physical integrity, but also affects their
mental health, thereby depriving them of their social,
cultural and educational rights. Armed conflicts have

both medium- and long-term repercussions for children
and deprive them and their countries of a future.

That bitter reality makes it incumbent upon all of
us to safeguard international peace and security. The
erosion of international peace and security and the
outbreak of armed conflicts compel us to shoulder the
responsibility vis-a-vis children and populations not
only with regard to protecting them and safeguarding
their physical and mental integrity, but also giving
them a chance to live new, dignified lives following the
resolution of a conflict.

We agree with the Secretary-General in calling
on warring parties to take the necessary measures
to strengthen the protection of children in armed
conflict. As he underscored so well, it is imperative to
cooperate with the United Nations and its specialized
agencies to that end. There is also added value in
the recommendations in the report of the Secretary-
General, in particular those calling on parties to
armed conflict to respect the principles of distinction,
proportionality and military necessity, to allow the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in conflict zones
while ensuring the protection of children and to
strengthen the child-protection capacities of States and
regional and subregional organizations.

Furthermore, we agree with the Secretary-
General's recommendation concerning the treatment
of children suspected of having been involved in
terrorist activities, namely, that it is necessary to take
a coordinated approach towards resolving it, as it is the
result of the systemic exploitation of children by terrorist
organizations. There is no one-size-fits-all solution to
resolving that issue, which requires close international
cooperation. Every State must be allowed the necessary
leeway in which to operate to resolve that problem in
line with its circumstances and national legislation.

Such facts remind us that the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians, including children, lies
with the State concerned, free from foreign interference,
under international legal instruments. We should also
not forget the importance of addressing the root causes
of conflicts, including social exclusion and poverty,
which, as I just said, is incumbent upon the States
concerned. The international community must simply
stand ready to provide assistance and nothing more.

In conclusion, Ireiterate my country's support for the
work being done to ensure the protection of children in
armed conflict. I underscore that Egypt attaches special

importance to strengthening the capacities of Africa.
In that regard, we are chairing the African Union this
year. In order to strengthen the protection of civilians
and the implementation of international humanitarian
law, we will be organizing training sessions in Egypt,
while supporting regional cooperation programmes and
hosting other relevant events.

