The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of July, I should like to
take the opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Jean-Marc de La
Sabliere, Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of June 2005. I am sure
that I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador de La
Sabliere for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cote d'Ivoire

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-Bi
(cote d'lvoire) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council has taken note with
interest of the Declaration on the implementation
of the Pretoria Agreement on the peace process in
cote d'Ivoire signed on 29 June 2005 in Pretoria
under the auspices of the African Union
Mediator, President Thabo Mbeki.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
undertaken by the African Union Mediation so
that the forthcoming elections in Cote d'Ivoire
the

are credible and held as planned, and reiterates its
full support to the African Union Mediator.

"The Security Council recalls that it has
endorsed the Pretoria Agreement signed on
6 April 2005.

"The Security Council demands that all the
signatories to this Agreement and all the Ivorian
parties concerned implement fully and without
delay all the commitments made before the
African Union Mediation and comply
scrupulously with the timetable agreed on
29 June 2005 in Pretoria.

"The Security Council affirms that it stands
ready, in close consultation with the African
Union Mediation, to implement individual
sanctions provided for in paragraphs 9 and 11 of
resolution 1572 (2004) against those who do not
comply with these commitments or constitute an
obstacle to their full implementation."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/28.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m.

