Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like first to congratulate you, Sir, on your country's
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January, and to thank your delegation for
organizing this open debate on an issue that concerns
all of us - the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

I take this opportunity to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing,
taking stock of the current state of the protection of
civilians and highlighting the challenges facing the
international community in this regard.

Finally, I thank the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
representative of Oxfam for their briefings and
especially for all the efforts of the members of their
organizations, often undertaken at the risk of their lives.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The ongoing attention and involvement of the
Council, supported not only by the entire United
Nations membership but also by non-governmental
organizations and civil society, have led to significant
normative progress the protection of civilians. As noted
in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2015/453)
on the issue, numerous resolutions and presidential
statements, the updating of aides memoire and the
establishment of mandates tailored to the needs of
women and children in situations of armed conflict
have promoted the creation of a robust legal framework.
However, it is clear that despite these advances, the fate
of civilian populations, especially women and children,
continues to deteriorate, with an ongoing increase in
the number of victims, displaced persons and refugees.
The damning figures of the past decade have never
been higher, at least since the Second World War, and
forecasts for the coming decades are hardly promising.
The past year was particularly marked by this scourge.

Morocco strongly condemns all indiscriminate
attacks affecting civilian populations, and calls on
parties to conflict to honour their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. While the protection of civilians
lies primarily with States, it is clear that in times of
conflict, the capacity of these States may be inadequate
or non-existent. In such cases, the international
community has a responsibility to support these
countries by building their capacity and providing the
necessary means to shoulder their responsibilities for
protecting populations on their soil. It is in this context
that Morocco is redoubling its efforts to cooperate with
countries in or emerging from conflict, including with
respect to security sector reform and strengthening the
rule of law.

We must also commit ourselves firmly to promoting
the implementation of and compliance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law, especially human rights law, and
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols. It is unacceptable that hospitals and schools
are targeted indiscriminately and that weapons are used
indiscriminately in densely populated zones, hitting
not only the combatants but also civilian populations.
We believe that the fight against impunity should be
at the centre of our debate. It is also unacceptable that
journalists and humanitarian workers are deliberately
targeted. International humanitarian law is too often
swept aside, despite repeated appeals by the Security
Council. Similarly, we reiterate the imperative of
respecting the principles ofthe equality, independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.

Humanitarian assistance is an important element
in the protection of civilians during armed conflict.
Bringing humanitarian assistance to those who need it
should remain a priority of the international community,
because the lives of thousands of vulnerable people are
at stake. With the unprecedented number of displaced
persons fleeing conflict, the international community
must redouble its efforts to bring the necessary
assistance to those people. That is why my delegation
believes that the World Humanitarian Summit, to
be held in Istanbul in May 2016, will be a crucial
meeting that will make it possible for the international
community to rethink humanitarian assistance and find
new ways and means to improve its response to crises
and make humanitarian assistance more effective and
efficient. Humanitarian assistance cannot be effective
without free and unimpeded access for humanitarian
organizations to people affected by conflict.

The seminar on the protection of civilians that
was organized in November 2015 by the delegations
of Uruguay and Australia made it possible for us to
develop our thinking with a view to underscoring the
importance of political solutions to conflict and to
reconciling that with the imperative of the protection of
civilians. Indeed, one of the main instruments available
to the Security Council for ensuring the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is peacekeeping operations,
an area that is rightly currently being reviewed. Morocco
fully subscribes to the recommendations of the report
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peacekeeping
Operations (see S/2015/446), especially with regard
to the chapters on troop-contributing countries.
Moroccan troops, which have been deployed for over
60 years in peacekeeping operations, have always
considered the protection of civilians to be a key part
of their mission. That aspect is duly taken into account
during the predeployment stages of training Moroccan
contingents to serve under the United Nations flag. A
specific example is the offensive undertaken around
Bria, Central African Republic, which made it possible
to restore State authority throughout the region, ensure
the protection of civilians and even allow for the return
of many displaced persons.

Troop-contributing countries have a responsibility
to protect civilians, but that responsibility is shared
with both the Security Council and the Secretariat.
In order to make it possible for troops to fulfil their
missions successfully, the Council needs to take into
account the realities on the ground and provide United
Nations forces with adequate means. The Secretariat
should also strengthen its cooperation with troop
contributors and involve them more in the planning
phases. Those elements attest to the importance of
revised and strengthened triangular cooperation,
aimed at identifying possible obstacles and at enabling
deployed troops to fulfil their mandate successfully.
Such discussions could be held in the context of informal
Security Council working groups on the protection of
civilians and working groups on peacekeeping.

The conduct of Blue Helmets responsible for
the protection of civilians should be irreproachable.
Morocco firmly supports the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy and has taken specific measures
in that area. Morocco systematically sends national
investigators to its deployed troops, so as to deal with
any situation that might arise with the greatest diligence
and firmness. Once again, improved cooperation with
the Secretariat is necessary, especially in the area of
sharing information. All of those elements should be
taken into account during the upcoming review of the
matter during the meetings of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Morocco's firm
commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which is an imperative, be it in the context of
troops committed to serve under the United Nations flag
or in the form of programmes to strengthen the capacity
of States. We hope that the ideas and proposals put forth
during this debate will be implemented concretely in
order to improve the protection of civilians on the
ground. We must pursue our collective mobilization in
order to initiate changes that are awaited by millions of
people in conflict situations around the world.

