Mr. Mbeou (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his presentation
of the biannual report on the situation in that country
(see S/2012/307).

Togo welcomes the important political progress
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the formation,
on 10 February, of a central Government, more than
16 months after the general elections held in October
2010.

My country followed with great concern the
ongoing political impasse that slowed the normal
functioning of Bosnia and Herzegovina's institutions
and led, in particular, to the slower implementation of
the national and international obligations of that
country. The compromise reached by the political
leaders of the country is proof that, with political
resolve, Bosnia and Herzegovina is able to meet the
challenges facing it. The numerous actions undertaken
by Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the adoption of
measures pertaining to the European Union integration
process, show that a new momentum is at work and
should be supported.

My country would also like to commend the
progress made by political leaders towards achieving
the five objectives and two conditions required for the
closing of the Office of the High Representative, and
the signing in March 2012 of an agreement that opens
the way to the resolution of questions concerning the
ownership of defence and State property. We hope that
the relevant authorities, at their respective levels, will
very swiftly take the appropriate measures to
implement this agreement.

Moreover, we welcome the ratification on
30 March 2012 by Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance. By this
ratification, the country is committed to carrying out
investigations to locate those who have disappeared, to
prosecute the perpetrators of the disappearances, and to
provide families of the disappeared with access to full
compensation, which represents considerable progress
in terms of combating impunity.

These major achievements should not lead us to
ignore the remaining obstacles and challenges to
building a truly functioning, multi-ethnic State. Indeed,
according to the report, the political situation between
the different communities remains tense, and the
Dayton Peace Agreement is coming up against the
desire of some leaders to strengthen the autonomy of
their entity and to move towards independence,
circumstances allowing, while others call for the
creation of a third entity with a Croat majority.

In this respect, Togo deplores nationalist rhetoric
that undermines central State institutions and the
efforts of the international community to bring peace
and stability to the country and the region as a whole.
We continue to believe that only frank and sincere
dialogue and the quest for compromise will lead to a
lasting and definitive settlement of differences. That is
why we invite all Bosnian political leaders to refrain
from all unilateral and sectarian solutions and to
combat extremism, religious hatred and violence,
which destabilize the country. By the same token, Togo
urges them to work together in order to adopt the
reforms necessary to move the country onto the path
towards greater national and regional integration. It is
only in doing so that they will be able to ensure peace
and prosperity for their citizens.

I would like to conclude by expressing my
country's full support for the efforts of the High
Representative in his mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to the civilian and military staff who
work to promote respect for the Dayton Peace
Agreement and stability in the country.

