Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We would like to thank you for convening today's
meeting, Mr. President, and to welcome Foreign
Minister Coulibaly to the Security Council. We would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
his briefing.

The new Government in Mali has been working
hard since it took office to advance the Malian peace
process and implement the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, and has made some positive
progress. The Government, the signatory armed groups
and the relevant Malian stakeholders have made major
efforts in that regard, which we welcome. Meanwhile,
however, the security situation in northern and central
Mali has got worse. There is rampant terrorist activity
both in Mali iself and in neighbouring regions,
which has a serious impact on the peace process. The
international community should support Mali in its
efforts to ensure peace and development.

First, it is important to assist the Malian parties
in implementing the Peace Agreement. China hopes
that the signatories to the Agreement will continue
to demonstrate the necessary political will, work to
implement all its provisions and engage in concerted
reconstruction and development efforts so that the
people can reap the benefit of a peace dividend.
Basing its efforts on respect for Mali's independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, the international
community should continue to support the country's
peace process and help it to enhance its own
development and governing capacity. The Malian
Government is making intensive preparations for the
forthcoming election in July. We hope that its concerted
efforts and those of the people of Mali will make it a
success. The international community should support
the people of Mali in making their own decisions. The
sanction mechanism for Mali should provide objective
support to the political process and function in strict
compliance with the Security Council's mandate.

Secondly, the international community should help
Mali improve its security capabilities. The security
challenges in northern and central Mali are becoming
increasingly complex, and at the Government's request,
the international community should continue to support
it in enhancing its security and counter-terror capacities,
so that it can gradually take on the responsibility for
maintaining the security of the entire country. The issue
of peace and security is closely tied to the situation in
the surrounding regions, so we need to take advantage
of regional cooperation to ensure an integrated
approach to dealing with the terrorist activities in
Mali and beyond. China welcomes the initiative of the
Group of Five for the Sahel in forming a Joint Force
to address security threats such as regional terrorism.
It is important that African countries seek greater
strength through unity and thereby safeguard peace
and security on their continent and in the rest of world.
China commends the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
for the preparations it has made to support the Joint
Force, and we hope that when conditions permit it will
begin providing the Joint Force with support as soon
as possible.

Thirdly, we should support MINUSMA's work.
China commends and supports MINUSMA and Special
Representative Annadif in their efforts to promote the
Malian peace process and strengthen the country's
security capacity. The Mission's mandate expires at
the end of June, and China will engage actively in the
consultations on the draft resolution for its renewal. We
hope that MINUSMA will continue to communicate
with the Malian Government and help the country with
its capacity-building and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme. The security of
MINUSMA's peacekeepers is a serious issue. The
violent attacks this year have resulted in an increase
in the number of casualties. China notes the positive
measures that the Secretariat and the Mission have
taken to improve peacekeepers' safety and security,
and we hope that MINUSMA will continue to work
to improve those areas and ensure that the necessary
supplies and resources are in place. It should also step
up its communication with troop-contributing countries
and donors in order to ensure that the Mission has all
the equipment and resources it needs to discharge its
mandate and protect itself.

There are more than 400 Chinese peacekeepers in
Mali serving in the medical, engineering and security
areas, and their work has been much praised. China
will continue to give its firm support to the cause
of fostering peace and development for the people
of Mali and to contributing to the country's peace,
stability and prosperity alongside the rest of the
international community.

