Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First I wish to welcome the Foreign Ministers of
Belgium and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as the Permanent Representative of Rwanda, who
are present at our meeting today.

China voted in favour of the resolution just
adopted in order to show our support for the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). China has been
closely following the developments in the eastern part
of that country. We have noted with pleasure that the
security situation there has been moving towards
stability recently. The Government and the Nkunda
armed group have started a dialogue in Nairobi, and
the relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda have continued to improve. We
welcome those developments. We also appreciate the
good offices and mediation efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy, as well as of the
countries and regional organizations concerned.

China has consistently advocated the use of
political means in the search for an integrated
settlement of the problem in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Recently, Ambassador Liu
Guijin, Special Representative of the Chinese
Government for African Affairs, visited Rwanda and
the Democratic Republic to persuade them to make
peace through negotiations. We feel that the parties are
all willing to seek a negotiated settlement. We
sincerely call on all parties to continue to use the
Nairobi and Goma peace processes as the basis for
engaging in dialogue in good faith in order to seek
lasting peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.

We have consistently supported the work of
MONUC, and we highly appreciate its role in
facilitating the stabilization of the situations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region. We support the continuing and important role
played by MONUC in stabilizing the situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We support
the African countries and regions as well as Mr.
Obasanjo, as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
in continuing their roles of mediation and good offices
in order to seek an early comprehensive political
settlement of the problem in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

