Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Sir, for convening
today's open debate. We also thank the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support for their joint report on charting a New
Horizon for United Nations peacekeeping. I further
thank Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra
and General Agwai for their briefings.

Since its inception 60 years ago, United Nations
peacekeeping has made a positive contribution to
maintaining world peace and security and has won the
confidence and support of Member States. Over the
past six decades, ongoing efforts have been made to
reform and adapt United Nations peacekeeping
operations to changing circumstances. Multifunctional
integrated missions have become the prevailing trend
in the development of peacekeeping operations. The
expanded scope, mandates and funding requirements of
relevant peacekeeping missions have also given rise to
new problems. United Nations peacekeeping operations
face new difficulties and challenges in the areas of
policy parity, financial support, planning and
management.

China supports wide-ranging consultations
between Member States and relevant parties in order to
reach consensus and advance peacekeeping reform. We
welcome the Views and proposals of Member States
and the Secretariat on enhancing the efficiency of
peacekeeping operations and strengthening international
cooperation in peacekeeping.

With respect to the issues addressed in the New
Horizon non-paper, I should like to make the following
five points regarding the ongoing reform of
peacekeeping operations.

First, the United Nations should focus particular
attention on formulating an integrated conflict
prevention and resolution strategy. Equal attention
should be paid to the deployment of peacekeeping
operations and the promotion of political negotiations.
With respect to potential conflict situations, the United
Nations should make greater efforts in the area of
preventive diplomacy, launch early interventions and
do its utmost to defuse tensions. Efforts must also be
made to bring the good offices of the Secretary-
General and his special envoys into full play, and to
support the peace initiatives of regional and
subregional organizations. If we reverse the trend of
favouring conflict resolution over prevention, and
engage earnestly in conflict prevention, we could make
it less necessary to deploy peacekeeping operations. In
deploying such operations, the Organization should
also focus more on promoting political dialogue and
reconciliation so that there is a peace to keep.

Secondly, peacekeeping reform requires
innovation and adherence to basic principles.
Experience has shown that the Hammarskjold principles
are important guarantees of the success of peacekeeping
operations and remain effective in practice. The
tripartite mechanism of the Sudan, the United Nations
and the African Union has played an active role in the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, clearly demonstrating the
importance of enhanced communications and new

partnerships with host countries. Peacekeeping
operations must exercise caution in the use of force and
avoid excessive emphasis on military options. Given
the ongoing divergence of views on mandating
peacekeeping operations to protect civilians, further
in-depth discussions on that issue will be necessary.

Thirdly, the Security Council should improve the
authorization, planning and management of
peacekeeping operations. There is broad consensus that
the mandates of peacekeeping operations should be
clearly defined and achievable. In considering the
deployment of such operations, the Security Council
should take into full account the political environment,
the security situation, economic and social conditions
and other relevant factors in the country concerned, as
well as the resources available to the relevant
peacekeeping operation. In that way, mandates and
clear priorities can be formulated in the light of
specific conditions. The Security Council should also
closely monitor the implementation of mandates and,
in due time, develop exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations. Close interaction between the Security
Council and the Secretariat is of critical importance
during the deployment or extension of peacekeeping
operations.

Fourthly, Member States are duty-bound to
endow peacekeeping operations with adequate
resources, while operations should use their resources
more efficiently. China believes that Member States
should pay their assessed contributions in full and on
time so as to ensure the smooth functioning of
peacekeeping operations. In order to meet the
ever-growing demand for peacekeeping, serious
consideration must be given to the idea of exploring
innovative financing channels. We support the
Secretariat's ongoing effort to improve its logistics
support system, optimize the operational procedures of
peacekeeping operations, and expedite their deployment.
At present, most troop contributors are developing
countries. We call on more countries to contribute
troops to peacekeeping operations.

Fifthly, the United Nations should continue to
attach great importance to enhancing cooperation with
regional organizations in the field of peacekeeping
activities. Africa's special needs especially deserve our
attention. Currently, about 75 per cent of United
Nations peacekeeping personnel are deployed in
Africa, and about 70 per cent of peacekeeping
assessments are spent there.

The African Union is playing an increasingly
important role in preventing and resolving conflicts on
the continent. The United Nations should continue to
strengthen its peacekeeping partnership with the
African Union and to help Africa improve its
peacekeeping capacity-building. China looks forward
to receiving the Secretary-General's report on practical
ways to effectively support the African Union.

