Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation):
I am addressing the Council on behalf of the members
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP): Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, Timor-
Leste and my own country, Angola, which is the
current President of the Community.

At the outset, I would like to welcome the
participation in this meeting of His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-
Leste, Mr. Da Costa, and of Her Excellency the Vice-
Minister for Political Affairs of the Ministry of
External Relations of Brazil, Mrs. Vera Crivano
Machado. We are pleased to participate in this
important meeting of the Security Council, which
includes Brazil and Portugal as non-permanent
members, dedicated to considering the situation in
Timor-Leste. We also take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/641) on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT).

It is with great pleasure that I take the floor today,
in particular because we are discussing the situation in
the most recent member of our Community, Timor-
Leste. The situation in Timor-Leste is one scenario in
which cooperation within the CPLP has proved to be
important to all members of the Community concerned.
We sincerely hope that the result of our joint efforts
will benefit the country.

With the support of Member States, Timor-Leste
and the Executive Secretariat of the CPLP have worked
to establish permanent representation of the CPLP in
Dili. We welcome the commitment of the Timorese
authorities to this process, as demonstrated by the
recent allocation of space for a representative and the
funds necessary for the construction of the mission. We
hope that these developments will allow for the early
implementation of the CPLP strategic plan in the
country, especially with respect to the promotion and
dissemination of the Portuguese language as a vehicle
of communication in every day work and business and
towards institutional capacity-building in the areas of
justice and public administration.

It is with particular satisfaction that I recall the
importance of the eighth summit of CPLP Heads of
State and Government, held in Luanda in 23 July 2010,
where it was decided to reshape the future mandate of
the CPLP permanent representation in Dili to feature a
strong cultural component in favour of the use of
Portuguese in Timor-Leste, in addition to the political
component set forth in its original mandate. Timor-
Leste's commitment to forging a strong relationship
with the CPLP has also been demonstrated in its
performance as the current President of the CPLP
Parliamentary Assembly, and in the good results
achieved at its third session, held in Dili in late
September.

The States members of the CPLP remain
committed to continuing the excellent cooperation with
Timor-Leste with a view to strengthening its stability,
consolidating its institutions and growing its economy.
This process has already contributed to the growing
affirmation of the country at the regional level, with
benefits that support the CPLP's deepening
involvement in South-East Asia and the Pacific.
Coming possibly as early as 2014, the presidency of
the CPLP will be another interesting challenge for
Timor-Leste when it takes the helm of our Community
for the first time.

In this context, the recent acceptance by the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations of Timor-
Leste's application for membership in that regional
organization, together with the appointment of a
working group to consider the accession process, is a
further demonstration Timor-Leste's progress in recent
years.

I also welcome Timor-Leste's first steps as a
country that contributes to peace and security in the
world by the integration of Falintil-Forcas de Defesa
de Timor-Leste soldiers (F-FDTL) into the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau, and the dispatch of a military observer in South
Sudan.

In addition, it is clear that by its example Timor-
Leste has contributed to the creation of a more peaceful
and secure world. I refer to the lessons learned and
shared by Timor-Leste in the peaceful demobilization
of veterans of the liberation struggle, in the recruitment
of new soldiers, and in the new legislative framework
for the integration of the F-FDTL in the
professionalization of the country's defence forces,
which should make all those who serve the people and
democracy of Timor-Leste proud.

Timor-Leste has consistently improved its
position in the human development index, as shown by
the latest United Nations Development Programme
report. In addition, the recently adopted National
Strategic Development Plan will certainly further boost
the country's strong economic growth despite the
international crisis, help to modernize the country and
combat poverty.

The year 2012 will be of great importance for the
consolidation of Timorese democracy. The Community
I represent today has complete trust in the maturity of
the people and leaders of Timor-Leste as the country
takes its next political steps. We are certain that the
coming presidential and legislative elections will take
place in an atmosphere of peace and security, reflecting
the positive developments in the country in recent
years.

The CPLP maintains its solidarity with Timor-
Leste and has confidence in the people of that country
to maintain the peace and stability, which are necessary
to the economic and social development that will help
Timor-Leste to contribute to increased stability and
security in the region.

