Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): At the
beginning of2014, history takes us back to the beautiful
summer of 1914 when, in just a few days, the world
toppled into the horror of a seemingly never-ending
war. Out of the 39 million people in France, 1.4 million
would lose their lives in that war, without counting
the 800,000 handicapped and 4 million injured, or
forgetting the 40 thousand square kilometres of our
national territory that were devastated.

On 11 November 1918, observers noted that joy
was more contained in Paris than in London, despite
Alsace-Lorraine having been restored to France.
Indeed, the pride of victory and the relief brought by
the end of fighting were mixed with the sorrow caused
by the carnage that had spared not even a single French
family. Between the wars, France was a country of
veiled widows, war-orphans and walking wounded.
The monuments to the dead in even the smallest of our
villages still attest to that.

It is no surprise, then, that France later hesitated
to plunge into another slaughter. Before travelling to
Munich in 1938, the French President gathered his
thoughts in the cemetery of Verdun, where he had
fought. The cemetery remains overwhelming in a
landscape that is still gloomy and moon-like almost 100
years later. "Never again", intone the endless rows of
graves. In May-June 1940, at a time when the United
Kingdom and France stood proudly against Nazism,
another invasion killed 90,000 French soldiers in six
weeks. Misfortune and occupation followed, with half
a million dead.
And yet, my country, exhausted by its trials and
tribulations and invaded three times in 70 years,
decided not to prepare yet another round of the never-
ending cycle of confrontation but to place reconciliation
before revenge. Charles de Gaulle, wounded and taken
prisoner in the First World War, and saviour of the
nation in the Second, attended mass with Chancellor
Konrad Adenauer in Rheims, where our kings were
crowned in the cathedral whose destruction in 1914
symbolized the barbarity of war. It was at Verdun,
the most bloody battle in history, where over 700,000
French and German soldiers died, that President
Mitterand and Chancellor Kohl held hands before the
monument to the dead.

Germany and France have achieved what no one
could have hoped for even believed back in 1918 or
1945. They reconciled. The two peoples no longer
consider themselves to be hereditary enemies and no
longer fear or hate one another. It was a long road for
both sides; the memories were deep-rooted and bitter.
Prejudice was strong. It took the genius of the few, the
will and courage of the many, imagination and time.
It took imagination to create common institutions in
which the young people of both countries learned to
know each other and their parents learned to cooperate,
and time for new generations that were not damaged
by war to emerge. Today, the Germans and the French
have written common history books in which, together,
they spell out a shared story despite a history that so
often brought them to blows. History is not destiny. The
Germans and the French have proved that.

But there is history as tragedy that envelops peoples,
and there is the more modest history narrated by men
since the days of Herodotus and Thucydides. That
history reflects the passions, prejudice and ignorance
of its writers and readers, and, with the advent of
compulsory education in the nineteenth century,
became an instrument for forging national identities
that defined themselves exclusively by opposition
to one's neighbours. It is about this history that the
Jordanian presidency has asked us to reflect.

No diplomat would deny that this history is
omnipresent in our work. With every conflict, we look
to history to understand it, as if only the past can explain
human fury - as if each of us has inherited hatreds and
fears, the new incarnations of original sins, that make
us future Cains and Abels from our very birth. If that
were indeed the case, then that history would need to
be exorcised. Like the French and Germany teachers,
we would need to excise the history books of the hatred
and fear they contain. Like the young people of France
and Germany, we would need to visit one another on
vacation.

What should we make of this inevitability of history
that hangs eternally above us? Let us consider France in
the nineteenth century. Russia, the symbol of Eastern
despotism and oppressor of Poland, in 1891 became, at
the drop of a hat, the closest of our allies and friends.
Similarly, in 1890 the hereditary enemy of France was
not Germany but Great Britain, with which we were
repeatedly on the verge of war in those years. If we
allied ourselves with Russia, it was probably more in
opposition to Great Britain than to Germany. In 1904,
the conclusion of the Entente Cordiale buried, in a matter
of mere months, a hatred and rivalry that observers of
the time would have deemed to be irreconcilable.

Similar examples are manifold, and not only in
France. So-called historical conflicts are not perforce
eternal. After all, Iran was long Israel's ally. In other
words, it is not history that causes or fuels conflicts.
It is conflicts that fashion history in their own image.
Two countries that clash or come together do so for
reasons of interest, and not because of some sort of
eternal destiny. They need to look to the past to provide
justification for their hostility or friendship, and they
find it without great trouble because history is very
accommodating.

History is accommodating because its origins are
dubious. It sees itself as a science, and has increasingly
become so, but it is written by men. Men have a
nationality; they have religion and passions. They are
forced to base their versions of history on documents
that may be too few or too many, to formulate hypotheses
and to make choices. History is human and therefore
fallible. Thank God, we are no longer in an age when
French Hellenists chose Athens and Germans chose
Macedonia as reflections of their views of themselves
and of their countries. Thank God, today's historians
are distancing themselves from such biases.

But the average citizen is less subtle, the journalist
less scrupulous and the politician less knowledgeable
than the historian. It is all too easy for them to find
justification in the folly of their ancestors for today's
follies. They will always find it easy to do so. Their
neighbours will be, successively, the best of allies or the
worst of enemies, since the past justifies everything.
"History can be raped so long as the resulting children
are good-looking", Otto von Bismarck is supposed to
have said, and he knew what he was talking about.
Man continues to rape history, but sires nothing but
monsters in his own image. The origin of conflict is
to be found not in history but in men. History is but an
instrument; to forget that is to confuse the weapon with
the assassin.

What are we to do with this history? Shall we imitate
the Germans and French and extirpate our prejudices
without mercy? Is that possible, or even desirable?
Certainly, the question may seem paradoxical, but it
remains true that the Franco-German experience is
too specific in nature to serve as an example to others.
On the one hand, one of the two partners accepted its
primary responsibility as part of a brave exercise in
soul-searching that far transcended the context of its
relations with its neighbours; on the other, it required
a common threat to compel them to set aside their
suicidal quarrels.

If we set aside such exceptional conditions, we will
see that in seeking to neutralize history we come up
against the instinctive refusal of the average citizen to
believe that the world's trials and tribulations reflect
anything but a faceless inevitability. Man needs a
name for his misfortunes. Man needs to feel that he is
on the side ofjustice and reason. He needs a meaning
for the sacrifices he and his fellows make. History
is therefore necessary, indeed indispensable to him
because of its certainties, its explanations and above
all its condemnations. We will never deprive people of
that need; worse yet, in seeking to do so we may revive
disputes that had almost been forgotten and make such
fading quarrels topical once more as we come up against
people's refusal to renounce their own convictions.
Indeed, a history without guilty parties would force
them to admit either to their own share of responsibility
for the tragedy, or to their own powerlessness to prevent
it. In either case, they will feel that it strips them of
their dignity.

No, there is only one solution, and it is not reason.
It is time. "Time solves all", said the poet. Yes, time
flows slowly, but even in Europe, with its long memory
and many follies, we have forgotten Joan of Are and
Waterloo, and are currently forgetting the Kaiser. We
will forget our other misfortunes.

I should like, therefore, to conclude with a paradox.
France - a country that in the past century endured a
relentlessly tragic history that threatened to overwhelm
it and yet was able to transcend the resulting hatred and
fear - advises that history be left to its proper place
in the debates of historians, so long as they are free to
say what they wish and have free access to the archives
they need. States should not meddle in history. That is
neither their mission nor their remit.

However, it is not forbidden to demand that they
show a minimum of respect for the feelings of others
and for restraint in self-expression that is mindful of
the passions that threaten to flare up at any time. In
a word, they must exercise the prudence necessary to
ensure that history does not seek vengeance for what
humankind has inflicted upon it. In hearing some
of the statements made here today and considering
various approaches, such a call does not seem useless.
Franco-German reconciliation was certainly a unique
event, but it could serve as inspiration for resolving
other disputes.

I cannot conclude without turning again to the
centenary of the outbreak of the First World War - a
disaster that resulted in the countless ills of the twentieth
century. No one wanted the war, yet no one knew how to
avoid it. Let that impotence reminds us that we still live
on the brink. There may be no longer be any archdukes,
but we still have human folly. That is what we must be
wary of - what we must exorcise - knowing that it
lurks always, whether at home or abroad. Peace is never
a given, as the cemeteries of Verdun serve to remind us.

