Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and
High Commissioner for Human Rights Al Hussein for
their briefings.

In recent years, thanks to the joint efforts of the
Government and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the situation there has remained stable overall. The
economy is growing and political process and the rule
of law are making headway. Bosnia and Herzegovina
is an important country of the Balkans. The interests
of the region and the international community at large
are served by the maintenance of peace, stability and
development and the achievement of harmonious
coexistence among all ethnic groups there.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Dayton Peace Accord. The international community
should seize this opportunity to promote continued
progress in the efforts of the country's ethnic groups in
nation-building, the full implementation of the Dayton
Accord, and the achievement of greater progress in all
fields.

The conflict that occurred in the former Yugoslavia
two decades ago is a dark page in history. China
expresses its condolences for the deaths of innocent
civilians in Srebrenica and elsewhere. The international
community should reflect deeply on history so as
to prevent the reoccurrence of such a tragedy. In
addressing issues related to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the international community, including the Council,
should bear in mind the need to maintain peace and
stability in the country and the region, and promote
dialogue and reconciliation among all the ethnic groups
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and among the countries of
the region so as to achieve harmonious coexistence.
That should be the consensus of the Council.

China notes that the draft resolution introduced
by some countries on the commemoration of the
Srebrenica event has given rise to controversy within
Bosnia and the countries of the region, and that some
Council members have strong reservations on the draft.
In such circumstances, forcing a vote on a contentious
draft resolution goes against the spirit of promoting
reconciliation within Bosnia and Herzegovina and
among regional countries, and undermines unity
among the Council members. China regrets that, and
was therefore compelled to abstain in the voting on the
draft resolution.

China has always respected the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We believe that the country has the
right to choose its own path of development and its own
foreign policy. The international community should
respect and support the choices of the Government
and people of the country concerning their nationl
development; adopt a balanced and cautious approach
to the question of Bosnia and Herzegovina; fully
respect the leadership, ownership and initiatives of the
people of the country; facilitate unity and harmonious
development among all ethnic groups of the country;
and promote the sustainable economic and social
development and long-term security and stability
of the country. China stands ready to work with the
international community to make a due contribution to
the lasting peace, stability and development of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

