Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by thanking
the Russian presidency for organizing this debate, and
Under-Secretary General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
briefing this morning.

Over the decades, peacekeeping has become the
United Nations flagship enterprise and one of its pivotal
tools to manage complex conflicts that pose a threat to
international peace and security. Because of their hard
work, dedication and sacrifice, the Blue Helmets are
now acknowledged and respected all over the world as
an indispensable instrument of the United Nations.

We have seen an increasing focus on improving the
performance ofpeacekeeping over the past year, through
the normative framework and in terms of concepts
such as agility and protection through projection,
which are heavily reliant on additional expectations
from troop-contributing countries (TCCs). It is, after
all, the TCCs that are expected to provide equipment,
impart adequate training and ready the troops with the
appropriate mindsets.

Pakistan has been a consistent and reliable TCC
since 1960. We have contributed over 200,000 troops
to 46 missions so far, and we continue to be in the
field. Additionally, we are also host to one of the oldest
peacekeeping missions, the United Nations Military
Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP),
which monitors the situation on either side of the
Line of Control in the disputed territory of Jammu
and Kashmir.

UNMOGIP's role and importance have increased
dramatically, exponentially even, since India's illegal
de facto annexation of occupied Jammu and Kashmir
on 5 August, in flagrant violation of multiple Security
Council resolutions. UNMOGIP's efficacy has become
more consequential due to mounting ceasefire violations
by Indian forces, which necessitates regular and formal
reporting to the Security Council in this Chamber.

We appreciate the role UNMOGIP plays in
maintaining regional stability. We also welcome the
update on UNMOGIP provided by the Department of
Peace Operations to the Security Council in its meeting
on Jammu and Kashmir on 16 August. It is important
that the Council continue to closely monitor the
situation and also start exploring options to strengthen
UNMOGIP and ensure that India also allows it the
requisite freedom of access and movement in order for
it to fulfil its mandate.

As a major TCC, we fully understand the rationale
behind generating critical capabilities, increasing
female participation and, of course, improving
training. Pakistan has met United Nations targets on
the participation of women and also recently deployed
a female engagement team in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We are also deploying critical enablers,
including air assets to a number of peacekeeping
missions, and participating in train-the-trainer
programmes. Allow me to make six key points here.

First, even the best training and equipment
cannot be expected to deliver in the face of unrealistic
expectations. We could have the best-trained force and
critical assets on ground but not be able to optimally
utilize them, either due to caveats or mechanisms
involved in their deployment. It is therefore imperative
that all assets be available for utilization as the
on-the-ground situation warrants.

Secondly, performance assessments must start with
scrutinizing mandates and the adequacy of resources
actually available to TCCs. The Secretariat obviously
bears the responsibility of providing a pragmatic and
realistic analysis of the situation, in terms of political
environment, resource gaps and possible exit strategies.
That information then needs to be reflected by the
Council in its mandates.

Thirdly, delays in deployment must be removed to
ensure that TCCs do not become the victims of double
jeopardy. Committed assets cannot be deployed for
national demands and delays mean they are not even
being reimbursed.

Fourthly, peacekeeping is a shared responsibility.
As we are all committed to the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration, we must fulfil our respective obligations
and roles.

Fifthly, rather than focus just on cutting costs and
troop numbers, operations must dictate logistics and
not the other way around.

Sixthly, peacekeeping missions, especially those
with multidimensional mandates, are on the ground
to facilitate peacebuilding at all stages of conflict and
assist in achieving sustainable peace. Peacekeepers
cannot therefore be there to negotiate political solutions
or enforce peace.

In conclusion, we look forward to working with all
stakeholders for our common objective of improving
peacekeeping outcomes. The burden of responsibility
should, however, be shared equitably to achieve the
results we all want.

