Mr. Starcevic' (Serbia): At the outset, I would like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to thank
him for his report to the Council (S/2013/263, annex).

My country has stable relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and fully respects the Dayton Peace
Agreement as the basis for the stability of that country
and the Western Balkans region. We are committed
to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and believe that its future should
be decided by its people and political leaders without
outside interference. To that end, we shall support
any agreement accepted by the two entities and three
constitutive peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Serbia considers Bosnia and Herzegovina to be one
of its closest partners and has a very strong interest
in promoting mutual relations to the highest possible
level. We are committed to developing those relations
on the basis of good-neighbourliness and shall work on
their promotion at the central level, as well as on the
expansion and intensification of cooperation with the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the further
deepening and enrichment of special relations with the
Republic Srpska. Since new Governments were formed
in our two countries in 2012, cooperation between
us, both bilaterally and in regional organizations, has
increased considerably, with concrete results that have
made this recent period one of the most dynamic in our
history of cooperation.

Serbia is a staunch advocate of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's integration into Europe and of
strengthening our mutual cooperation in that process,
particularly with respect to exchanging experiences,
administrative capacity-building and concrete
agreements on joint approaches and ways to use the
available European Union funds.

We note that the High Representative devotes a
significant segment of his report to a discussion of the
status and functioning of institutions in the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska.
We hope that the internal obstacles will be overcome
and an internal agreement conducive to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's continued European integration reached
as soon as possible. Serbia is ready to address all
outstanding issues with Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
are now significantly fewer, in good faith and in our
mutual interests. We particularly welcome the united
position on the importance of having direct contact and
exchanges of views without outside mediation.

Serbia is committed to the stability and overall
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina and, for its
part, has taken a number of important steps towards
regional reconciliation. In March 2010, our National
Assembly adopted a declaration on Srebrenica, and
in an interview with Bosnian television in April,
President Nikolie apologized for all crimes committed
in Serbia's name and announced that he would be
visiting Srebrenica to pay his respects to the victims.
In that regard, Serbia firmly believes that, in the
process of genuine reconciliation, all the perpetrators
of crimes must be punished, regardless of which ethnic
community they belong to.

We consider it particularly important that the
process of refugee returns be completed and that the
regional programme for dealing with the housing
problems of the region's most vulnerable refugees
be implemented more efficiently, without red tape or
additional requests.

My country views intensive regional cooperation
and apolitically and economically stable region in South-
East Europe as a basic precondition for its sustainable
development. We are committed to strengthening
regional cooperation and welcome the successful
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina that has been
achieved through the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the Regional Cooperation Council, the Central
European Free Trade Agreement - of which Bosnia
and Herzegovina is currently Chair-in-Office - the
Central European Initiative, the Adriatic and Ionian
Initiative and other forums.

