Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): On
behalf of Canada, I wish to commend the appointment
of Mr. Hans Haekkerup as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Kosovo. Mr. Kouchner has
established a solid basis for the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We have no doubt that Mr. Haekkerup will
make excellent use of this very important legacy and
will continue to lead Kosovo towards greater
democracy, security and prosperity.

(spoke in English)

We also thank Mr. Annabi for his traditional good
briefing on this issue and on others. We welcome the
presence of Foreign Minister Svilanovic of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and have taken careful note of
the points he made to us in his statement.

S/PVAZA')

 

With respect to the situation in the Presevo
Valley, Canada remains deeply concerned by the
potentially destabilizing impact of violence by a
marginal group of armed extremists. We fully support
the presidential statement to be issued today on this
subject. We also support the efforts made to date by the
international community to reduce tensions, for
example through the more stringent control by the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) of the administrative boundary
between Kosovo and Serbia, including the efforts made
to block the transit of recruits, supplies and weapons
into the Presevo Valley. We also condemn the recent
attack on the KFOR joint patrol and, more generally,
all violence in the area. We hope KFOR's resolve will
help to reduce that violence.

The ongoing political dialogue between UNMIK
and Yugoslav and Serbian authorities is crucial, both
for the issues involved in the Presevo Valley and for
other issues affecting Kosovo, such as the problem of
detained Kosovar Albanians in Serbian jails. Canada
appreciates the work done by international
organizations, particularly the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in the
Presevo Valley, which has assisted the return of
refugees to the region. The presence of international
observers has had an important stabilizing effect.

We also applaud the moderate reaction of the
Yugoslav and Serbian Governments to the acts of
violence in southern Serbia. Yugoslav army and
Serbian police units have respected the terms of the
Military-Technical Agreement and avoided any
escalation of violence. We encourage Yugoslavia to
continue its cooperation with the international
community and urge the Kosovar Albanian leadership
to do its part to prevent the support of armed groups.

Once the 23 December elections in Serbia are
completed, the international community should
examine the options for greater cooperation for
security in the Presevo Valley. With the constructive
engagement of a democratic Government in Belgrade,
of moderate Albanian leaders and of the international
community, we can all at last look forward with some
optimism to the future.

