Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The Senegalese
delegation would like to begin, Mr. President, by
associating itself with the condolences you expressed,
Sir, in connection with the victims of the terrorist
attack that befell the American people, as well as the
Argentine and Belgian people.

On the occasion of this first public meeting of the
month, my delegation would like to congratulate the
Italian delegation on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council, as well as to commend you,
Under-Secretary Amendola, for personally presiding
today. I also commend the French delegation for its
outstanding conduct of our work during the month
of October.

My delegation welcomes the initiative of the Italian
presidency of devoting this meeting to the critical
problem of refugees and internally displaced persons,
particularly in situations of conflict - an issue that
requires the urgent, decisive and coordinated action of
the international community for a lasting settlement.

Additionally, I would like to thank the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo
Grandi, for his comprehensive briefing on the situation
of refugees worldwide, which shed light on our
discussions, by forging a clear link and indicating
the desired complementarity between the role of the
High Commissioner and that of the Security Council.
That is why the Senegalese delegation echoes the call
made by the initial speakers to increasing the dialogue
between them.

The unacceptably high number of 65.6 million
uprooted people in the world in 2016 is of particular
concern, especially since almost all ofthose cases are due
to conflict. The Council has the primary responsibility to
resolve this situation ifit cannot prevent it. Considering

that every minute 20 people - primarily women and
children - are internally displaced or become refugees,
how many thousands of lives, especially of women and
children, will plunge into uncertainty by the time this
morning's briefing ends?

That is why, in our view, at a time when humankind
has more resources and capacities than ever before for
every individual to live in dignity, it is regrettable
that the international community is still searching for
solutions and financing to resolve primarily man-made
crises that could have been avoided. That is why Senegal
keeps affirming that in situations of conflict, it is the
responsibility of all parties to scrupulously respect
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law by providing protection and assistance
to civilians first. The existing normative framework
obligates the parties to a conflict and other stakeholders
not to displace civilian populations and to take measures
to prevent and manage possible movements.

And when national Governments cannot or will
not assume responsibility for protecting internally
displaced persons and refugees, international actors
must act, using a two-pronged approach of encouraging
States and other entities to respect their obligation to
protect those populations under international law while,
at the same time, supporting the development of local
and national capacities to fulfil those responsibilities.

My delegation believes that the Security Council
can, and must, make better use of all the means at
its disposal to help the parties involved to assume
their obligations to refugees and internally displaced
persons. For example, the Council's aide-memoire for
the consideration of issues pertaining to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict suggests that members
of the Council adopt certain initiatives with regard to
forced displacement.

Similarly, international action must be strengthened
to better support those populations and their host
countries and communities. Indeed, the burden is
increasingly heavy for host and transit countries,
which, for the most part, are developing or low-
income countries.

I would also like to stress the importance

of partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, if we are to improve our care as it
relates to reception, integration, provision of basic
services, as well as management of statelessness. On
that point, I would like to highlight one of the firm
recommendations of the Ministerial Conference on
Statelessness in West Africa, held in February 2015. It
suggests that nationality that is determined at the time
of the refugees' arrival is a valid presumption that can
be challenged only by the State of origin on the basis of
hard evidence that the State itselfwould need to furnish.
The 10 million stateless persons reported by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in 2016 attest to the vulnerability of refugees to losing
their identity, especially when their exile is protracted
and the administration of their country of origin is
hobbled by serious dysfunction.

Addressing the problem of refugees and displaced
persons also requires strong regional partnerships.
In that regard, my delegation would like to recall
the contribution of Africa in managing that
phenomenon - particularly as evidenced by the
adoption of the African Union Convention Governing
the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa
and the African Union Convention for the Protection
and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in
Africa. We must note that the African continent
itself hosts 30 per cent of the 65 million refugees and
displaced persons.

To ensure better protection for internally displaced
persons and refugees and, above all, in order to mitigate
that phenomenon as much as possible, Senegal would
like to renew its call for better conflict prevention
based on reliable and rigorous warning systems,
as well as on the need for open cooperation with all
the relevant stakeholders, including regional and
subregional organizations.

It is in this spirit that, in referring to the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, we Wish
to reaffirm Senegal's commitment to achieving the
goals set by the Comprehensive Refugee Response
Framework. Accordingly, we call on the international
community to redouble efforts to ensure the adoption
of the global compact on refugees in 2018, as it is clear
that conflict resolution and prevention requires genuine
political will ifwe are to bring about a lasting settlement
to the problem of refugees and internally displaced
persons, including voluntary return in conditions of
safety, dignity and respect for their rights.

Bearing in mind the importance of the post-conflict
phase in the resurgence of crises, it seems appropriate
to take into account the systematic promotion and
protection of the human rights of refugees and
internally displaced persons in efforts to consolidate
and sustain peace.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of a comprehensive approach that
duly takes into account the political, economic,
social, environmental and legal dimensions of the
protection of civilians and stresses a preventive and
proactive approach.

In addition to bolstering efforts to find political
solutions to conflicts, it is also necessary to support
countries in conflict in their implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals, especially those
linked to the problem of forced displacement, as well
as to foster a culture of justice and peace by boosting
women's participation in the resolution of conflicts and
promoting peaceful and prosperous societies.

