Ms. Motsumi (Botswana): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to reiterate my delegation's sincere congratulations
to you and your country, Peru, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of April. I wish also to express my delegation's
appreciation to you for having convened this quarterly
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, a matter to which
my delegation attaches great importance.

I further wish to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his invaluable input on
the subject.

My delegation aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

It is a fact that the Council has for 70 years now
had on its agenda the situation in the Middle East, with
particular reference to the question of Palestine. While
we regret this reality, Botswana stands firm and will
not tire of expressing its position on this matter as long
as a durable solution has not been achieved.

We continue to be encouraged by the unrelenting
pressure being brought to bear by the international
community for the resumption of the intra-Palestine
peace talks. We accordingly call for the intensification
of efforts to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East that is jointly facilitated by
the United Nations, the Middle East Quartet, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Madrid terms of reference, as
well as the relevant United Nations resolutions.

While we remain optimistic, we are at the same
time deeply concerned about the growing tension
between the Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. To this end, we deplore unilateral actions,
as they lack legitimacy and also have the potential to
undermine prospects for peace.

Against the backdrop of challenges relating to
the achievement of sustainable peace in the disputed
territories, we condemn any activities that undermine
international efforts to achieve a lasting solution,
including increasing illegal settlements; violence;
and the denial of the rights of peaceful protesters. We
also deplore the lack of progress on negotiations on
final-status issues. In this regard, Botswana supports
the plan proposed by President Mahmoud Abbas, which
he presented to the Council in February this year (see S/PV.8183). The plan sought to address problems that
have consistently undermined efforts to bring about
peace in Palestine.

We encourage the parties to respect all relevant
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), which is clear in its call for parties to refrain
from inflammatory rhetoric or acts of provocation or
incitement. It urges them to act in accordance with
international law, including humanitarian law, in the
interests of promoting peace and security.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
my delegation's long-standing position on the question
of Palestine. We continue to believe that there is no
alternative to the two-State solution. We therefore
cannot overemphasize our continued support of a
negotiated solution that embraces the coexistence of
Israel and Palestine, living peacefully side by side as
two sovereign States.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Botswana's
solidarity with the Palestinian people and my country's
unwavering support for their just cause. We reiterate
our call for the strengthening of the coordination
of international efforts to promote a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the situation in
the Middle East, in particular the question of Palestine.
We also lend our full support to the continued
diplomatic efforts of the Security Council and the good
offices of the Secretary-General. We thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and all
other agencies, including the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
for their commitment to the peace process, as well as
for their relentless efforts aimed at finding a sustainable
solution to the political, security and humanitarian
situation in the region.

