Mr. Mekel (Israel): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Madame, and the Council, for the
important steps that you have taken, together with the
Monitoring Group, in assisting and monitoring State
implementation of Security Council resolution 1267
(1999) and subsequent relevant resolutions. In taking
that decisive action to counter the terrorist capacity of
the Taliban and Al Qaeda, you have made a significant
contribution to the efforts of the global community in
combating the pervasive threat of terror and to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

As we are all aware, the activities of the Taliban
and Al Qaeda are not confined to Afghanistan. As our
own report to the Council notes, there have been
several foiled attempts by Al Qaeda to establish a
military infrastructure in our region and to recruit
Palestinian terrorist operatives. In addition, there have
been attempts by Al Qaeda operatives carrying foreign
passports to penetrate Israel in order to gather
intelligence and perpetrate terrorist attacks. In the wake
of these attempts, Israel has taken all necessary
measures to implement the required sanctions and to
prevent future actions by that and other terrorist
organizations.

No country can prevent terrorism in isolation.
Success in bringing down the networks of terrorism
will require a sustained international effort, along with
increased international cooperation, information-
sharing and coordination. Only our common efforts
will pay dividends in the face of this threat.

The weakest link in our fight against terrorism are
those regimes which are able but unwilling to join this
campaign. It takes only one non-compliant State to
provide safe harbour for Al Qaeda, and to enable it to
regroup, plan and perpetrate deadly attacks against
civilians. Given this reality, it is troubling that so many
States have failed to submit their implementation
reports to the Council. Moreover, it is noted in the
report of the Monitoring Group that minimal effort has
been engaged by States in locating and freezing
financial assets and economic resources.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) is an important component in the fight
against the terrorist activities of the Al Qaeda
organization. But the value of the Committee is not
limited to that fight alone. The Committee also
demonstrates ways in which the Council can actively
and aggressively target specific terrorist organizations,
beyond the scope of Al Qaeda, as part of the Council's
broader counter-terrorist agenda in accordance with
resolution 1373 (2001). The terrorist threat will not
remain static, and new threats will emerge. But it is
crucial for States to have an operational model at their
disposal similar to that of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) as part of the fight
against terrorism.

Since our most recent discussion on this issue,
there have been marked successes in the fight against
the Al Qaeda network and in the efforts to find and
detain key Al Qaeda leaders. But as recent attacks have
demonstrated, Islamic extremist elements are still
willing and able to strike at targets, inflicting heavy
civilian casualties. The fight against terrorism is far
from over. Israel would like to take this opportunity to
reaffirm its support for the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and to
assure it of our full cooperation.

The Committee is not about grabbing headlines.
It is about the nuts and bolts of fighting terrorism. It is
about staying the course and addressing the
multifaceted elements that make up the terrorist
infrastructure. While it is but one component of our
broader confrontation with the terror weapon, it serves
as an important example of international resolve.
Members of the international community should not
only cooperate with the Committee, but draw
inspiration from its methodical and sustained approach
to the fight against terrorism.

