Each of today's speakers has reminded us, in their outstanding statements, of the need to continue to challenge the status quo. Indeed, too few women participate meaningfully in peace processes, and women and girls continue to be the primary victims of the consequences of conflicts around the world. For a country like mine, in a region plagued by multiple crises, the women and peace and security agenda is not just a concept; it is fundamental to maintaining peace and preventing conflict. Twenty years have passed since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and, although progress has been made, there is still a long way to go. Women remain largely underrepresented in decision-making. My country, the Niger, is working to change those trends. Last October, the Niger increased the quota of women in elected positions from 15 per cent to 25 per cent and appointments to high-level positions within the State from 25 per cent to 30 per cent. Here in the Security Council, we, too, must do more. Consultations with civil- society organizations are important and must be followed up appropriately. Five years after the peace and security reviews in 2015, only half of the recommendations made to the United Nations on the women and peace and security agenda have progressed. It is clear that there is a need for more systematic follow-up and more effective implementation of those recommendations. The Niger remains determined to support women peacebuilders, whose role we consider essential in our work. That is why during our presidency last month we invited several members of civil society, including four young women, to make presentations to the Council. The gap between our ambition, our commitments and reality cannot be bridged if we do not adequately support the vital work of women peacebuilders. Women's organizations remain underfunded. It is deeply unfortunate that only 0.2 per cent of total bilateral aid for interventions in vulnerable and conflict areas has gone directly to women's organizations. We all agree that there is a need to allocate more funds to women's organizations working in peacebuilding, especially those working at the grass-roots level in communities. My delegation stresses the need to address the gender-related factors that amplify conflict and how they intersect with existing vulnerabilities, for instance in the situation in the Sahel countries, where it is clear that further analysis and work on the intersection of the women and peace and security agenda and climate issues is crucial. That is just one example. We believe that monitoring the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda and carrying out regular analyses is one of the most important steps we could take towards more effective policy formulation and implementation. We welcome in that regard the development of the African Union's Continental Results Framework for monitoring the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. That framework, which is a major step towards implementation, must be supported and reproduced in other contexts. Let me add that tackling some of the structural inequalities and the existing discrimination against women and girls remains paramount for conflict prevention. Access to education is one of the surest ways to tackle it. During the open debate held last month under our presidency, the Security Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/8) recognizing the gendered nature of attacks on schools and demanding greater protection for all children, girls in particular. We called for more attention to be paid to how conflict affects young women and girls, especially given the increased incidence of sexual and gender-based violence. Measures must take into account the gender dimensions of conflict and how they amplify existing inequalities. While women are often the primary victims in conflict situations, they are also the impetus for major changes. We have seen the role played by young women in the Sudan and, more recently, in other parts of the African continent. Young women peacebuilders have greatly expanded the civic space. It is essential that greater protection be afforded women human rights defenders, who face serious reprisals for their vital work. In that regard, the Niger supports the United Kingdom-funded Women Peacebuilders Protection Framework and is committed to strengthening our national legal and political safety net for women peacebuilders. Like 30 other African countries, the Niger has started to implement a national action plan for peace and security for women, which was developed following a consultation process involving both women and men from all parts of the country. This is an important instrument, and we urge other countries that have not yet adopted one to do so. Finally, the gender vulnerabilities that the coronavirus disease has highlighted only underscore the systemic exclusion that women face in many areas. It is in that context that my delegation would make the following recommendations. First, there is a need to allocate more resources to local organizations of women peacebuilders working in the area of peace and security. Secondly, my delegation, as a troop-contributing country, calls for the more effective participation of women in peacekeeping operations and missions. The Niger is particularly keen to see a strengthening of the trend towards the participation of women in the police force. We also call for the strengthening of early-warning systems. In the same vein, the relatively low number of women in high-level positions in political and peace and security institutions, as well as the unbalanced geographic representation of women in leadership positions, must be addressed. We therefore call for the full participation of women, on an equal and meaningful basis, in all processes mandated by the United Nations. Thirdly, it is crucial that peace agreements continue to include special provisions for women. We recognize the key role of women in peace processes, but we regret that only 20 per cent of the peace agreements signed between 1990 and 2018 contain special provisions for women. Finally, allow me to make a few remarks on the existing normative framework on the women and peace and security agenda. It is a robust agenda, but, as has been underlined in many past and ongoing discussions, what is lacking is its effective implementation. To conclude, I would pay tribute to the thousands of women who led to the creation of this agenda. We owe the women and peace and security agenda to those women defenders and builders of peace, in particular from the South, who demanded change and sometimes even risked their lives for peace, reconstruction and social justice - and, to put it simply, to have their human rights upheld. It is our responsibility to ensure that the hard-won gains made since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) are not only maintained but also strengthened and fully implemented as a matter of urgency.
