Mr. Mogae: I would like to thank the President
of the Security Council, His Excellency Mr. Amr
Abdellatif Aboulatta, for his kind invitation to me to
brief the Security Council today.

This morning, in Juba, I chaired the monthly
plenary meeting of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (JMEC). I therefore come to the Council
via videolink from the base of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). Before I begin,
I would like to deal with a housekeeping matter by
noting that as I shall be issuing the pending JMEC
quarterly report by the end of this month, as mandated
under Chapter VII of the peace Agreement. I trust that
it will reach all Council members in good time.

Members will recall that in my briefing to
the Security Council last month, I described the
"one voice" initiative and the process by which the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
mandated the convening of a high-level Revitalization
forum for the peace Agreement in South Sudan (see S/PV.8008). I was very grateful for the unanimous
support of the members of the Security Council for the
IGAD initiative. The Council's support and endorsement
sends a strong message to all South Sudanese leaders
that the world is watching and has high expectations
for a rapid and sustained improvement in the overall
situation in South Sudan.

The second anniversary of the signing of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan passed relatively unnoticed
last week. Our perception at the time of the signing of
the peace Agreement, in August 2015, was that it had
ended a tragic internal conflict that had threatened to
tear Africa's youngest nation apart, and it was hoped
that disagreements among the parties over substantive
issues had been resolved.

The peace Agreement brought JMEC into being,
and we believed that our task would be simply
to oversee and guide its implementation by the
Transitional Government of National Unity. By now, the
peace Agreement should have achieved considerable
progress towards improved security and governance
in the country. From day one, however, we have had
to persuade the parties to implement each and every
task. Disagreements between the key principals and the
lack of any appetite for compromise slowed progress
to a standstill and led to growing tensions in Juba that
ultimately resulted in the violence of July 2016 and
its continuing repercussions. Two years on since the
signing of the peace Agreement there has been little
meaningful progress in its implementation.

Since July 2016, we, as JMEC, have remained
profoundly shocked by the rampant hostilities across
the country and the rapid deterioration of the political,
security, humanitarian and economic situation in South
Sudan. As a result, we are now rightly absorbed in a
process to restore and revitalize the prominence of the
peace Agreement.

In the past month, the security situation in the
former Upper Nile state has worsened, due to the recent
offensive operations by forces of the Sudan People's
Liberation Army in Government against the Machar
faction of the Sudan People's Liberation Army in
Opposition in Matthiang and Pagak. In today's JMEC
plenary, I condemned all the violence that occurred in
and around Pagak over the past month and urged that
military operations cease immediately. I also urged
all parties involved to facilitate access for the Cease
Fire and Transitional Security Monitoring Mechanism
(CTSAMM) to investigate and report on the situation
in Pagak.

In this month in which we marked World
Humanitarian Day, tens of thousands of people in
Upper Nile have been forced to flee their homes, and
humanitarian aid workers have had no choice but to
relocate from the area and suspend delivery of support
to those in need. The cycle of violence, displacement
and deprivation of humanitarian support has been
repeated around the country over the past year and has
led to untold misery among those who seek only to live
peacefully and provide for their families.

Over the past week, there has been some unfortunate
confusion and dispute over the deployment of advanced
elements of the Regional Protection Force. One impact
of this dispute was the temporary grounding of all
United Nations flights, which had a direct impact on
the operations of CTSAMM. This is deeply regrettable,
and I urge the Transitional Government of National
Unity to resolve issues with UNMISS swiftly and
facilitate the deployment of the Force without further
hindrance, in accordance with resolution 2304 (2016).

To that end, I have further urged IGAD to convene
a meeting between the Transitional Government of
National Unity, UNMISS and the Chiefs of Defence
Forces of the troop-contributing countries, as specified
in the IGAD communique of 12 June 2017. That meeting
has not yet taken place and, as a result, key issues
affecting the practical deployment of the Force have
not been addressed, and serious challenges are arising.

The IGAD Council of Ministers met on 24 July
for the first time in Juba. In its communique that day,
the Council of Ministers empowered the IGAD Special
Envoy for South Sudan to coordinate the revitalization
process, including all stakeholders and the institutions
charged with the responsibility for the implementation
of the peace Agreement. The Council also urged all
South Sudanese stakeholders to embrace the objectives
of the High-level Revitalization Forum and collaborate
with the IGAD Special Envoy to achieve a positive
outcome. It is essential to stress a number of issues
regarding the Revitalization Forum in order to ensure
full understanding. The Revitalization Forum is an
IGAD initiative, mandated by the Summit of Heads of
State and Government and executed by the Council of
Ministers through the office of the new IGAD Special
Envoy. Our role as the JMEC is to support IGAD in its
efforts to convene the Forum.

While the Forum was set up to fulfil three
objectives - first, to reinstate the permanent
ceasefire; secondly, to reinstate the full and inclusive
implementation of the peace Agreement; and,
thirdly, to develop revised and realistic timelines for
implementation with a view to elections and the end of
the transition period - the outcomes of the Forum are
not predetermined. It is for the parties and estranged
groups to determine and commit to the outcomes of the
Forum. After all, in the end the responsibility for the
implementation of the peace Agreement lies squarely
with those parties. This is a Forum through which we
can explore options that can restore the prominence of
the peace process, while taking current realities into
account. It is our hope that this revitalization process
will be pursued in the spirit of peace, inclusiveness
and compromise.

In the JMEC's perspective, for the revitalization
process to succeed, there is a need for demonstrable
political will by the parties and estranged groups to be
inclusive and to accommodate one another politically,
rather than defeat each other militarily.

We must speak with one voice to the leaders of
South Sudan and align our actions. There should be
clear consequences for intransigent groups, spoilers
and violators. The parties must commit to adhering to
any revised timelines and implementation schedules,
and adequate funding for the implementation of the
revitalized peace Agreement must be determined
and secured.

