Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank the Secretary- General for his excellent overview. I warmly welcome the Secretary-General of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and thank him for his comprehensive briefing on cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations. Let me also congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the chairmanship of ASEAN this year. ASEAN has played a significant role in providing peace and enhancing security in the South-East Asia region and globally for 52 years. We support ASEAN's commitment to promoting peace and security in the wider Asia-Pacific region, as well as to resolving disputes peacefully, which includes full respect for legal and diplomatic processes. Further, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, we support deepening United Nations cooperation with regional and subregional organizations in order to ensure more effective conflict prevention and mitigation. We acknowledge ASEAN's commitment to multilateralism and a rules-based international order. Today's challenges are global in scope and nature and must be tackled jointly. Multilateral cooperation is key to contributing to the regional peace and security. We commend ASEAN's work on addressing emerging non-traditional security issues, such as climate change. As climate change is the most serious challenge in the near future, we need to accelerate that work. We recognize ASEAN's interest in promoting cybersecurity and welcome the important steps that it has taken to build a rules-based cyberspace, including the implementation of the 11 voluntary, non-binding norms of responsible State behaviour contained in the 2015 report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security (A/70/174). Global digital cooperation is needed to address the emerging non-traditional, cross- sectoral threats to peace and security, and we welcome ASEAN's efforts to enhance cooperation with the relevant United Nations bodies to combat the threats that emerge from cyberspace. We welcome the efforts of ASEAN member States to advance discussions with China on a code of conduct on the South China Sea. We encourage both parties, ASEAN and China, to implement the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea in its entirety. We count on ASEAN to play an active role in settling international disputes through peaceful means and in providing necessary support to its member States to address the root causes of crises. We note the recent order of the International Court of Justice indicating provisional measures for the protection of the Rohingya in Myanmar. We expect Myanmar to duly comply with the Court's order and report back on measures taken within the timeline indicated by the Court. In conclusion, we express our support for ASEAN Community Vision 2025: Forging Ahead Together. We think that cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN could be further strengthened to maintain peace and security and accelerate prosperity for the 650 million people in the region.
