Ms. Liu: Wednesday's air strikes obliterated
Al-Quds Hospital in Aleppo. They blew apart at least
55 men, women and children. An air strike killed
one of the last remaining paediatricians in the city: a
murderous air strike.
There were almost 300 air strikes in Aleppo
over the past 10 days. Civilians, often in crowds,
were repeatedly struck. What are individuals in wars
today - expendable commodities, dead or alive?
Patients and doctors have become legitimate targets.
Women, children, the sick, the wounded and their
caregivers are condemned to death. Stop those attacks.

I went to Kunduz, Afghanistan, following the
United States attack on our trauma centre on 3 October
2015. One of the survivors, a Medecins Sans Frontieres
(MSF) nurse whose left arm was blown off during the
relentless air strike, told me something that haunts me
daily. He said that, when fighting erupted in Kunduz,
MSF staff were told that its trauma centre was a safe
place. Over and over again, we said that. He told me,

"We believed you, but did you know that we would
be bombed?"

I told him that until 3 October I truly believed that the
hospital was a safe place. I cannot say that anymore
about any medical facilities on the front lines today.

In Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, South
Sudan, the Sudan, Syria, Ukraine and Yemen hospitals
are routinely bombed, raided, looted or burned to the
ground. Medical personnel are threatened. Patients
are shot in their beds. Broad attacks on communities
and precise attacks on health facilities are described
as mistakes, are denied outright or are simply met
with silence. In reality, they amount to massive,
indiscriminate and disproportionate civilian targeting
in urban settings and, in the worst cases, they are acts
of terror. The effects of attacks against health facilities
go far beyond those immediately killed and injured.
They serve to demolish routine and life-saving health
care for all. They make life impossible, ull stop.

On 26 October 2015, a Saudi-led coalition air strike
hit an MSF hospital in the Haydan district in northern
Yemen, leaving at least 200,000 people without
life-saving care. It was the first of three MSF facilities
partially or completely destroyed in Yemen during a
period of three months.

Attacks on MSF facilities provide only a glimpse
into the brutality of war. Attacks on other hospitals
and clinics, as well as schools, markets and houses of
worship, are routine. Local health workers bear the brunt
of those abuses. We are at a deadly impasse. We can
no longer assume that fully functioning hospitals - in
which patients are fighting for their lives - are out of
bounds. Hospitals and patients have been dragged onto
the battlefield.

In Jasin, a town in southern Syria, citizens have
protested in front of a hospital to prevent its reopening.
They know what happens to functioning hospitals. We
are facing an epidemic of attacks on health facilities,
impeding our ability to do our core work. To date,
our calls for independent investigations have gone
unheeded. Accountability begins with independent
and impartial fact-finding. Perpetrators cannot be
investigators, judges or juries.

Make no mistake: we will relentlessly denounce
attacks on health care. We will speak out loudly and
with force about what we witness in the field. Medicine
must not be a deadly occupation. Patients must not be
attacked or slaughtered in their beds. As physicians,
we take an oath when we join the medical profession
to treat everybody, every individual, regardless of who
they are and regardless of their religion, their race
or on which side they may fight - even if they are
wounded combatants or ifthey are labelled as criminals
or terrorists.

Hospitals must not be attacked or forcibly entered
by armed personnel, including to search for and capture
patients. To turn our backs on those basic principles
is to turn our backs on the foundation of medical
ethics. Medical ethics cannot be buried by war. The
neutrality of wartime medical care cannot be stamped
out by State sovereignty or domestic law, especially
in an age of counter-terrorism and counter-insurgency
characterized by shifting alliances and murky rules
of engagement. While the nature of warfare may have
changed, the rules of war have not.

The Council is charged with protecting peace and
security. Yet four of the five permanent members of
the Council have, in varying degrees, been associated
with coalitions responsible for attacks on health-care
structures during the past year. Those include the
NATO-led coalition in Afghanistan, the Saudi-led
coalition in Yemen and the Russian-backed, Syrian-
led coalition. The Council therefore must live up to its
extraordinary responsibilities and set an example for all
States. I repeat: stop those attacks.

The discussion here today cannot amount to
empty rhetoric. Resolution 2286 (2016) cannot end up
like so many others, including those passed on Syria
over the last five years, which have been routinely
violated with impunity.

Health care in Syria is systematically targeted and
besieged areas are cynically denied medical care. I
exhort the Council to uphold its obligations, ensure the
protection of the impartial provision of health care in
conflict, and support health workers in fulfilling their
obligations to treat every sick and wounded person
without discrimination. Dr. Maas, the paediatrician
murdered in Aleppo last week, was killed for saving
lives. Today, we remember his humanity and bravery,
which he shared with so many patients, nurses, doctors,
communities and MSF staff caught up in areas of
conflict. For their sake, the Council must translate this
resolution into action. It must recommit unambiguously
to the norms that govern the conduct of war. This
resolution must lead to all States and non-State actors
stopping the carnage.

Council members must also pressure their allies to
end attacks on health care and populations in conflict
areas. We will not leave patients behind, and we will not
be silent. Seeking or providing health care must not be
a death sentence. The Security Council will be judged
not on its words today, but on its actions. The Council's
work has only begun. I urge it to make resolution 2286
(2016) save lives.

