Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): No principle is
closer to the heart of the work of the United Nations
than that of justice. The links with the particular role of
this organ to maintain and restore peace and security
are very clear. This link has obviously been
increasingly recognized by the Council in recent years.
There has been reference, for example, to the
international tribunals that have been established, and
to the incorporation of rule of law elements in the
mandate of missions such as the one in Kosovo.
But many of these developments have been ad
hoc, and we therefore welcome the proposal that this
debate emanates from, that greater thought be given to
how to address rule of law issues in a systemic and
comprehensive way in the Council's work.

Given the many elements that are involved in
establishing the rule of law, much will depend on
effective coordination within the United Nations
system and among the agencies involved.

Too often, conflicts are marked by crimes
committed by the very people and institutions that
should protect and defend the law. In order to restore
stability and rebuild respect for those institutions, it
will often be necessary to rebuild all aspects of the
legal system. The extent of this task, and the need for
regional or international assistance, will clearly vary
from situation to situation. But, in our view, promoting
national ownership and capacity-building is one of the
most important aspects of international involvement in
a post-conflict environment. As Mr. Guehenno has
made very clear, however, the rule of law needs to be
regarded as a core function of post-conflict peace- and
nation-building operations, and not as an optional
"extra".

Again, Mr. Guehenno has indicated that one of
the Council's first tasks in a post-conflict situation will
be to complete an assessment of the existing systems in
order to determine what assistance is needed. We
would suggest that it could therefore be useful to
establish registers or panels of experts that the Council
could draw on to assist in completing these
assessments. Such panels should be representative of
each of the world's regions. In compiling the panels,
the Council could also draw on the expertise contained
in many regional or other international organizations,
including many non-governmental organizations.

A fundamental element of re-establishing respect
for the rule of law is also delivering justice for the
victims of crimes or atrocities committed during the
period of conflict. Again, in our view, the national
courts should, where possible, be the first line of
prosecution.

That said, however, there will clearly be instances
where the nature and the gravity of the crimes, the
political situation or, indeed, the capacities of the
national system will mean that it will be necessary to
turn to an international process. In this situation, we
would very much encourage the Council to take
advantage of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
We fully understand the sincerity of those countries
that have reservations about the Court, but we are
confident that its operations will, in fact, assuage those
concerns. We therefore hope that the Council will
cooperate with the ICC within the framework of the
Rome Statute and the Charter, and that it will refrain
from actions that would undermine the effective
operation of the Court.

Finally, may I briefly refer to the usefulness of
complementary mechanisms such as truth and
reconciliation commissions. The dilemma, here,
obviously, is finding the appropriate balance between
justice on the one hand and national reconciliation on
the other, because it will obviously not be possible to
put an end to the culture of impunity for the gravest
international crimes if amnesties are granted for them.

Again, we believe that local ownership and
decision-making is very important. In most cases, the
Council's role may be best by way of facilitation of the
provision of technical assistance or guidance to the
States concerned.

Finally, although this is not in the much more
comprehensive written text that I have circulated, I
should like to support the comments made by the
Permanent Representative of Japan regarding the need
to strengthen the regime under the Convention of the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,
which we also believe would make a significant
contribution in this area.

