Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate and the
Emergency Relief Coordinator for his briefing at the
beginning of this meeting.

This debate is taking place against the backdrop
of the armed conflict in Gaza, which is causing very
high numbers of civilian casualties, in particular
among children. We support resolution 1860 (2009),
which is legally binding on the parties to the conflict,
and call for its implementation, first and foremost in
the interest of the civilian population, whose rights are
not being respected, who are bearing the brunt of the
ongoing violence and who are being deprived of the
necessary humanitarian assistance. The parties to the
conflict have the responsibility under international
humanitarian law to facilitate humanitarian operations.

Civilian populations have always suffered the
consequences of armed conflicts, but modern warfare
and the changed nature of armed conflict have
massively exacerbated their situation. The Security
Council has routinely discussed the plight of civilians
in conflict situations and achieved some remarkable
results. Most recently, resolutions 1674 (2006) and
1738 (2006) constituted important steps in enhancing
the normative and operational framework for the
protection of civilians.
Nevertheless, the disproportionate burden that
armed conflicts continue to place on civilians requires
more consistent and more permanent engagement. The
establishment of an expert-level group of the Council
and the consistent application and updating of the aide-
memoire with a view to the consideration of issues
pertaining to the protection of civilians would facilitate
more systematic consideration of protection issues.

A positive development outside the Council was
the adoption of the Convention on Cluster Munitions,
which we have signed, together with nearly 100 other
States. While that was only a first step, we hope that it
will rapidly lead to the total elimination of such
weapons, which are by nature indiscriminate and
causing enormous suffering among civilian populations
around the globe.

This year, we are celebrating the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions, one of the outstanding achievements in
the history of international law and the centrepiece of
international humanitarian law. Only the full
implementation of the Geneva Conventions and of
other provisions of international humanitarian law can
ensure the effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Sadly, in the recent past, we have witnessed
an erosion in the observance of international
humanitarian law, and we must urgently reverse that
trend.

We are also supportive of the principle of the
responsibility to protect, endorsed at the summit level
more than three years ago, and call for its consistent
application both at the international level and by the
relevant intergovernmental bodies.

If the observance of the relevant standards of
international law is at the core of the protection
agenda, the effective fight against impunity is its
necessary complement. When national judiciaries fail
in their duty to prosecute the most serious crimes under
international law, the International Criminal Court can
step in to fill the gap. While more than 100 States have
become parties to the Rome Statute, the Security
Council also has a special obligation by virtue of the
referral powers given to it under the Statute.

One type of crime warrants the particular
attention of the Council. Owing to its large-scale,
systematic and targeted use, sexual violence is no
longer simply a by-product of armed conflict; it has
become a method of warfare aimed at destroying the
social fabric of communities in order to achieve
political and military ends. In that regard, we reaffirm
our support for resolution 1820 (2008). The protection
of civilians from acts of sexual violence must be a task
inherent to all peacekeeping missions, and the
Council's mandates must offer clear guidance on how
to provide such protection. Furthermore, the full
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) requires
more resources for the collection of data on sexual
violence in conflict situations.

