Mr. Mantovani (Italy): While we thank the
Secretary-General for being with us today, we also
acknowledge your presence, Sir - the Prime Minister
of Croatia; and the Secretary of State of the United
States, Dr. Rice; Foreign Minister Miliband; Foreign
Minister Lavrov; the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs
of China, and also, with particular satisfaction, the
Foreign Minister of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and all of his delegation.

Italy has traditionally followed with deep concern
the very difficult developments of the national
reconciliation process in Somalia and the dire
consequences of the crisis in both the humanitarian and
security fields. We therefore fully appreciate this
opportunity to discuss the situation in Somalia, which
more and more urgently deserves the attention of the
international community.

Italy is strongly committed to support the peace
efforts led by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ould Abdallah, as well as by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) aimed at finding an inclusive negotiated
solution within the very sensitive regional context. In
particular, Italy supports the political process opened
by the Djibouti Agreement between the Transitional
Federal Government and the opposition, represented by
the Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia.
However, its pursuit requires an effective security
framework. The announced withdrawal of the
Ethiopian troops needs to be accompanied by
immediate and strong support to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) so as to avoid a
dangerous security vacuum, thus contributing to the
implementation of the Djibouti process.
Italy supports the idea of a United Nations
rehatting of AMISOM. as the only feasible option for a
really concrete United Nations involvement on the
ground, sustaining and integrating the already
significant effort made by the African Union. We could
not agree more with the remarks by Secretary of State
Rice on the need for the international community and
the United Nations to assume direct responsibility in
the Somali crisis.

Italy of course strongly supports all international
efforts to counter piracy, which certainly poses a major
threat to the delivery of humanitarian aid and to the
freedom of international navigation, as well as to the
safety of commercial maritime routes. In that respect
we are strongly committed to all multinational
initiatives against piracy in the European Union,
NATO, the International Maritime Organization and all
the other relevant multilateral forums. We consider that
the NATO naval mission in which we are presently
taking part represents a major step forward in the fight
against piracy and that the newly established European
Union naval operation Atalanta will further strengthen
our common endeavour.

Piracy off the Somali coast is clearly the result of
the general political and security crisis in the country.
For that reason, Italy is once more convinced that naval
action against piracy should be complemented by a
stabilization process on the ground, from both a
political and a security viewpoint. Only through timely
and concrete support to such processes can the United
Nations meet its political and moral responsibilities in
what should no longer be considered as a forgotten
cr1s1s.

