Mr. Ould Abdallah (spoke in French): I will be
very brief. I would just like to make the following
comments. First, I am very pleased to make my first
briefing to the Council in terms of my new mandate
under your presidency, Sir, because your country has
an expertise, it is involved, and I am working very well
with the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Rome.

I would also like to say that I wanted to draw the
attention of the Council to the need to review the
working approach we have on Somalia. I say this out
of respect for the Council. If we continue with the
working method we have been using for 17 years, not
only are we unlikely to achieve anything, but even
worse, this institution risks losing its credibility.

It is that motivation that led me to make these
new suggestions. If we maintain the status quo,
humanitarian assistance, which is useful and essential,
will continue to be shipped from Kenya to Somali
ports. But there are limits after 17 years. After so many
millions and so much energy spent, we can say that we
have not been successful. Can we give up? That is
morally and ethically difficult, so we need to act
differently. In doing so, we need to accompany the
Somalis in a political discussion, which is not easy, and

we need to encourage them to dialogue. They are
competent and serious. They can do this if we act in a
consistent and serious manner.

At the same time, we must provide them with a
new security, which will not only give them stability,
but will also provide jobs and reassurance. Escorting
ships on the high seas will produce more security and
reassure the population in Mogadishu.

I think that while waiting, my colleagues in the
Secretariat should send a field mission. We cannot send
it now, however, because of regulations. I have twice
been to Mogadishu and Baidoa. Everybody is going to
Mogadishu and Baidoa. I am not saying that it is like
the Mediterranean and everything is alright. We can go
to Somaliland and we can go to Puntland, but it is in
Mogadishu where there are problems, in 4 out of the
city's 16 neighbourhoods.

We need to make an effort or admit our own
powerlessness. It is said that the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is doing work.
However, it is more accurate to compliment the
Ugandan contingent, as it is the only one there. African
public opinion is aware, because of the Internet and
radio, that there are none from AMISOM, simply a
Ugandan contingent. We must strengthen that
contingent and try to find - Council members know
how better than I do - a means to do that. Perhaps the
neighbouring countries from the Middle East could
help pending an additional AMISOM. reinforcement.

That is what I wanted to say out of respect for the
Council, and particularly as regards its credibility and
the credibility of this Organization for which I work.

