Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): My country wishes to reaffirm all the reasons
that led Costa Rica to vote, on 7 March, in favour of the
previous draft resolution on the subject of the building of
settlements in the area of Har Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim
in the Arab territories occupied by Israel in East
Jerusalem.

In that same spirit, we also voted in favour of
General Assembly resolution 51/223 on 13 March 1997.

We are firmly convinced that this decision by the
Government of Israel runs counter to international law
and does serious damage to the desire for peace and
faithful compliance with the Oslo agreements.

We have insistently maintained, during the entire
process of the previous and the most recent informal

 

consultations, that there must be unity in the Security
Council, whether it is expressed as a resolution or as a
presidential statement, in order for the message from the
United Nations to reach the Middle East clearly and
unequivocally.

Israel's erroneous decision is seriously jeopardizing the
peace process. The spirit of Oslo is seriously threatened.
Unfortunately, added to that reality are the reprehensible
terrorist acts that have taken place in recent hours,
responsibility for which has been publicly and formally
claimed by the group Hamas.

There are dark clouds over the Promised Land and
over the Holy City, which is equally sacred for Jews,
Muslims and Christians.

Costa Rica once again appeals vigorously for peace.
The radical positions of either side should never override
the explicit will expressed by President Arafat and the
martyred Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, when they
signed the Peace accords in Oslo. We believe that is the
only route that Israel and the Palestinian National Authority
should continue to follow, with the support and
encouragement of the international community and the
United Nations. Costa Rica will always vote in favour of
peace in that effort.

The present circumstances have caused us to stop and
to ponder, objectively and far-sightedly, the decisions of the
Security Council in order that its support for the peace
process will be truly effective and appropriately reflect the
international community's desire for peace. Unfortunately,
for the second time, we find ourselves lacking the necessary
conditions of unity.

In this context, I have received instructions from my
Government to abstain in the voting on the draft resolution
before the Council.

