Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. We would
like to commend the recent visit of Mrs. Kaag, Minister
for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation
of the Netherlands, with Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock, to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and their drawing of international attention to the
urgent humanitarian situation in that country. We also
welcome the briefers of this meeting - Coordinator
Bahati and Secretary-General Nshole.

We join others in expressing our deep concern
about the dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is aggravated by
the increasing violence, armed conflicts, poverty,
malnutrition, drought, forced internal displacements
and refugee flows.

We note the importance of the joint initiative of
the United Nations, the Netherlands, the United Arab
Emirates and the European Union to host the first-ever
high-level humanitarian conference on the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, to be held in Geneva on 13 April.
We call on donors for greater support in order to respond
to the needs of more than 13 million Congolese people.

The politically fragile and insecure situation
heightens the existing crisis. It is therefore causing a
vicious cycle of conflict and humanitarian tragedy,
with one triggering the other. We therefore call for
a political resolution of the crisis, adherence to the
Constitution and the holding of timely, free, fair and
credible elections, which could lead to stabilization
and the gradual building of State institutions. The
international community must support the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in laying the foundations for
good governance, the rule of law and reform of the
security, law enforcement and judiciary sectors. The
Government needs to encourage women and young
people to participate in those processes.

Food security is also severely affected by the
ongoing armed conflict, forcing farmers to flee and
to miss the planting seasons. According to the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
UNICEF and the World Food Programme, only 400,000
ofthe 3.2 million severely food insecure people in Kasai
received assistance in December last year.

Women and children are the most vulnerable
category of the country's population, leaving their
homes to escape the horrific inter-ethnic violence
and sexual abuse and, as a result, being exposed to
difficult living conditions. With humanitarian needs
having doubled since last year, more than 4.6 million
Congolese children are acutely malnourished, including
2.2 million severe acute cases. Moreover, epidemics are
spreading, making for the worst outbreak of cholera in
15 years.

Gender equality in all stabilization and
development processes is important. The role of women
in the political process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo cannot be overestimated. The broad
participation of women in the upcoming elections and
further nation-building measures should therefore be
encouraged. Women activists, organizations and civil
society networks must be guaranteed security.

TheOfficeoftheUnitedNationsHighCommissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) has a central role to play
in ensuring that protection is mainstreamed across
the humanitarian action. The caseloads of refugees,
returnees, internally displaced persons and host
communities are large and diverse. UNHCR therefore
requires adequate funding for its life-saving work.

We need to address the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by looking at it through the prism
of innovative strategy, as it influences the entire region
and its causes and repercussions are interconnected with
similar challenges in neighbouring states. Accordingly,
we encourage all international and regional partners
to actively engage in addressing the crisis through a
revamped regional approach. The security track is
closely interlinked with development through a range of
multifaceted, mutually reinforcing factors. Investments
in development are therefore critical as they validate
the often-demonstrated formula of strengthening the
security-development nexus, which is a key path to
achieving sustainable peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the wider region. We also commend
the tireless efforts of humanitarian organizations and
their personnel on the ground, while selflessly risking
their own lives for the sake of saving others.

We call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to facilitate and ensure safe
and unhindered humanitarian access across the
country. The role of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is absolutely strategic and
must reinforce operational and cost effectiveness,
thereby contributing to filling gaps, together with other
actors, especially with Government and international
development stakeholders. We are convinced that all
United Nations agencies should deliver as one United
Nations in providing assistance in a more coordinated,
transparent and efficient manner. We also emphasize
the crucial role of confidence-building measures, as
mentioned by the Permanent Representative of Kuwait.

Lastly, every human life is sacred, and people
are the main asset and resource of any nation. The
international community should make every effort in
addressing the suffering of the Congolese people in a
spirit of solidarity and sense of unity inspired by the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
