Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Madam
President, to preside over the Security Council. We are
grateful to the Argentine delegation for its initiative in
holding an open debate in the Council on such a topical
issue as United Nations cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. The presence in the
Chamber of representatives of a number of leading
regional organizations testifies to its importance.

The global nature of today's challenges and threats,
and the formulation of the collective approaches that
are essential to tackling them effectively, requires that
cooperation on international peace and security between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations be strengthened. That task consists in
ensuring that, with the United Nations in the role of
leader, those organizations, harmoniously and without
unnecessary bureaucracy, complement one another by
making use of their respective comparative advantages.
For the United Nations, those advantages are primarily
the universality of its membership and activities,
along with its universally recognized legitimacy. For
their part, regional organizations often have a more
nuanced understanding of circumstances in their areas
of responsibility, and, in a great many cases, preventive
and peacebuilding mechanisms adapted to regional
realities. It is nonetheless important that regional
organizations' activities be focused on seeking peaceful
political solutions to emerging conflict situations, so
as to ensure that they are not overly influenced by
individual members, who may be pursuing their own
agendas.

The Security Council plays a key role in cooperation
between the United Nations and regional associations
on issues relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security. That has to do first and foremost
with its obligatory approval and monitoring of regional
and coalition peacekeeping operations where the use of
force is authorized. Only the relevant decisions of the
Council can lend the necessary international legitimacy
to the use of sanctions mechanisms.

Cooperation between this global Organization
and its regional partners brings with it a wider set of
problems. Along with peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tasks come the countervailing forces of proliferating
weapons of mass destruction, illegal sources of small
arms and light weapons, the fight against terrorism,
drug trafficking and organized crime. In the network
of traditional United Nations partnerships, the African
Union occupies a special place. The broad experience
of respectful cooperation that exists between both
organizations in various areas is also a helpful guide
for other regional organizations in building effective
models for collaboration.

There is great potential in the cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States.
We believe that there are good prospects for broader
contact between the United Nations and such rapidly
developing organizations as the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations.

For our part, we cannot ignore the importance
of United Nations cooperation with the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (STO), which are building
their political authority globally and are helping to
strengthen regional and international security. We
associate ourselves with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the member States of the CSTO and STO
by the representative of Kyrgyzstan, the country that
currently presides over both organizations. There are
prospects for deeper cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO in the area of peacekeeping.
Serious work is being done within the CSTO to develop
its own peacekeeping potential, including acting
jointly with United Nations peacekeeping operations.
At the same time, the CSTO is actively participating
in international post-conflict reconstruction efforts
in Afghanistan and in neutralizing the threat of drugs
coming from that country's territory. The STO is
making a serious contribution to stability and security
in the Eurasian region, directing its activity to fighting
terrorism, separatism and extremism. To that end, it
has established a regional antiterrorism body and is
developing cooperation on combating the spread of
weapons of mass destruction, drug trafficking and
transnational crime, as well as providing international
information security.

We have consistently campaigned for broader and
deeper cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, as laid down in Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, with the aim of
promoting our world Organization's worthy goals. In
that respect, we feel that, on the one hand, regional and
subregional organizations must position themselves
more to actualize their own potential in the interests
of the United Nations, while on the other hand, the
United Nations itself must continue to duly prioritize
strengthened coordination and cooperation with such
organizations, based on strict compliance with the
principles of the universal Organization and its Security
Council.

