Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We join other members in thanking the King and Queen of the Belgians for participating in this meeting. We welcome the Foreign Ministers of Belgium and Indonesia and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Estonia. We also thank Secretary-General Guterres, Commissioner Chergui and Ms. Becker for their briefings. With children constituting approximately half of the population of countries ravished by war and conflict and an estimated half of the world's refugee population, remediating the disproportionate impact of armed conflict on children remains critical to the work of the Security Council. As signatories to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stands in solidarity with Security Council members in endorsing the use of child-centred, gender-aware and gender-responsive comprehensive strategies in peace processes and post- conflict settings. We welcome the production of the adaptable practical guidance for mediators as part of the Council's essential child protection- and child empowerment-related peace and development work. We are well aware of the atrocities committed against children, as chronicled in various Secretary- General reports, since the emergence of the children and armed conflict mandate, in 1996, and the Council's subsequent adoption of 12 resolutions, between 1999 and 2018, on all six of the grave violations against children. However, it is worth reminding members that in 2019, in spite of our work and that of Governments, civil society, communities and families, the killing and maiming of children reached a global record since the monitoring system's creation, in 2005. As we heard earlier from Ms. Becker, children also suffer the worst effects when schools and hospitals are attacked and when humanitarian access is denied. The rate at which children continue to be abducted, recruited and used in active hostilities, including as suicide bombers, has continued unabated in several conflict-ridden regions. Saint Vincent and_ the Grenadines remains particularly concerned about the recruitment and use of children. We are also deeply troubled by the high levels of reported cases of sexual violence against children, in particular girls, even while sexual violence in conflict remains underreported owing to stigma, lack of services and concerns over the protection of victims and survivors. That problem is exacerbated by endemic impunity and a lack of accountability for perpetrators at the individual, community and State levels. The Security Council has articulated frameworks across its various mandates to address accountability and reparation. We regard mediation as a _ key mechanism in securing remediation and reparation for survivors, as a strategy for sustainable healing and as a means through which to ensure violations against children are prevented from occurring in the first place. Mediation provides a space where parties to a conflict assume ownership and responsibility for the final resolution, thereby increasing the likelihood of a lasting peace. However, as noted in the guidance document presented today, that can be compromised in the absence of child protection-focused analyses, the requisite resource persons with child-centred expertise, tailored psychosocial and reintegration strategies for children and respect for the right of children to be heard. The practical guidance for mediators is an important document that can assist with mainstreaming child protection-focused action in confidence-building measures, security arrangements, governance and transitional justice systems and _ peacebuilding processes. We agree with the representative of Viet Nam that it should be a living document, constantly updated with examples of good practice. Children represent more than 20 per cent of our world population, but 100 per cent of our future. We cannot sit idly by while future generations face such uncertain prospects for life and livelihood. There can be no greater purpose to which we commit ourselves.
