Mr. Wetland (Norway): After 10 years of
international military presence in Afghanistan, we have
moved into a new phase. The military presence will be
gradually scaled down, as the Afghans take over
responsibility for their own security. Norwegian
combat troops will be withdrawn by 2013, but Norway
will not withdraw from Afghanistan. We will remain a
partner and friend of Afghanistan during the transition
years and during the transformation decade and
beyond.

The Bonn Conference focused on civilian aspects
and delivered certainty and clarity with respect to the
long-term international commitments to Afghanistan.
The partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community is now based on firm mutual
commitments. We foresee a substantial shift from
military and security aspects to the political process
and long-term development. In that respect, we need a
constructive dialogue with Afghanistan on civilian
support and civilian presence up to and after 2014. We
note with satisfaction that the Kabul process seems to
be back on track and that a three-year International
Monetary Fund programme for Afghanistan has been
confirmed.

Only a political process can resolve the conflict.
We must involve all parties to the conflict, as well as
ethnic and political groups, civil society and women, in
particular. Arms must be replaced by politics. The
Afghan Government is facing overwhelming
challenges and needs further support from the
international community. The terrorism threat is
serious and the security situation volatile, but years of
training and the gradually increasing responsibility of
Afghan security forces have produced results.

Afghan security forces are one key to a stable
society. Another and equally important element is the
Government's ability to properly perform its functions.
We have stated again and again that measures must be
taken to improve good governance and its effectiveness
in all parts of Afghanistan. The fight against corruption
must be intensified and credible democratic institutions
established.

It is imperative that the Afghan Constitution be
respected. Women's rights and empowerment must be
honoured. Afghanistan must unfailingly respect the
country's international obligations and, above all,
universal and basic human rights.

We find the Istanbul Process to be promising,
given its increased focus on regional cooperation. That
focus can improve stability and economic development
in the wider region also.

On repeated occasions over the years, we have
stressed that responsibility for governing and securing
Afghanistan lies with the Afghan Government. We will
continue to support its efforts to build a stable
Afghanistan. International efforts must support the
priorities of the Afghan Government. Norway has
pledged $125 million annually for civilian purposes.
We will provide that annual sum until 2013, and are
prepared to continue providing support at a high level
in the future.

Finally, our profound gratitude goes to Special
Representative de Mistura for his untiring efforts. We
welcome the appointment of Mr. Jan Kubis as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
look forward to continuing excellent cooperation with
him. The leading role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan is indispensable.

Again in 2011, several civilians, United Nations
staff members and International Security Assistance
Force soldiers, including a Norwegian soldier, were
regrettably killed. We honour their memory and pledge
to work with the United Nations to provide safety and
security for all personnel.

