The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Finland and Rwanda, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the consideration without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ibrahima Fall,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Fall to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Liberata Mulamula, Executive Secretary of the
Great Lakes Conference Secretariat.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Mulamula to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
2
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/811, containing a letter dated
4 October 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, and document
S/2006/812, containing a letter dated 13 October 2006
from the President of the Security Council addressed to
the Secretary-General.

The Security Council will now hear a briefing by
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, to
whom I give the floor.


