Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I too would like to start
by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting on conflict prevention, an issue of
vital concern to all of us. Your presence here as
Foreign Minister of your country not only attests to the
importance that you attach to this meeting, but also
gives us hope that the outcome of today's deliberations
will go beyond the usual and customary complacency
that we have been witnessing in the presidential
statements issued after earlier meetings of the Council.

Unfortunately, in the post-cold-war era, the world
continues to witness internecine and intra-State
conflicts. Their consequences in terms of loss of life,
property and massive human suffering have been
extensively catalogued by various research institutions.
The accounts of devastation and human suffering are a
constant reminder to the international community to
reinvigorate its efforts to control, if not eliminate, the
causes of such conflicts. We believe that, given a
sufficient degree of commitment, concern, engagement,
objectivity and even-handedness by the international
community, most conflicts are preventable most of the
time.

In recent years, conflict prevention has emerged
as a major theme in international discourse. This
reflects the fact that there is a growing realization of
the need to prevent conflicts before their eruption into
fully fledged wars, with the concomitant devastation
and destruction. Further efforts and wider participation
will be necessary to create a global culture of peace,
particularly because, since the causes of conflicts are
diverse, so are the methods of dealing with those
conflicts.

In the Security Council's earlier debate on the
subject in November last year, the Member States,
including my delegation, had highlighted the causes of
conflicts and the need to address them, and urged the
Security Council to play a far greater and more
effective role in conflict prevention, as envisaged in the
Charter of the United Nations. We note with concern
that the Council's presidential statement which is
expected to be issued after today's debate fails to
mention political disputes as one of the causes of
conflicts. It lists only economic, social, cultural or
humanitarian problems as the root causes of armed
conflicts. This is not an adequate or right reflection of
the situation confronted by the international
community.

The overwhelming number of issues currently on
the agenda of the Security Council are essentially
political disputes. If, despite that, the Security Council
chooses to avoid stating the obvious, one wonders what
is the purpose of this debate. Is a presidential statement
which is devoid of realities and truth worth the effort,
time and resources of the Member States? Is the
Security Council doing any justice to its own mandate?
Are we not being guided by expediencies rather than
by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations? One also wonders why this body is
shy of addressing the root causes of conflicts all around
the world and finds itself paralysed in the face of
serious threats to international peace and security.

This being the attitude of the Security Council,
we have little doubt that today's presidential statement
would provide a mistaken direction to its future
discourse on conflict prevention. I think somebody has
to call a spade a spade. Similarly, the recommendations
of the Secretary-General on a comprehensive strategy
on conflict prevention, which are expected next year,
would become totally meaningless. We therefore urge
the Council to review its position on this vital issue.

I must emphasize that the underlying causes, and
not the symptoms of conflicts and disputes, must be
addressed in order to find lasting solutions to conflicts.
When treating a disease, one does not treat the
symptoms; one has to go deep down to treat the
disease. Particular attention should be paid to resolving
outstanding disputes which pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. The protracted
conflict over the illegal occupation of Jammu and
Kashmir, and the denial of the right of the people of
that territory to determine their own future, is a case in
point. The Security Council must work for the early
resolution of this and other similar disputes in
accordance with its own resolutions on these subjects.

The mechanism for conflict prevention is rooted
in the Charter of the United Nations. The preamble of
the Charter envisages settlement of disputes or
situations which might lead to a breach of peace and
Article 2 stipulates that such settlements are to be
reached "by peaceful means" and in conformity with
the principles ofjustice and international law.
Under Article 33, parties to any dispute are
required to use peaceful means for settlement. The
Security Council is empowered to call upon the parties
to settle their disputes by such means. Responsibility in
this regard should not be evaded on the pretext that
bilateral disputes should be resolved by the concerned
parties alone. This is an erroneous notion because all
bilateral disputes, particularly those with implications
for global peace and security, are by definition
international disputes.

Another tendency noted occasionally is that the
Security Council is unwilling or unable to fulfil its
responsibilities, either because of the use of the veto or
because it has lacked the collective will to implement
its own resolutions. This problem needs to be
addressed in the context of reform and expansion of the
Security Council.

In our view, the principles that must guide actions
by the international community on conflict prevention
should include the following. I ask your indulgence,
Sir, while I list these principles.

First, conflict prevention must be based on the
norms of collective security defined in the Charter of
the United Nations.

Secondly, the principles of State sovereignty and
non-interference and non-intervention in the internal
affairs of a sovereign State must be respected.
However, these principles should not be applicable to
situations where people under colonial rule, foreign
occupation or alien domination are struggling to be
able to enjoy their inalienable right to self-
determination. Had this not been so, more than half the
world today would have remained dependent and
unfree.

An effective early-warning system should be
developed with a view to identifying prospective
conflict areas without any discrimination. When
picking up early-warning signals, the international
community must exercise great care, caution and
circumspection in labelling situations as being threats
to international peace and security.

Once a determination is made that certain
situations require preventive action, the response of the
United Nations should be comprehensive and robust,
not half-hearted.

The central role of the General Assembly as the
only body with universal representation in the United
Nations system must be respected and maintained.
The Security Council has over the years lost
credibility and authority. It must reclaim both of these,
in fulfilment of its Charter role to maintain
international peace.

The Security Council must act on the basis of an
objective assessment of a particular situation, instead
of responding selectively. Nor should it give in to
political expediencies or become helpless by seeking to
placate a few players of power politics and hegemony.
Principles, not expedience, should be the norm.

The Secretary-General must play a more
proactive role, as envisaged in Article 99 of the Charter
of the United Nations. I think he needs the Security
Council's authorization to perform his mandate,
particularly in situations where massive violations of
the human rights of people under colonial rule or
foreign occupation are taking place. He must not find
himself inhibited by the intransigence of one party in a
particular conflict situation.

More effective peacemaking efforts should be
pursued wherever peacekeeping operations are in
place, considering that peacekeeping alone has not
ensured lasting peace in many conflict situations.

The proclivity to bypass the United Nations,
which puts into question the Organization's viability,
must be avoided.

The role of the regional organizations should be
in consonance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter.

There should be effective cooperation and sharing
of responsibility between the various organs of the
United Nations as envisaged in the Charter.

Preventive deployment should be considered by
the Security Council, as was done in the case of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

The concept of preventive disarmament needs
farther discussion and elaboration, because such a
concept would militate against the inherent right to
self-defence sanctified by the Charter of the United
Nations.

Peace and development are indivisible. This we
all know. Therefore, the international community must
revitalize its efforts and devote its resources to the
economic development of the developing countries in
order to promote international peace and to prevent
conflicts.

Open debate in the Security Council should be
held before finalizing the Council's response to any
conflict situation. The views expressed by non-Council
members must be considered for incorporation in the
Council's presidential statements or resolutions.

Before concluding, I would like to convey our
support for the idea that the Secretary-General should
establish panels of experts to prepare periodic reports
on disputes that pose serious threats to international
peace and security, with a view to developing strategies
for their peaceful settlement. We note with concern that
Council members could not agree on the text that was
proposed in this regard. We hope that further
consideration will be given to the issue by the Council
in its next deliberations on conflict prevention, with a
view to reaching a consensus.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Pakistan's
cooperation with and support for the international
community's efforts to prevent conflicts, in keeping
with our commitment to global peace and collective
security and to the honour and dignity of peoples all
around the world, as well as to their progress and
prosperity.

Finally, may I say that we are all human beings.
We always like to speak good words about each other;
we like to listen to good words about each other; after
that, we like to issue anodyne statements. But let me
say that an anodyne presidential statement coming out
of this meeting today will not prevent any conflict as
long as we do not take any specific measures to
authorize the Secretary-General to address the root
causes of those conflicts.

