Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Egyptian delegation is pleased to attend this meeting
under your presidency, Sir, in order to discuss a vital
issue that affects every continent - although the
continent of Africa, to which Egypt belongs, is the
most severely affected: there, wars and conflicts are
further fuelled by small arms and light weapons, which
claim the lives of tens of thousands of Africans
annually.

I would also like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2003/1217) on
small arms, which describes the developments that took
place over the past year.

Allow me to make some remarks concerning the
issue before the Council today. First, the effectiveness
and credibility of the Security Council do not emanate
solely from the fact that it is the sole internationally
accepted organ charged, since its establishment over
half a century ago, with the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is based also on the
fact that the Council constantly addresses, responds to
and evolves with new challenges to peace and security
at both the regional and the international levels. Thus,
since the Security Council has recognized the gravity
of the illicit trade in and proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the resulting serious
humanitarian consequences over the years, the Council
must address those issues in a serious and effective
manner commensurate with the grave implications of
the dangers involved.

Secondly, interaction between the Security
Council and the General Assembly is indispensable in
dealing with issues relating to the illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and the development of
an effective long-term strategy to address the problem.
In that regard, the General Assembly has achieved
tangible progress, as demonstrated in its resolution
58/241 of 23 December 2003, by which it decided to
establish an open-ended working group to examine the
feasibility of negotiating an international instrument to
enable States to identify and trace illicit small arms and
light weapons. We hope that the efforts of that working
group during 2004 and 2005 will succeed in
strengthening international cooperation in prohibiting
and eliminating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

Thirdly, despite the fact that the imposition of
arms embargoes is the mechanism most frequently used
by the Security Council to curb the flow of illicit arms
to areas of conflict, the report of the Secretary-General
highlights a crucial factor: the difficulty of enforcing
embargoes. That is due either to non-compliance by
some countries with Security Council resolutions or to
the weakness of security structures and border control
agencies in countries adjacent to conflict areas. Such
lapses make it easier for illicit arms brokers and
smugglers to operate freely. The strengthening of
security institutions in some countries is a long-term
goal, and compliance by Member States with Security
Council resolutions mandating arms embargoes should
take place with as little difficulty as possible in order to
ensure the credibility of the Security Council and its
resolutions. It might even be plausible for the Security
Council, when its resolutions are violated, to consider
measures such as publication of the names of
institutions or States that violate those resolutions, as a
first step towards the development of a tighter legal
and political framework that would ensure the
implementation of Security Council resolutions.

Fourthly, all this is closely related to another
issue: the supply of illicit weapons to areas of conflict
in exchange for natural resources such as diamonds,
and in some cases for narcotic drugs. Over the past five
years, the Security Council has examined the question
of the diamond trade and its relationship to the fuelling
of conflicts in some regions of Africa. The report of the
Secretary-General before the Council today highlights
the way in which the illicit drug trade in some States in
the Horn of Africa, promotes the import of weapons in
violation of relevant Security Council resolutions.

There is no doubt that those cases relate in large
measure to the question of whether or not Council
members have the political will to address the constant
breaches of Security Council resolutions, and to how
serious the Council is about ensuring strict compliance
with its resolutions.

Finally, there is no doubt that the evolution of
Security Council peacekeeping activities allows for the
incorporation in peacekeeping operations of clear
provisions regarding the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants in civil
society. In addition to specific measures relating to the
collection and destruction of surplus small arms and
light weapons, Egypt suggests that the General
Assembly's Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations should consider and support ways to
enhance the role of the United Nations in DDR and to
finance those activities from the assessed peacekeeping
budget.

