Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (Spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate the People's Republic of China
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also wish to commend you,
Mr. President, for your wise leadership. It also gives
me pleasure to welcome Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
We thank him for presenting his first briefing to the
Security Council. I would also like to commend him for
the good start and his work and diligence in networking
with all sectors of society and their representatives in
order to fulfil the Mission's mandate. At the same time.
we would like to affirm Iraq's support for Mr. Mladenov
and the efforts of his team in Baghdad and New York
in order to ensure the successful implementation of the
Mission's mandate and objectives in assisting Iraq.

I also take this opportunity to congratulate, on
behalf of the Government of Iraq, the Government
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the five permanent
members of the Security Council, Germany and the
European Union on reaching an agreement towards
resolving the Iranian nuclear issue. That will inevitably
relieve tensions in the region, while providing a greater
opportunity for stability. We hope that the agreement
and the positive atmosphere generated by it will benefit
the efforts undertaken to resolve the Syrian conflict
and maximize the chances of success of the "Geneva
II" conference.

As the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People falls this week, I congratulate
the Palestinian people on the first anniversary of
the recognition by the United Nations of the State of
Palestine as an observer State.

Iraq is sparing no effort to involve all segments of
Iraqi society in the political process, and continues to
resolve all remaining and outstanding problems in the
framework of the national reconciliation process. At the
same time, Iraq is striving to build a strong economy on
the basis of the significant Iraqi human resources while
taking advantage of its natural resources.
In spite of the security challenges, Iraq is pursuing
the path of democracy and building its institutions. On
4 November, the Iraqi Parliament enacted the current
election law, and 30 April 2014 has been set as the
date to hold national elections. This will be the fourth
time that the people of Iraq will have selected their
representatives in the past 10 years. The Independent
High Electoral Commission is currently developing the
necessary plans and coordinating efforts, including by
updating voter registries, to hold the elections on time.
In this regard, we express our gratitude to UNAMI
and its team for their support in the electoral process,
and we look forward to the Mission's ongoing support
and advice to ensure the success of the upcoming
parliamentary elections.

On 27 June, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2107 (2013) on the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait. Iraq welcomed the resolution and
the efforts of Council members in drafting it. In that
regard, we confirm the continuing commitment of the
Government of Iraq to fulfilling the provisions of that
resolution, in particular the paragraphs relevant to the
search for the remains of missing Kuwaitis and the
return of Kuwaiti property. We would also highlight
the excellent and developing relations between the
Republic of Iraq and the State of Kuwait and their
existing cooperation in that area. The work of the
interministerial committee is well on its way, and its
meetings are scheduled to be held next month in the
brotherly State of Kuwait.

Today, Iraq is pursuing a policy of openness
and seeking to develop friendly relations with the
international community on the basis of mutual interests
and benefits and non-interference in the internal affairs
of States. On that basis, Iraq today enjoys good relations
with its neighbours, including Jordan, Kuwait and Iran.
We would also underscore the most recent development
in bilateral relations with neighbouring Turkey, in which
Iraq's Minister for Foreign Affairs recently explored
with his Turkish counterpart, in Baghdad, the means
to enhance our political and economic cooperation.
Furthermore, the most recent visit of the Iraqi Prime
Minister to Washington, D. C., was part of a series
of mutual bilateral visits between the United States
and Iraq to continue talks on activating the strategic
agreement signed between the two countries. That
visit led to the strengthening of bilateral cooperation
in combatting terrorism and improving Iraq's military
and defence capabilities.

The ongoing conflict in Syria and the presence
of nearly 35,000 foreign fighters on Syrian territory
from dozens of countries, who are battling alongside
the parties to the conflict and transforming it into a
sectarian conflict, are causing the conflict to spread to
the larger region. That has had a significant impact on
the frequency of terrorist attacks in Iraq, since one of the
main sources of terrorism in my country is the activity
of jihadi and extremist Takfiri armed groups linked
to Al-Qaida that infiltrate the country from its long
border with Syria. Those armed groups obtain weapons
and financial aid from individuals, organizations and
countries that are thereby violating their obligations
under international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We therefore call on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities and to take appropriate
action. We call on the Council to consider those terrorist
acts -which target the lives of Iraqi civilians, including
children, women and men in schools, houses of worship
and public places - as crimes against humanity and to
bring the perpetrators and those who support them to
justice without impunity, as these attacks have led to
the deaths of thousands of innocent Iraqi citizens.

Over the past two years, we have repeatedly
emphasized the gravity of the continuing Syrian
conflict and its severe consequences for peace and
security in the region and the world. We have stressed
the importance of finding a peaceful Syrian solution to
the conflict. Unfortunately,the international community
arrived at this conviction only after two years of
conflict, the deaths of more than 100,000 Syrians and
the displacement of millions from their homes. The
humanitarian situation in Syria and the Syrian refugee
camps in neighbouring countries has created a dire
need for urgent and pragmatic international and United
Nations assistance. Iraq supports the presidential
statement issued by the Security Council in that regard
(S/PRST/2013/15).

The Government of Iraq has hosted and provided
humanitarian aid to more than a quarter of a million
Syrian refugees in different parts of the country.
Furthermore, Iraq supports international efforts to
facilitate, expand and accelerate the process of providing
humanitarian relief to Syrian civilians at home and
abroad, and with medicine and all the humanitarian aid
that they so desperately need.

On the political front, Iraq was a proactive
participant in the work of the first Geneva conference
and supports the efforts of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States for Syria, in his role to bring the
parties together at the negotiating table at the Geneva
II conference, which is expected to take place after all
parties agree to it.

We must find a comprehensive political solution
to the continuing conflict that is acceptable to all
parties. On that basis, Iraq supports the holding of the
Geneva II conference, where support must be provided
to all benevolent efforts to that end, including those of
neighbouring countries, the United States and Russia.
Moreover, the political solution must be accompanied
by a momentum for humanitarian relief that is fully
pledged by the international community in order to
provide immediate humanitarian aid to all segments of
Syrian society.

In conclusion, we appreciate the efforts of the
Security Council in the fight against terrorism and
remind Member States that terrorism

"can only be defeated by a sustained and
comprehensive approach involving the active
participation and collaboration of all States, and
international and regional organizations to impede,
impair, isolate and incapacitate the terrorist
threat" (resolution 1989 (2011), seventh preambular

paragraph).

Therefore, we request that appropriate measures be
taken to support Iraq in its fight against that international
scourge and in fulfilment of the terms of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted
in 2006, and to address the conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism in Iraq and the entire region.
We would also mention the need to urge all States to
cooperate actively with Iraq to bring to justice the
perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of
reprehensible acts of terrorism, which rise to the level
of crimes against humanity.

Finally, I reiterate our appreciation and thanks to
Mr. Mladenov and his team for their outstanding work,

and we wish them success in the fulfilment ofUNAMl's
mandate and tasks in Iraq.

