Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): I would like to
thank Argentina for putting the working methods of the
Council at the centre of the agenda during its presidency
this month, and for your leadership, Madam President,
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, which since 2013 has
produced six important President's notes on working
methods. What we are debating today is no longer
only about the implementation of the note contained in
document S/2010/507 but also the implementation of
subsequent notes that complement it and even innovate.
That might suggest changing the title of the agenda
item to "Security Council working methods", reflecting
that the debate is not about the implementation of note
507 alone but now goes well beyond it.

I wish to now briefly address the issues you
highlighted, Madam President, in your very
comprehensive concept paper (S/2014/725, annex).

First, the work of sanctions committees represents,
no doubt, a heavy portion of the Council's activity,
but a significant part of it remains invisible. Sanctions
committees require efficiency in their working
methods, but also transparency. Transparency is
key to facilitating an understanding of the sanctions
regimes by States, which are the ones committees rely
upon for the effective implementation of sanctions.
The past decade has brought about new developments
in this area. One of them is the establishment of the
post of Ombudsperson for the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, which
we warmly welcome. Bearing in mind the substantive
results of its work, the Office of the Ombudsperson
offers today a remedy for those requesting delistings
that has proved to be real and effective. It would be
useful to replicate that experience in other sanctions
committees. For our part, we reiterate our support
to extending the mandate of the Ombudsperson to
other relevant sanctions committees. Those will lead
to strengthening the targeted nature of sanctions and
will help States in their domestic implementation, thus
improving the overall effectiveness of the sanctions
regimes.

Secondly, referrals are a prerogative of the Council
and an instrument to counter impunity made available
to the Council by the Rome Statute. Once the Council
uses that instrument, it should remain engaged with the
International Criminal Court (ICC), in particular in the
cooperation aspects necessary for the Court to perform
a judicial function. From the perspective of working
methods, it makes sense that the Council establish an
efficient way to address those aspects of its relationship
with the ICC without necessarily having to overburden
its already charged plan of work. In that regard, it should
be worth considering having issues relating specifically
to the follow-up of Council referrals considered by
a subsidiary body, which should review them and,
whenever needed, recommend Council action. That is a
matter that is not only relevant to the ICC. It has to do
with a broader issue, which is the implementation of the
Council's own decisions.

Before I conclude, I would like to highlight with a
few brief remarks, in view of the time available, some
of the very important aspects related to the Council's
working methods.

First, the annual reports serve two purposes:
statistical records and information. A considerable
part of the report is not meant to be read, but rather
consulted. That is the part containing statistical data
for historical record and future reference. The other
part, which is basically the introduction, should be
informative, and that is where there is still much work
to do. We think that it is through more informative
monthly assessments, particularly on subjects
discussed in consultations, that those parts should be
substantially enhanced. Next month, we will have the
opportunity to debate this issue when the annual report
will be presented in the General Assembly.

Secondly, on penholders, we welcome the note
by the President (S/2014/268) on this issue and recent
positive examples of co-penholdership in drafting
initiatives, which is encouraging. We would welcome,
in that vein, more joint initiatives by Council members.
We encourage in particular the newly elected members,
who we take the opportunity to congratulate again
on their election, to use the avenue opened by this
note. Through co-penholdership, we believe one can
improve the end result in substantive terms, even in
the facilitating of the negotiating process within the
Council.

Finally, on the election of the chairs of the subsidiary
bodies, again, the Council already agreed in December
2012, in its note contained in document S/2012/937 to

"support an informal process with the participation

of all Council members as regards appointing the

Chairpersons of subsidiary bodies from among

Council members in a balanced, transparent,
efficient and inclusive way" (S/2012/937, para. 2).

We would encourage members of the Council to
use these coming months before the end of the year,
in consultation with the recently elected members, to
put into practice this agreement, thereby engaging in
a more participatory informal process of appointment
through the establishment of a facilitation arrangement
involving the incoming members, but also the
participation and experience of those who remain in
and those who will be leaving the Council.

I would say one final word to congratulate the
Council for reintroducing and reinvigorating the wrap-
up meetings. We think that they represent a bold step
in the right direction in promoting the relationship
between the Council and the wider membership. They
are good news for accountability and transparency, two
aspects very dear to the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group, of which Portugal is a member.

