Mr. Fendrick: We wish to thank first of all
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs Aziz Pahad for his
briefing. We commend the superb mediation that
President Mbeki has done on behalf of the African
Union, and we also wish to thank the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria for his briefing on behalf of
President Obasanjo. We wish to pay tribute to all
those who have supported these efforts, which have
begun to bear some fruit.

My Government welcomes the Pretoria
Agreement. We are encouraged by the constructive
engagement that took place to build on prior promises
to overcome disagreements. The Pretoria Agreement
provides an opportunity to move events forward on the
ground in Cote d'Ivoire.

It is too early, of course, to say that all is well.
The parties have made important and serious
commitments which must now be fulfilled. We call on
the parties to abide by the letter and the spirit of the
Pretoria Agreement in order to move the process begun
by the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement to a peaceful and
successful conclusion. A real cessation of violence is
vital for this Agreement to succeed. It is for that reason
that we are in agreement with President Mbeki's
condemnation of ceasefire violations in November
2004 and February 2005. These are reminders of types
of events which must not recur.

In that regard, we also commend the parties for
their formal declaration of an end to hostilities. That is
an important political statement, but it is action on the
ground that matters most. We look forward to seeing
that commitment to peace backed up by concrete
action, in strict accordance with the Agreement.

Disarmament is certainly critical. We are pleased
that the armed forces of both sides have resumed their
discussions on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), as promised in the Agreement.
We commend the withdrawal of heavy weapons from
forward positions by the National Armed Forces of
Cote d'Ivoire (FANCI) and the Forces nouvelles. This
is a good step in the right direction. We now urge the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire and the Force nouvelles
to honour their agreement to finalize their DDR plans.
We are pleased that two ministers from Forces
nouvelles have rejoined the Government, and we call
for the full return of the Forces nouvelles to the
Government.

We call on the National Assembly of Cote
d'Ivoire to implement the required amendments to the
Independent Electoral Commission and to adopt all
other legislation necessary to conform to agreements
that have been reached by the two sides.

We call on President Gbagbo to respect,
implement and publicly support President Mbeki's
determination on presidential eligibility. We look
forward to the draft decree on the appointment of
members of the Radio Television Ivoirienne board. We
note that the Security Council continues to monitor the
situation, including the arms embargo and the existing
sanctions regime.

