Mr. Feltman: Last week, the Council heard
briefings that described in grim detail the tragedy
unfolding inside Syria and its dramatic humanitarian
consequences in the absence of a political solution that
could bring about a new and democratic Syria. This
is a moment of increased risk and instability across
the Middle East, and there is a need for quick and
concerted action to address the humanitarian situation,
both inside and outside Syria. Lebanon and Jordan are
on the front line and must be supported effectively.

Action must also be taken on the Israeli-Palestinian
issue. The fragile hope triggered by the renewed United
States engagement must be sustained and translated
into serious efforts on the part ofthe parties. The desire
for peace needs to be cultivated by early measures to
reverse negative trends on the ground and build trust.

Last month's visit of United States President Obama
marked an important opening. Secretary Kerry's
subsequent trips and continued engagement with the
parties and regional leaders demonstrate a serious
commitment to breaking the political deadlock. It was
in support of these efforts for renewed meaningful talks
that the Secretary-General met with President Obama on
11 April. The two agreed that there is at least a window
of opportunity for Israelis and Palestinians to resume
negotiations. The Secretary-General reconfirmed the
United Nations commitment to supporting, including
through the Quartet, a substantive initiative with
a defined political horizon to achieve a two-state
solution. He spoke to the urgency of making progress
towards peace.

In the margins of the Group of Eight meeting
on 10 April, ministers recommitted themselves to a
just, lasting, and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. They further agreed on the need for a major
international effort, involving regional parties and the
Quartet, to drive the peace process forward. Now is
the time for the international community to work in a
concerted manner and without delay. During the recent
Doha Summit, Arab leaders reconfirmed their intention
to send a ministerial delegation to Washington, DC, on
28 April to discuss the peace process.

Of course, much depends on whether the
parties have the political will and exercise the bold
leadership required to create conditions conducive
to the resumption of a political process, despite the
considerable differences between them and the risk
that events on the ground could overtake new efforts at
engagement.

In a development of note, on 13 April President
Abbas accepted the resignation of Prime Minister
Fayyad. The Prime Minister is expected to continue
carrying out his functions as caretaker until a new
Prime Minister is announced. The United Nations
recognizes that Prime Minister Fayyad had to contend
with circumstances that kept constraining the success of
the statebuilding agenda he led together with President
Abbas and which is now, in the absence of a credible
political horizon, at serious risk. We remain committed
to working with our Palestinian partners, under the
leadership of President Abbas, towards statebuilding
and development, and to achieving the long overdue
negotiated two-State solution.

In an encouraging development Israel and
Palestine, with the facilitation of several parties,
reached an important agreement on 23 April at a
meeting of UNESCO's Executive Board, which allows
for an experts mission to the old city of Jerusalem in
mid-May. The parties also agreed on the postponement
of five resolutions taken by UNESCO's Executive
Board. This agreement exemplifies how cooperation
and dialogue can be beneficial to all Member States and
also conducive to maintaining stability on the ground.

The financial viability of the Palestinian Authority
remains at stake, and we continue to call for donors to
step up their financial support. The budget approved by
the Palestinian Cabinet on 28 March for the 2013 fiscal
year reflects fiscal discipline, yet reveals the Palestinian
Authority's continued and increased dependence on
external aid to cover its expenditures in the short-term.
The Palestinian Authority's efforts to expand its tax
base and enhance collection will result in increased
net revenue of $2.5 billion, and total expenditure will
amount to $18 billion, more than half of which is for
wages, even with the implementation of a net hiring
freeze. This expenditure includes some $350 million
planned for development projects, most of them to be
financed externally and dedicated to rural communities
in Area C. International assistance amounting to close
to $1.4 billion will be required to cover the deficit. The
most recent meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
in March forecasted a worsening economic outlook for
the current year, with slower growth rates than in 2012,
and a growing financing gap for the new budget should
foreign aid continue to decline.

The reporting period witnessed a considerable
increase in Palestinian casualties, mostly as result
of new clashes with Israeli security forces during
Palestinians demonstrations that grew violent. On the
occasion of Palestinian Prisoners Day on 17 April,
some 3,000 prisoners went on hunger strike for the
day and demonstrations were held in main West Bank
cities, resulting in 11 Palestinians being injured by
rubber-coated bullets fired by Israeli security forces.
The issue of Palestinian prisoners has fueled much of
the unrest, especially following the terminal illness and
death of Maysara Abu Hamdiyeh in prison on 2 April.
During the clashes that ensued, Israeli security forces
killed two Palestinian teenagers and injured two more
with live ammunition at a checkpoint near Tulkarem
alter they allegedly threw Molotov cocktails at the
checkpoint. The case is under investigation by the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF), and we look forward to a timely
and public announcement of its conclusion.

We welcome the resolution in the case of Samer
Issawi, who has reportedly suspended his hunger strike
following a court ruling on 23 April that provides he
will be freed to his Jerusalem home after he serves an
additional eight months. We continue to call for a swift
resolution to his case based on humanitarian grounds.
The United Nations remains closely involved on the
ground, and the Secretary-General has urged that a
solution be reached without delay in order to end the
prisoners' plight and to preserve calm. We cannot but
recall that other fundamental issues incorporated in the
May 2012 agreement remain unresolved.

Wide demonstrations were also organized
throughout the West Bank on the occasion of Land Day
on 30 March, but violence was relatively contained
compared to previous years. Some 22 Palestinian
protesters and four Israeli soldiers were injured
on that day. Protests continued against the barrier,
which deviates from the Green Line in contravention
to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice. We reiterate that demonstrations must remain
non-violent. We also urge the Israeli security forces
to show the utmost restraint and to ensure the right of
Palestinians to demonstrate peacefully and freely.

In all, incursions by Israeli security forces in the
occupied West Bank remained at approximately the
same level - a total of 303 operations compared to
186 in the previous reporting period. But the levels
of violence have nearly doubled, with Israeli security
operations resulting in two Palestinian teenagers dead
and 724 people injured, including 352 children and
six women. A total of 354 Palestinians were arrested,
including a number of Hamas and Islamic jihad leaders.
Thirty-five Israeli soldiers were also reportedly injured
by protesters in the clashes during the period.
Clashes between Israeli settlers and Palestinians
have also continued. A total of 13 Palestinians, including
six children, were injured by settlers, and over 600
trees belonging to Palestinians were vandalized. On
7 April, Israeli settlers reportedly spray-painted racist
slogans on the walls of two mosques in a village near
Bethlehem. In two instances, Israeli security forces
arrested a total of six settlers, among them a serving
soldier, suspected of involvement in so-called price-tag
activities. Palestinian attacks on Israeli settlers in the
occupied West Bank resulted in ten injuries, including
one child and one woman, and extensive damage to
Israeli vehicles as the result of stone-throwing.

The reporting period registered continued
demolitions and related displacements in Area C and
East Jerusalem. As compared to the monthly average of
50 demolitions in 2012, 29 Palestinian-owned structures
were demolished between 25 March and 23 April 2013,
including 16 structures demolished yesterday, leading
to the displacement of 40 Palestinians.

We remain deeply troubled by the continued
developments with respect to settlement activity. Let
me reiterate unequivocally the consistent position
of the United Nations that settlement activity
violates international law. Settlement activity further
undermines Palestinians' confidence in the viability
of the two-State solution. The Secretary-General is
particularly worried about reports suggesting that
the Israeli Minister of Housing and Construction has
predicted the construction within a year and a half
of housing units in the El area of the West Bank.
Separately, initial approval was granted on 9 April to
begin a new construction project in a settlement that is
part of occupied East Jerusalem.

We are also concerned about the potentially
negative impact on Palestinians of the continuing
expansion of the Sderot Begin Highway through parts
of the neighbourhood of Beit Safafa, occupied by the
Israelis in 1967. Such actions are counterproductive to
creating the right environment for peace.

The situation in Gaza has become increasingly
fragile. The calm that followed the ceasefire on
21 November 2012 has been challenged, and there has
been little progress on the more substantive underlying
issues that formed part of that understanding. In an
alarming development, over the last month, a total
of 20 rockets, including three Grad rockets and four
mortar shells, were fired from Gaza into Israel and
towards the sea, albeit without causing injuries or
damage. Explosive ordnance placed along the border
fence hit an Israeli patrol, causing physical damages to
the vehicles but no injuries during the reporting period.
Israel conducted four incursions and two airstrikes into
the Gaza Strip. Two Palestinian civilians were injured
on 5 and 16 April by Israeli fire while approaching the
border fence. In reaction to the shooting of rockets,
Israel again closed the Kerem Shalom crossing from 8 to
11 April. Since 26 February, the crossing, which is the
only passage for goods from Israel into Gaza, has been
closed for 29 out of 56 days. The off-shore fishing limit
has remained reduced from six to three nautical miles
since 21 March, well below the 20-mile limit agreed
by the Israelis and Palestinians in the 1995 Israeli-
Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip, which remains in force and should be
respected. The movement of Palestinians across Erez
has been further restricted to humanitarian cases with
special permits for several periods since 26 February.

In another development, on 17 April two Grad
rockets fired from Egypt's Sinai peninsula exploded in
open areas ofthe Israeli Red Sea resort of Eilat, causing
no casualties or damage. The attack, claimed by the
Salafistjihadist group, Mujahideen Shura Council, was
the first such rocket-firing at Eilat in a year. The same
group has previously claimed responsibility for rocket
attacks from Gaza into Sderot on 21 March.

We continue to strongly condemn the firing of rockets
into Israel. Those rockets, which are indiscriminate, are
intended to sow fear and cause civilian casualties, and
can trigger cycles of violence difficult to stop. We also
call on Israel to act with restraint. At the same time, we
remain seriously concerned about the impact of Israeli
restrictions on the vulnerable civilian population in
Gaza. The United Nations continues to support Egypt's
efforts to fully implement the ceasefire understanding
it brokered between the parties. In that regard, we
continue to call for preservation of the calm, with
crossings into Israel remaining open and the fishing
limit line to be expanded in full implementation of the
November understanding. The United Nations will also
continue to work for the relief of the Gaza population,
including by stepping up reconstruction efforts.

Demonstrations and sit-ins took place all over the
Gaza Strip in front of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) facilities on 4 April, protesting against cuts to
its cash-assistance programme, which were necessitated
by budget shortfalls. Protests grew aggressive when a
group of demonstrators entered UNRWA offices and
threatened staff members, forcing UNRWA to close its
offices until 9 April, thus preventing the Agency from
providing necessary assistance to Palestine refugees.

Meanwhile, efforts to achieve Palestinian
reconciliation continue. Hamas and Fatah have
resumed informal working-level meetings but have
not advanced in their discussions. On 2 April, Khaled
Meshaal was re-elected Chief of the Hamas Political
Bureau. A day earlier, President Abbas reiterated his
position, in accordance with the Doha understanding of
February 2012, that he was prepared to lead a technical
interim Government, which would prepare for elections
90 days into its term. On 12 April the Chair of the
Central Election Commission (CEC) handed a copy of
the updated voter register to the Palestinian President
and informed him that the CEC is technically ready
to organize any election, once so decided. The voter
register now includes over 1.8 million electors, both
in the West Bank and Gaza, representing over 80 per
cent of the total Palestinian adult population, of which
48.2 per cent are female. The CEC continues to organize
the complementary municipal elections scheduled for
1 June 2013 in the West Bank.

On the Syrian Arab Republic, I will keep my
remarks short, as the Security Council was already
briefed in-depth only five days ago by the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States for Syria. Mr. Brahimi emphasized the need
for a political solution along the lines of the Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex) and warned against
the growing militarization and radicalization inside
Syria. He reiterated the Secretary-General's call to stop
the flow of arms to either side in Syria and called on the
Council to consider an arms embargo.

The Security Council also heard detailed
presentations on the humanitarian and refugee situation,
as well as on sexual violence and children in the context
of the Syrian conflict, by Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Amos, High Commissioner
for Refugees Guterres, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
Bangura, and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict Zerrougui. The
meeting provided an opportunity for the Council to hear
directly about the challenges faced by the neighbouring
countries most affected by the humanitarian spillover
of the Syrian conflict, particularly Lebanon and Jordan,

in their efforts to accommodate unprecedented flows of
refugees from Syria.
As concerns the United Nations fact-finding
mission to investigate the alleged use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, we are still in
discussions with the Government of Syria on the scope
and modalities of the mission. In line with his authority
under General Assembly resolution 42/37 C and Security
Council resolution 620 (1988), the Secretary-General
intends to ensure that all credible allegations brought
to his attention by Member States are considered and,
if it is deemed necessary, investigated. The Secretary-
General's position is that, at this time, the mission
should investigate the allegations about incidents in
Aleppo and Horns. While awaiting access to the Syrian
territory, the experts of the mission are studying the
information on the alleged incidents involving the use
of chemical weapons provided to them by Member
States. They remain ready to deploy to Syria within
24 to 48 hours following the Syrian Government's
acceptance of the modality and scope of the mission.

The situation in the Golan remains unstable, with
sporadic clashes between Syrian armed forces and
armed members of the opposition continuing on a daily
basis. The military activities in the area of separation
have the potential to escalate the situation between
Israel and Syria and tojeopardize the ceasefire between
the two countries, as has been highlighted by recent
incidents. On two occasions, on 2 and 12 April, the IDF
fired tank rounds and missiles in what they described
as retaliation for gunfire aimed from the Bravo side at
IDF patrols across the ceasefire line. Syrian authorities
reported to the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force that the missiles fired by the IDF on 12 April
caused one fatality and injured several members of
Syrian security forces.

The spillover of the conflict in Syria continues to
be felt in Lebanon, particularly in northeastern border
areas. On 21 April, at least seven rockets from the
Syrian side fell on Lebanese soil in the villages ofDora,
Aysh, Sahlat Al-Miyah and the town ofHermel, causing
only material damage; no casualties were reported.
The Lebanese Armed Forces deployed heavily in the
area. In a statement, President Sleiman denounced the
missile attacks on Lebanon and stressed Lebanon's
role in hosting Syrian refugees. He stated that Lebanon
is working on controlling the border in accordance
with the Baabda Declaration, and that the Army and
relevant authorities were instructed to take measures
to prevent attacks on Lebanon and protect the safety
of its citizens. There were reports of three further
airstrikes on Lebanese territory on 3, 4 and 11 April by
Syrian military aircraft, none of which caused injury.
On 8 April, the Lebanese Foreign Ministry raised the
issue of the violations of Lebanese sovereignty to the
Syrian authorities. On 14 April, two Lebanese civilians
were killed and two injured in shelling from across
the border in Syria. I take this opportunity to reiterate
the concern of the United Nations that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Lebanon should be fully
respected by all parties.

On 6 April, President Sleiman designated
Tamam Salam the next Prime Minister, following
the resignation of Prime Minister Mikati last month.
Mr. Salam, whose designation received near-unanimous
parliamentary support, has stated that he will form a
Government to hold parliamentary elections and that
he is in consultations with the parties regarding the
character and composition of his future cabinet. It is
critical that Lebanese leaders use this opportunity
to continue to engage positively to ensure the early
formation of a Government. The Secretary-General
also calls on all Lebanese parties to respect President
Sleiman's wise and courageous disassociation policy,
designed to help protect Lebanon from spillover from
Syria. The Secretary-General, concerned about reports
that there are Lebanese fighting in Syria, both on the
side of the regime and the side of the opposition, hopes
the new Government will find ways to promote better
compliance with the disassociation policy by all sides
in Lebanon.

On 6 April, President Sleiman signed a decree
postponing the parliamentary elections by one week
to 16 June. On 10 April, Parliament voted to amend
the current election law, suspending the candidate
registration process until 19 May, so as to give the parties
a longer period in which to agree on a new electoral
framework. I echo Council members' call for swift
progress to be made in ensuring speedy agreement on
the electoral law, so that timely parliamentary elections
take place on a consensual basis within the legal and
constitutional framework.

Meanwhile, the situation in the area of operations
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and
along the Blue Line has remained generally calm. Twice
this month, President Sleiman publicly condemned
Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace as breaches of
resolution 1701 (2006).

In conclusion, allow me to make the following
observations. As the situation inside Syria continues
to deteriorate, it is more vital than ever that everyone
collectively works towards preserving regional stability.
Advancing the Middle East peace process remains
central to ensuring that the region is not at further risk
of destabilization. Let me repeat what the Secretary-
General has stated at every opportunity: there is now an
opening to develop a meaningful initiative to achieve
the negotiated two-State solution that will best serve
the interests, rights and aspirations of both Israelis and
Palestinians. But it is not an overstatement to suggest
that we are about to reach a critical point in the viability
of the peace process. Whether that prospect solidifies
or vanishes will depend on the direction that leaders on
both sides choose to take, and on the level of regional
and international support for new efforts.

Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas
have reiterated the right commitments. The choice
ultimately rests in their hands not to disappoint their
people and to offer them, at last, real prospects for
peace and security. The international community also
bears a unique responsibility to help them move forward
together. The United Nations welcomes the renewed
attention that the United States is giving to the peace
process. We stand ready to contribute to a return to
meaningful negotiations in the period ahead, including
through the Quartet and through broader engagement
with all relevant partners. Despite the difficult regional
context and the challenges on the ground between
Israel and Palestine, we believe that this is a moment of
opportunity that we cannot afford to lose.

