Mr. Loulichki. (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to express my congratulations for a
very successful Argentine presidency of the Security
Council during this month of August, which has been
very busy and has demanded the active participation of
the presidency and all members of the Council until the
very end of August. I would also like to congratulate
Ms. Sandra Honore on her appointment as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
I welcome her presence here and thank her for her
thorough briefing. We would also like to express our full
appreciation to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for the work accomplished so
far. Finally, I would like to welcome our new colleague,
the Permanent Representative of China, Mr. Liu Jieyi,
on the occasion of his first participation in our work. I
wish him all the very best.

Morocco welcomes the concerted efforts by the
Haitian authorities in various areas, especially those
to develop its police force, strengthen capacities for
elections and promote and ensure respect for human
rights, as well as good governance.

Politically speaking, the establishment of a
transitional college of the permanent Electoral Council,
as well as the advances made in the implementation
of the Government's "five Es" policy programme,
are positive developments, which we welcome. Now
the constitutional work needs to be finalized so as to
enable legislative, municipal and local elections to
take place as soon as possible. It is a positive sign that
yesterday, as the Special Representative indicated,
President Martelly submitted a draft law on elections
to the Parliament. We would like these elections to be
accelerated, and all parties, including MINUSTAH,
should assist. We would like to support Ms. Honore's
efforts in that regard, in particular the announcement
and adoption of electoral laws and the promotion of
dialogue among the various political stakeholders in
order to find a consensus that would enable elections to
be held as soon as possible .

Concerning security, the collective action
of MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police
are beginning to bear fruit, thus contributing to
progressive and noticeable improvements in the
country. The strengthening of recruitment for and
capacity development of the Haitian National Police,
in accordance with the 2012-2016 development plan,
has enabled the police to take on greater responsibility,
allowing the withdrawal of MINUSTAH from four
departments. In that regard, the decrease by 50 per
cent in the number of criminal acts and kidnappings as
compared to 2012 is also extremely reassuring.

On the humanitarian situation, although
encouraging results have been achieved in terms of
rehousing displaced persons by the end of2013, 279,000
people continue to be housed in 352 camps in deplorable
sanitary conditions. Furthermore, the persistence of
food insecurity, which was exacerbated by the impact
of Hurricane Sandy in 2012, is still affecting almost
1.5 million people.

Aware of its primary responsibility in improving
the socioeconomic situation of its population, the
Government invested greatly during the reporting
period in promoting and attracting foreign investment.
Such efforts should be encouraged, especially given the
roll-back in international assistance.

Since its establishment, MINUSTAH has
decisively contributed to the efforts to stabilize the
country. We commend the Mission's staff for the work
that they have accomplished up to this point in spite of
the difficulties and obstacles they have faced. While
we support the Haitian Government in its efforts to
assume its responsibilities, specifically for security and
socioeconomic development, we call on MINUSTAH to
continue to pursue its valuable support for the Haitian
authorities, in close collaboration with the country team
and Haiti's regional and international partners.

A short time ago, the Special Representative
welcomed and underscored the efforts of senior
Haitian officials in the areas of security, reconstruction
and the economy. Also in that regard, it is correct to
insist on the importance of holding elections as soon
as possible. The Haitian political forces are therefore
urged at this very crucial stage of the modern history
of their country to transcend their differences and put
the national interests above their partisan interests in
order to ensure the stability of Haiti and the well-being
of its people. We hope that they will be up to the task of
assuming that responsibility. We are certain that they
will spare no effort to achieve that stability, bring Haiti
back to a state of normality and launch the sustainable
development of the country.

