Mr. Baali (Algeria) (interpretation from French): For
the delegation of Algeria and for me personally, it is
enormously gratifying to see a worthy son of Africa
presiding over the Security Council's deliberations this
month. Allow me to congratulate you warmly, Sir, and to
wish you every possible success in your difficult but
interesting task.

I also wish to express my admiration for another
worthy son of Africa, the Ambassador of Gabon, who so
skilfully and effectively led the Council's work at a
moment when the entire world, with bated breath, had
turned its eyes to our Organization.

I also wish to take this opportunity to welcome
Mr. Muntasser, the representative of Libya, a sister State
and the family members of the victims of Lockerbie, to
whom we extend our sincere condolences.

For many years, the brotherly Libyan people has been
subjected to a very severe embargo, the grave consequences
of which are reflected in the daily life of the people, as
well as in their health and well-being. These consequences
are known to all, particularly since they were clearly
described late last year in the report of Mr. Petrovsky, the
Secretary-General's special envoy to Libya. Because of the
ban imposed on Libya, which also affects the rest of the
world, starting with us, the neighbouring countries, and
which prevents entry into or exit from Libyan territory by
air, the Libyan people has found itself cut off from the rest
of the world, condemned to a tragic isolation for which it
neither understands the cause nor sees an end.

Algeria most emphatically condemns terrorism
whatever its form, manifestation or motivation and calls for
a strengthening of international cooperation to tackle this
terrible scourge of our times which threatens us all. My
country has constantly stressed, in respect of the horrendous
Lockerbie attack, the need to pursue and prosecute with all
necessary rigour those who organized and perpetrated it
and to establish the whole truth about the crime, which
must not go unpunished.

Thus, together with all the Arab and African
countries, it could not but express its satisfaction at seeing
Libya, which has been urgently requested to extradite two
of its nationals suspected of organizing the attack, declare
its readiness to allow those nationals to be tried in a third
country. Libya's proposals to this effect seem to us to be
in keeping with an approach towards settling this dispute
in a just, decent and honourable manner. The dispute has
lasted too long already, so long that the families of the
victims of this appalling attack - whose immense grief
we share, as we share also the suffering of the fraternal
Libyan people, with whom we feel solidarity, in the
sufferings imposed on them - have almost come to
despair of ever seeing it resolved.

What ultimately counts in this terrible tragedy is that
the truth should be established and justice done. What
matters for the families of the victims and for the
international community as a whole is that the alleged
terrorists should be tried, and if their guilt is established,
that they should be receive an exemplary punishment so
that cowardly attacks like this do not happen again. What
also matters is that at the same time the unspeakable
suffering of the Libyan people should cease.

By declaring that it has jurisdiction over the matter,
the International Court of Justice has definitely just taken
an important decision which Algeria cannot but welcome.
We welcome it, first, because this decision will, we hope,
mark the start of a process that will make it possible to
break the deadlock over the matter and lead to a trial of
the alleged perpetrators of the horrendous Lockerbie
attack under conditions of equity, the establishment of the
truth and the triumph of justice. We welcome it, secondly,
because the long-awaited resolution of this tragedy should
pave the way for the lifting of the sanctions, which are so
severely afflicting the fraternal people of Libya, with
which the Algerian people is in solidarity. We welcome
it, finally, because the end of the Lockerbie crisis will
have the effect of reducing tensions in the region and
facilitating a return to the normality and stability our
Maghreb needs so much.

Lastly, I hope that this decision of the International
Court of Justice will prompt the Council and the General
Assembly to engage in a healthy, serious and fruitful
debate on the very principle of sanctions - which have
shown their limits and, generally speaking, have served
 

only to penalize civilian populations - and on
arrangements and conditions for lifting them.

