The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

Abdel Hamid Al-Youssef put his nine-month-old
twin babies in the ground last week. Each branch of
Abdel's extended family reportedly got its own trench
to bury their dead. One family, 22 victims. Abdel held
his twins in his arms. He tried to keep himselftogether.
He tried to stop his tears. All Abdel could say before
putting his twins in their final resting place was "say
goodbye baby, say goodbye". They were two of the
smallest Victims of the Assad regime's vicious and
barbaric chemical attack.

No one anywhere in the world should ever have to
face that kind of suffering. That is why the United States
of America, the United Kingdom and France put forward
today's draft resolution. It was a step toward holding
the perpetrators of that chemical attack accountable,
and I thank those members who supported that effort.
But, with its veto, Russia said "no" to accountability.
Russia said "no" to cooperation with the United Nations
independent investigation, and Russia said "no" to
a draft resolution that would have helped to promote
peace in Syria. Russia once again has chosen to side
with Assad, even as the rest of the world - including
the Arab world - has overwhelmingly come together
to condemn that murderous regime.

Russia said that the draft resolution was biased
and that the Assad regime was not involved. The draft
resolution simply emphasized the information that the
regime is already required to provide to investigators.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
has told us many times that Assad has not provided the
access needed to investigate. We need to continue to
support the Mechanism's role in further investigating
what happened on 4 April. If the regime is innocent, as
Russia claims, the information requested by the draft
resolution would have vindicated them. Unfortunately,
this was Russia's eighth veto on the Syrian resolution.
The United States takes no pleasure in seeing Russia
isolated again in the Security Council. We want to work
with Russia to advance a political process for Syria. We
want Russia to use its influence over the Assad regime
to stop the madness and the cruelty that we see every
day on the ground.

Today's vote could have been a turning point. Once
more, today's voting could have served as the moment
when Russia saw that its interests do not lie with a
murderous dictator, but rather with the many countries
in the international community, including those all
across the Middle East, that want to end the conflict.

By its failure, Russia will continue to be isolated.
We urge Russia to join forces with the overwhelming
number of countries that are pushing for a political
solution. The international community has spoken.
Russia now has a lot to prove.

To Assad and the Syrian Government, I say that
they have no friends in the world after their horrible
actions. The United States is watching their actions
very closely. The days of their arrogance and disregard
of humanity are over. Their excuses will no longer be
heard. I suggest that they look at today's vote very
carefully and heed our warning.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic

