Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting on topics supposedly related to
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. I
say supposedly as a reflection of our disappointment
that, after several days of discussing a draft
presidential statement as the outcome document to
crystallize the results of this meeting, nothing remains
on the matter of nuclear non-proliferation. At any rate,
we appreciate the concept paper (S/2012/194, annex)
circulated by your delegation to substantiate our
debate, Madam President, which by itself has the merit
of focusing on the differences that persist on the matter
between the members of the Council.

In spite of that, recent circumstances have
demonstrated that it has become more pressing and
necessary than ever to advance on the road towards a
world free of nuclear weapons - a goal that your own
head of State, Madam President, articulated in a
visionary manner as the ultimate goal that we must
aspire to. Nuclear disarmament is the only sensible
way to forge a more secure world. Nothing would
contribute more to reducing the risk of the proliferation
or use of nuclear weapons than their total elimination.
With respect to the issues under consideration
today, Guatemala's position reflects that of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), which is contained in
document S/2012/223. Allow me, however, to make
some remarks in my national capacity.

Guatemala reaffirms the validity of the norms
that underpin the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), as well as the commitments
that we have undertaken, particularly in the framework
of the Review Conferences of the parties to the Treaty,
most recently in 2010. While it is true that the new
challenges that we currently face have given rise to
divergent views regarding our next steps, we cannot
lose sight of the fact that the Treaty was adopted as the
cornerstone of disarmament, arms control and the
peaceful prevention of the proliferation of nuclear
weapons.

Guatemala believes in the universality of the NPT
and the strict observance of each of its provisions. We
stress that compliance is a legal obligation and that all
States parties must give clear evidence of their
commitment to the spirit and the letter of that
international legal instrument.

Furthermore, we deem it crucial to maintain the
moratorium on nuclear tests until the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty enters into force. We wish to
take this opportunity to reaffirm our country's support
for the Treaty, which we signed on 20 September 1999
and ratified, as was recalled by the representative of
France, on 12 January 2012.

We must devise ways to strengthen activities
aimed at nuclear disarmament, which requires, above
all, an expression of clear political will on the part of
nuclear-weapon States, as well as a set of concrete,
time-bound and verifiable actions that will make it
possible to abandon the type of rhetoric that obliges us
to acknowledge progress even as nuclear weapons
continue to exist in vast quantities and attempts are
being made to broaden their scope.

We note certain positive political signals
emanating from the nuclear-weapon States that suggest
their renewed commitment to nuclear disarmament at
the bilateral and multilateral levels, and we hope that
this will translate into concrete measures in the near
future. In that respect, we view the New START treaty,
signed between the United States and the Russian
Federation, as a step in the right direction. In the same
vein, we believe that initiatives aimed at promoting
nuclear security and the agreements that were reached
between the countries that participated in the Seoul and
Washington, DC, summits represent an important
contribution to the process of reviewing nuclear-
weapons-related security doctrines.

We are convinced that to ensure that those
agreements yield the best possible results, we must
keep in mind at all times that just as progress must be
made on nuclear disarmament, we must also make
advances in the area of non-proliferation. In that
regard, we the non-nuclear-weapon States must also
comply with own responsibilities under the NPT,
reaffirming our commitment not to acquire nuclear
weapons while preserving our inalienable right to
accede to, develop and, in future, participate in nuclear
technologies for exclusively pacific uses.

On the other hand, nuclear terrorism and the
illicit trafficking in nuclear material pose a grave threat
to security, which must be addressed through a global
commitment. It is imperative that all States comply
with the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004).

Finally, all of these measures - in the areas of
both disarmament and non-proliferation - must be
implemented in an environment that is conducive to
verification and transparency, with a view to restoring
confidence among the parties to the Treaty. We
therefore underline the role of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in the verification of the exclusively
peaceful use of nuclear energy.

Guatemala is proud to be a party to the Treaty of
Tlatelolco, which established the first inhabited
nuclear-weapon-free zone on the planet and has served
as an example and an inspiration for the creation of
other such zones. The consolidation of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in Latin America and the Caribbean
was also aimed at preserving the area from the risk of a
nuclear threat.

In closing, we wish to affirm that this meeting
represents an opportunity to assess the goodwill of all
parties in terms of meeting and honouring their
commitments and the resultant expectations. We must
not renege on those commitments; rather, we must
reaffirm the unequivocal pledges that have been made
to date and address the new challenges that we face. It
is on the basis of that understanding that together we
must progress towards agreement on a common agenda
to maintain international peace and security.
