Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I should like first to
thank Ambassador Munoz for his presentation today.
Acts of terrorism by Al Qaeda and Taliban-associated
terrorists continue unabated, and in late October, the
Japanese people were shocked and saddened by the
killing in Iraq of a young Japanese man by a group
considered to be associated with Abu Musab al-
Zarqawi. As a result, Japan is all the more resolved to
maintain its determined posture, in concert with the
international community, in the fight against terrorist
groups, which do not hesitate to take the lives of
innocent citizens for political purposes.

Having heard the Chairman's briefing, and taking
into consideration Japan's current counter-terrorism
policy, I would like to make the following three points
in relation to the Committee's activities for the coming
yean

First, Japan places importance on improving the
quality of the Committee's consolidated list as a
valuable information source enabling individual
Member States to take effective sanction measures
against terrorists. We strongly hope that more
information will be added, to enable Member States to
have a more substantive list at their disposal. Recently,
my Government, along with other Member States,
submitted additional information for inclusion in the
List. On the other hand, as indicated by the report of
the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change (A/59/565), submitted to the Secretary-
General, it has also become essential to review the
information on the list in the light of developments
occurring after individuals and entities have been
listed. We understand that it is not easy to amend or
delete information on suspected individuals or entities
once they are included on the list, but that exercise, in
our view, is indispensable to ensuring that the list
constitutes a reliable database. In that context, my
Government thinks highly of the recent approval by the
Committee of a substantial number of corrections to
the information contained in the list on the basis of its
inquiries to Member States.

Secondly, it is highly important to further
strengthen cooperation among related organs within the
United Nations. In order to be successful in the fight
against terrorism, it is extremely important to have
effective cooperation with the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
other bodies having experience in that area. I am sure
that the Chairman's visits to Member States are very
useful, and it is critical that the results of those visits
be shared with the CTC. To the greatest extent
possible, information must be shared with other
counter-terrorism-related organs as to whether
individual Member States regard the sanction measures
as effective and what problems they have encountered
in implementing them. Above all, such information
must be shared with the CTC, because it is
indispensable for the Committee to understand the
assistance needs of individual Member States in order
to ensure implementation of counter-terrorism
measures.

Thirdly, among the activities of the Committee
for next year, improving and strengthening the sanction
measures, in our view, is the most difficult and critical
issue. My Government naturally attaches great
importance to that matter. When we learn from the
reports submitted by Member States, for example, that
none of the individuals on the Committee's
consolidated list are reported to have been stopped at
any border, or that there are no instances in which the
arms embargo has been enforced, we cannot help but
ask ourselves if the measures have been truly effective.
The Committee should undertake a study to ascertain
the problems confronting us in this area, based on the
forthcoming analysis of the measures by the
Monitoring Team, and to determine how to ensure the
effectiveness of the measures. In addition, as I pointed
out at the public meeting on the activities of this
Committee in September, my Government hopes that
effective methods will be devised to deal with cases in
which terrorists open financial accounts abroad by
illegally assuming the identities of individuals in actual
existence. We are looking forward to concrete
recommendations from the Monitoring Team on the
improvement and strengthening of the sanctions
measures.

During the past year and a half, Ambassador
Munoz has worked with remarkable vigor,
endeavouring to enhance the importance of the 1267
Committee and its operational effectiveness. I
understand that Member States will have another
opportunity to hear Ambassador Munoz when he
delivers his summary statement on 22 December on the
work completed under his chairmanship of the
Committee. However, my Government would like to
take this opportunity to express to him its deep respect
and profound appreciation for his efforts and
contribution during his tenure. Our appreciation also
goes to his outstanding staff. My country will join the
Committee as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council as of next month. We plan to do our best
during our Council membership to work towards the
goal of eradicating terrorism related to Al Qaeda and
the Taliban. I would like to ask Ambassador Mufioz for
his continued advice and cooperation on this issue.

