Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): We thank Ambassador
Osorio for his quarterly report and commend his
efforts in steering the work of the Committee. We take
note of the recent report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation in Iran
of safeguards in accordance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation ofNucIear Weapons (NPT) as well as
the resolution adopted by the Board of Governors. The
increasingly heated rhetoric and potential confrontation
over Iran's nuclear programme threatens to further
destabilize the immediate region and beyond. In our
view, dialogue and diplomacy are the only means to
resolve outstanding issues.
As a party to the NPT, Iran is required to carry out
the obligations that the Treaty entails. Similarly, Iran,
as a member ofthe IAEA, is required to cooperate fully
with the Agency within the framework of its safeguards
agreement. While Iran should fulfil its legal obligations
under the NPT and the IAEA Statute, its rights under
those instruments should also be duly respected. We
urge Iran to extend full cooperation to the IAEA for
resolution of all outstanding issues.

We believe that a peaceful resolution of the crisis is
possible on the basis of reciprocal confidence-building
measures relating to Iran's nuclear programme as
well as measures to ensure the exercise of its right to
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We urge the five plus
one group and Iran to stay engaged in a meaningful
manner, build on the talks that they have held this year
and deepen the diplomatic process for a negotiated and
peaceful solution of the Iranian nuclear issue.

We continue to share the view that the Panel of
Experts needs to undertake its work and activities
strictly in accordance with its mandate, as outlined
in the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and under the direction of the Committee. While it is
essential that Iran fulfil its international obligations,
the work of the Committee, and particularly that of
the Panel of Experts, must be tailored to the larger but
mutually reinforcing goal of effective implementation
of the sanctions and a diplomatic solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue.

We reiterate our view that Security Council
sanctions should not be pursued as an end in themselves.
A negotiated solution to the unresolved issues can
only be advanced if the Council, the Committee and
the Panel of Experts remain mindful of the need to
maintain a balance between sanctions and negotiations.
Given the delicate and complex regional environment,
Pakistan, as a neighbouring country of Iran, does not
wish any further escalation of tensions in an already
volatile region. We therefore reaffirm the need for
dialogue and diplomacy.

Coming back to the subject ofthe Panel, we continue
to believe that its composition needs to be made more
diverse and representative, with, in particular, more of
its members being drawn from developing countries.
The requirements of expertise must be balanced
against the well-established principle of broader
geographic representation. In so doing, the Council and
the Committee will help promote greater awareness
and effective implementation of the sanctions regime
among the wider United Nations Membership.
