Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. I also take this opportunity
to thank the Member States for their care and support
for the work of the Security Council.

The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the solemn responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. In today's
complex state of international affairs, fraught with
security challenges of all kinds and with expectations

high on the part of the Member States, the Security
Council finds itself facing colossal tasks.

In recent years, the Council has striven to meet its
responsibilities and made active efforts to improve its
working methods and enhance the transparency of its
work. The Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions has carried out fruitful
work, and the President's note contained in document
S/2006/507 marks an important step towards further
improvement of the rules and procedures of the
Security Council. Efforts in this regard have also
benefited from constructive views and proposals put
forward by Member States. We should build on the
results achieved so far, base our actions on reality, and
continue to tap potentials for the improvement of the
Council's working methods so as to make its work
more equitable, efficient and transparent.

I believe that we should focus our efforts on the
following aspects. First, we should widely seek the
views of non-members of the Council and strengthen
communication and interaction with them. Useful
practices in this regard include monthly briefings by
the presidency of the Security Council to non-members
of the Council and dialogues with troop-contributing
countries (TCCs). We hope that the Council fully hears
the views and proposals of the Member States. We also
hope that the latter will make the best use of such
occasions as open meetings and meetings with TCCs to
air their views so that the Council can be informed of
their valuable opinions.

Secondly, we should seek practical results in the
enhancement of transparency. Efforts to enhance
transparency should stress the participation of Member
States and the practical results achieved, instead of
becoming a matter of formality. Open meetings are
more transparent and enjoy the broader participation of
Member States. As such, they offer an important
platform for non-members of the Council to participate
in the work of the Council. We hope that open
meetings will be more results-oriented so that
non-members of the Council are given an opportunity
to present their views and proposals. The themes of
open meetings should have a more narrow focus and
should not be too general.

Thirdly, we should focus our energy on
addressing major and urgent threats to international
peace and security. We support the annual review by
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions of items on the Security
Council's agenda in order to keep the agenda current,
save resources and increase efficiency. Recent years
have seen an excessive increase in thematic items,
some of which are beyond the Council's sphere of
competence. This trend should be a matter of concern
to Member States.

Fourthly, we should further improve the
timeliness and quality of Council documents. The
surge in quantity of documents adopted by the Security
Council in recent years demonstrates the increase in
the Council's workload, but also serves as a reminder
that greater attention should be paid to the quality of
documents and their practical implementation. Reports
of the Secretary-General should strive to be more
targeted and timely so as to become living documents
that genuinely reflect problems and present
recommendations. Due attention should be given to
making relevant documents available in all six official
languages in a timely manner, which is an important
step in enhancing the transparency and openness of the
Security Council.

Improving the working methods of the Security
Council is a long-term task that cannot be
accomplished all at once. We are willing to work with
others in making unremitting efforts in this regard. We
are convinced that, with the continuous improvement
of its working methods and incessant innovation of its
practice, the Security Council will be better able to
fulfil the mission entrusted to it by the States Members
of the United Nations.

