Mr. Akufo-Addo (Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana): I must begin first, Mr. President, by
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of November
and to thank you and members of the Security Council
for receiving once more a ministerial delegation of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mediation and Security Council on such
short notice. That is yet another sign of the support and
concern of the Security Council for matters concerning
ECOWAS and we are grateful for that.

Today's delegation from ECOWAS is composed
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Mamadou Bamba; the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Guinea,
Mr. Francois Fall; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Ambassador Olu
Adeniji, an old friend of this Organization; the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States, Mr. Mohamed Chambas; and
myself, Nana Akufo-Addo, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Ghana and Chairman of the
ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council. The
delegation is fortified by the presence here in the
Council Chamber of Mr. Albert Tevoedjre, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Cote
d'Ivoire and Chairman of the Monitoring Committee
(Comite' de Saivi), Ambassador Raph Uwechue, Special
Representative of the ECOWAS Executive Secretary in
Cote d'Ivoire and member of the Monitoring
Committee, and Colonel R. O. Sackey, Deputy
Commander of the ECOWAS Mission in Cote d'Ivoire
(ECOMICI).

We are here today to brief the Security Council
on current developments in the peace process in Cote
d'Ivoire. You may recall that earlier this year a
ministerial delegation of the ECOWAS Mediation and
Security Council that I was privileged to lead had the
honour of addressing this august body on the situation
in Cote d'Ivoire. Since then ECOWAS has continued to
benefit from the support of the United Nations in
general, and that of the Security Council, in particular,
by its endorsement of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement
in resolution 1464 (2003) of 4 February 2003 and the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in Cote
d'Ivoire (MINUCI) by resolution 1479 (2003) of 13
May 2003. Since then, some of the terms of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement were subsequently clarified by
the provisions of the Accra II Accord.

Significant progress has been made towards the
restoration of peace in Cote d'Ivoire, notably by: the
joint declaration of a cessation of hostilities by the
National Armed Forces of Cote d'Ivoire and the Forces
nouvelles and the establishment of a Joint
Reunification Committee; the formation of the
Government of National Reconciliation; the
promulgation of the amnesty law by the National
Assembly; the progressive re-establishment of State
authority in several parts of the country; the
elaboration of draft laws relating to the various issues
addressed by the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement; and the
setting up of a National Committee for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration.

Despite this progress, the peace process has faced
certain difficulties such as disagreement over the
appointment of certain Government officials and heads
of Government corporations; concerns over the
personal safety of members of the Government of
National Reconciliation; the persistence of provocative
demonstrations and inflammatory statements by the
various parties; the delay in the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process; the delay in returning the country to normality
as a result of the continued de facto partitioning of the
country; and the non-delegation to the consensually
chosen Prime Minister of the required executive
prerogatives for the implementation of the Linas-
Marcoussis Accord. These difficulties have resulted in
the suspension by the Forces nouvelles of their
participation in the Government of National
Reconciliation, the Council of Ministers and the DDR
programme.

It has, therefore, become imperative to find a
rapid solution to these difficulties to ensure that there
is no further deterioration of the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire. The social and economic development of the
country may then be compromised, the suffering of the
people unduly prolonged and the stability of the West
African region again jeopardized. There is, thus, a need
to reinforce initiatives aimed at facilitating and
accelerating the implementation of the confidence-
building measures provided in the Linas-Marcoussis
and Accra Accords and thereby creating a momentum
for the implementation of these agreements.

Concerned by this situation, the Chairman of the
Authority of Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the President of the Republic of Ghana,
His Excellency John Agyekum Kufuor, convened in
Accra on 11 November 2003, a consultative closed-
door meeting of some Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS, comprising President Mathieu Kerekou
of Benin, President Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso,
President Laurent Gbagbo of Cote d'Ivoire, President
Tandja Mamadou of Niger, President Olusegun
Obasanjo of Nigeria and President Gnassingbe
Eyadema of Togo in order to consider the security
situation in West Africa, and in particular the situation
in Cote d'Ivoire.

The Heads of State emphasized the need for the
President and the Prime Minister of C6te d'Ivoire to
work closely together to ensure that the Government of
National Reconciliation is able to function as a team
and implement the programme of work drawn up; the
need to guarantee the security of the members of the
Government of National Reconciliation by immediate
strengthening of the ECOWAS Mission in Cote
d'Ivoire (ECOMICI) VIP Protection Unit; the
responsibility of the Ivorian political class for the
excesses of the media and the need for the class to
contribute effectively together with civil society to the
reinforcement of the process of national reconciliation;
and the need for close and harmonious relations among
the States of West Africa to enhance the security of the
region and help hasten the peace process in Cote
d'Ivoire.

The Heads of State concluded with the view that
the presence of a robust peacekeeping force, capable of
securing the entire national territory, would contribute
greatly to the implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Accord. ECOWAS, unfortunately, does not dispose of
the means required to raise and maintain such a force.
It had, thus, become necessary for the United Nations
to consider the transformation of the ECOMICI into a
full-fledged United Nations peacekeeping force.

The meeting, involving a frank exchange of
views, ended on a positive note, which permitted three
days later the Ivorian Prime Minister, Seydou Diarra, to
go to Ouagadougou, the capital of Burkina Faso, to
meet with the Faso President, His Excellency Blaise
Cornpaore. The meeting was successful. This process
of rapprochement has to be warmly welcomed and
encouraged for it represents the best way to peace and
stability in the region. It is in the same vein that, given
the assurances and undertakings that flowed from the
meeting, we anticipate the imminent return of the
Forces nouvelles to full participation in the
Government of National Reconciliation, an event
which will give greater impetus to the implementation
of the Linas-Marcoussis Accord.

It is worth reiterating that insecurity in Cote
d'Ivoire has remained the real threat to the peace
process. Various sources have alleged that the various
parties are strengthening their positions militarily in
the eventuality of a resumption of hostilities. It is vital
for peace in Cote d'Ivoire that dialogue,
accommodation and reconciliation, and not the resort
to force, remain for the parties the means for the
resolution of the crisis. All measures should be taken in
order to continue to secure the ceasefire and to
implement the security provisions of the Linas-
Marcoussis Accord. ECOWAS, for its part, continues
to work closely with the French troops of Operation
Licorne to secure the line of separation between the
belligerents. ECOWAS has also decided to deploy
immediately 80 additional policemen to augment the
personal security of the Ministers of the Government of
National Reconciliation. These efforts need now to be
supported by a stronger and wider engagement of the
international community.

I wish to renew once again our sincere
appreciation to the Security Council for all its efforts
and attention to the West African region and request
that the Security Council consider the possibility of
establishing a United Nations peacekeeping force in
Cote d'Ivoire and of transforming the ECOWAS
mission in Cote d'Ivoire into part of this United
Nations peacekeeping force. We strongly believe that
this step will be decisive for the peace process in Cote
d'Ivoire. Indeed and in addition, there appears to be
virtual unanimity amongst the principal actors of the
Ivorian crisis from the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Laurent Gbagbo, and the Prime Minister,
Seydou Diarra, through to the former President of the
Republic and leader of the Parti democratique de Cote
d'Ivoire (PDCI), Henri Konan Bedie, the former Prime
Minister and leader of the Rassemblement
democratique africain (RDA), Allasane Ouattara, and
the Minister of State and leader of the Forces
nouvelles, Guillaume Soro, about the need for such a
step. Once again, the region is ready to contribute to
this peacekeeping force and work closely with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
implementation of its mandate.

I cannot end without appealing to the proverbial
sense of humanity and solidarity of this great
institution, the Security Council of the United Nations.
Despite the current difficulties confronting them, the
peoples of West Africa are determined to be part of the
global movement for democracy, respect for human
rights and the rule of law. They need your patience and
assistance at this critical juncture of their history, and I
am confident that, in the end, they will not disappoint
you.

I wish to thank you, President and Members of
the Security Council, for your kind attention.

