Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
thank the United Kingdom presidency for organizing
this debate, giving the Council the opportunity to take
stock after six months of reform discussions. Let me
also thank Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy
and Susana Malcorra for their presentations.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union.

We were particularly pleased to see General
Martin Luther Agwai and his colleagues in the Council
today. Austria hopes that the presence of force
commanders in Council meetings dealing with
peacekeeping issues will become a regular practice.
Briefings by military experts provide accurate
information on the real-life challenges peacekeeping
missions face and are thus indispensable to the
Council's decision-making.

The past few months have seen a great increase in
the dialogue on peacekeeping. We need to pursue this
effort systematically when dealing with specific
missions as well. A more systematic dialogue between
Council members and troop-contributing countries, as
well as with the Secretariat, is the best way to close the
gap that often still exists between the Council as a
mandating body and the Member States whose forces
are supposed to implement Council mandates.
The draft presidential statement before us today
rightly identifies the implementation of protection
mandates in peacekeeping operations as one of the
areas requiring further debate within the Council and
among Member States, and I certainly agree with the
representative of China that this topic demands further
in-depth discussion. From our point of View, some of
the questions that we ought to reflect on during the
coming months are the following.

How can we match the challenges of a particular
protection task with a realistic assessment of the
available resources? How can we best avoid disparities

between a mission's protection mandate, its
composition and the resources required? How can the
various parties involved - the Security Council, the
Secretariat, troop contributors and host countries -
help define realistic protection scenarios that provide a
clear framework of action for peacekeepers on the
ground? And how can we improve the Council's
monitoring and oversight with a View to enhancing the
effective implementation of such mandates?

We hope that the independent study
commissioned by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs will provide answers to these
questions. We also hope to make further progress on
these issues in the framework of the debate on the
protection of civilians that Austria plans to organize
during its presidency of the Council in November.

Our peacekeeping efforts will meet with success
only if we are able to respond to crisis situations in a
timely and effective manner. We therefore support a
capability-driven approach that concentrates on skills,
capacity and equipment, with a special focus on
potential resource gaps. Not only is this in the interest
of the effectiveness of our missions, but it is also
essential to the security of our peacekeepers.

While recognizing the need to increase the pool
of troop and police contributors, we have to be aware
that Member States have only one set of forces that
they deploy in various frameworks. We must therefore
increase our emphasis on pooling resources and
enhancing force integration training, be it at the level
of the United Nations or of regional organizations. In
this regard, we believe the United Nations could draw
on existing experience and knowledge within regional
organizations.
We are, of course, aware that the United Nations
operates in a unique global setting. Lessons learned at
the regional level are not automatically applicable in
the global context of the Organization. We nonetheless
believe that we should study whether such concepts as
that of the framework nation, developed at the regional
level for particularly demanding multinational peace
operations, might not also be relevant to some United
Nations peacekeeping situations.

We also have to take into consideration that the
United Nations and regional organizations increasingly
cooperate in peacekeeping by acting together or
sequentially. It is in the interests of all parties involved
to base this cooperation on standardized framework
arrangements. At the same time, United Nations
mandates are and will remain essential, both in view of
the provisions of the Charter and to achieve a clear and
efficient division of labour between all international
actors involved in specific peacekeeping efforts. In this
context, we also look forward to the forthcoming report
of the Secretary-General on how to provide effective
support for African Union peacekeeping operations.
We support a substantial and open-minded debate of all
the proposals in the Prodi report (S/2008/813).

We welcome the clear connection made in the
draft presidential statement between peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. For this reason, we
also think that the Council should further deepen its
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission. Let
me also add that Austria sees the need for a new field
support strategy that takes into account the important
contributions peace operations can make to the
sustainable socio-economic development of the region
in which they are deployed, and I heartily agree with
what Under-Secretary-General Malcorra said on this
subject.

In conclusion, let me express my country's full
support for the draft presidential statement to be
adopted later today. We would like to thank you, Sir,
and your delegation for all your efforts in preparing
this comprehensive and well-balanced text. It shows
how far this debate has moved forward since the
beginning of the year, when France and the United
Kingdom started this discussion. It also demonstrates
how much still needs to be done.

