Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish at the outset to thank Mr. Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
the representative of the United States for their
briefings. We also wish to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Adil Abdal Mahdi and to thank him for the
information he has provided today.

We are concerned about the serious security
situation in Iraq, not only because of its obvious tragic
effects on human lives, but also because of its
consequences for, inter alia, the country's political life,
the humanitarian and social situation, the provision of
public services, job creation and access to health
services. As we have stated in other forums, the
solution of those problems requires a strong component
of political dialogue and measures at the regional and
international levels.

The worrisome humanitarian situation provides a
clear example of the regional effects of the situation in
Iraq. According to Red Cross data, there are
approximately 2 million Iraqi refugees in the
neighbouring countries. That underscores the
importance of regional cooperation to resolve the
humanitarian situation and of efforts such as those
undertaken by countries such as Jordan and the Syrian
Arab Republic. In that connection, we agree with the
Secretary-General regarding the importance of the
outcome of the conference of Iraq's neighbours. It is
important that peoples with such diverse interests, but
also with so much in common, take joint action to
make progress in stabilizing Iraq and thus the region.

A particularly worrisome aspect of the
displacement of refugees is the information, provided
in the report, that it has a strong ethnic and sectarian
component. We believe it is essential that the efforts of
Iraqi actors, the United Nations, the Security Council
and regional actors be aimed at achieving national
unity in Iraq.

The conference of Iraq's neighbours must give
the necessary impetus to initiatives such as the
International Compact with Iraq. We also commend
United Nations efforts in endeavours such as those
supporting the Independent High Electoral
Commission in Iraq. It is within Iraq itself and at its
initiative that the most important steps will be taken
and the most significant progress will be made towards
political life and an inclusive society.

We wish to emphasize the importance that we
attach - as does the Secretary-General in his report -
to the efforts to resolve differences through the path of
dialogue and the protection of human dignity. The
Secretary-General's report gives us reason to believe
that, with the participation of the Iraqi leaders and the

international and regional communities, we can meet
these challenges, and more, in order to achieve a united
and peaceful Iraq.

