Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First of all, I too wish to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco for his useful presentation.

We fully support the ongoing international efforts
to reactivate the Middle East peace process, and we are
contributing to them. Meaningful negotiations covering
all core issues, leading to a comprehensive settlement,
should start without further delay. However, we sadly
observe that there are still certain issues blocking the
way. We need to eliminate the remaining obstacles on
the way to peace and to put our focus on confidence-
building.

In that respect, I wish to emphasize, first, the
current pattern of demolition of Palestinian homes,
eviction of Palestinian families and revocation of
residency rights of Palestinians of Jerusalem, which is
unacceptable and undermines trust between the parties.
Last year set an all-time record for the number of
Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem who were
stripped of residency rights. In 2008, the number of
Palestinians whose residency was revoked was 21
times the average of the previous 40 years. Such
numbers are quite striking and give a clear idea about
the scope of the current practices.

The international community does not recognize
Israel's annexation of East Jerusalem. The core issues
include the status of Jerusalem, and this should be
settled in such a way that Jerusalem can emerge as the
capital of two States living side by side in peace and
security. In the meantime, many faiths meet in
Jerusalem and hold the city sacred. Jerusalem reflects
our common cultural heritage and unites us in our
values. Therefore, the importance of preserving the
demographic composition, character and status of
Jerusalem, as well as its cultural and religious fabric, is
great. Any unilateral act on the nature of Jerusalem can
easily have much broader ramifications.

We call on Israel to put an end to the pattern of
forced evictions and house demolitions imposed upon
Palestinians, to refrain from any provocative action in
the city and to preserve the status of Jerusalem, as
required by the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Secondly, Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied territories are of great concern and illegal
under international law. Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 446 (1979) and 452 (1979), as well as the
Quartet Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative,
require Israel to withdraw from territories occupied
since 1967. It is difficult to see how any agreement can
be reached while the settlements continue to grow.
Therefore, Israel must go beyond moratoriums which
are very limited in scope as well as in time frame and
meet its commitments in full. All settlement activities
including "natural growth" must be ceased completely
and permanently, and outposts erected since 2001 must
be dismantled. Otherwise, it will not be possible to
clear the way towards a peace based on the two-State
solution.

One year after the Israeli operation, more than
1.4 million Palestinian men, women and children are
still trapped in the Gaza Strip. Their daily lives in a
tiny area are marked by power shortages, little or no
running water and deteriorating health care. Mass
unemployment, extreme poverty and food insecurity
are steadily worsening due to the impact of the
continuing blockade. The blockade prohibits exports
and restricts the entry of basic goods, including food
and fuel. Although Israel has announced that it would
allow glass to be transported into Gaza, with other
essential construction materials barred by Israel, the
people in Gaza are unable to rebuild their shattered
lives. More than 20,000 people displaced from their
homes still live in tents or other rudimentary housing.

This cannot go on. The incomparable suffering of
the people of Gaza must come to an end. Resolution
1860 (2009) must be implemented. The rebuilding of
Gaza must start. The pledges made by the international
community in Sharm el-Sheikh last March should be
transformed into actual reconstruction. The human
rights and well-being of the Palestinians in Gaza must
be ensured. Unless the crossings to Gaza are fully open
and there is an absolute return to normal daily life in
Gaza, building confidence and making progress
towards peace will be extremely difficult.

In the Middle East, we are yet again at a
crossroads. The stakes are high. The framework for a
negotiated settlement has already been laid out in the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference, the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative. Within that framework, we have to move
forward and overcome the current stalemate.

At this critical stage, there is no alternative but to
focus on the political process, eliminate obstacles,
renounce violence and push forward with
determination for a comprehensive and lasting peace in
the region. Otherwise, as the Secretary-General has put
it, we risk sliding backwards. That is a possibility that
no one can afford.

