Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson; Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Humanitarian
Policy Advisor at Oxfam; and Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their statements and their commitment.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this essential meeting. This first open debate
of 2016 on the protection of civilians has never seemed
more timely and necessary. Permit me to underscore
three points that will allow me to explain why.

First, the briefings we heard show that the protection
of civilians is being tested as never before. The Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War of 1949, which is an integral
part of international humanitarian law, was inspired by
a draft preamble by the French and Finnish delegations,
which was ultimately not retained, on "the eternal
principles of that law which is the foundation and the
safeguard of civilization". Evoking the protection of
civilians in 2016 is to return to that origin at a time
when the unbearable images of starving civilians come
to us from the siege of Madaya. As we know, the regime
is using the heinous tactics of siege and starvation there
and in many other places. Those reprehensible acts must
end in order for a dialogue among Syrians to begin. At
the same time, in Syria, Daesh continues to carry out
summary executions and abduct women and children.
In the face of such unspeakable acts, France will always
call for mobilization, as it did on Friday, during an open
meeting on the situation of besieged cities in Syria (see S/PV.7605).

Sadly, it would take too long to recall all the dire
situations in Yemen, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Lake
Chad basin and in many other crises, but we must
recall that the protection of civilians, which is above
all the primary responsibility of each State, is neither
a concession nor a favour by the parties concerned, but
rather an absolute obligation. Attacks that deliberately
or indiscriminately target civilians and medical and
humanitarian personnel must be unconditionally put to
an end in their various theatres.

Strengthening respect for international humanitarian
law, where the protection of civilians is a key component,
is at the heart of the thirty-second International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement. France supported that initiative and
would like to thank the Conference for its unwavering
commitment throughout the four years of consultations
among States. France reiterates its commitment to that
issue and its willingness to actively continue with those
consultations.

Secondly, bearing that in mind, I would like to
emphasize that the protection of civilians remains for
France both a moral commitment, but also something
without which there can be no lasting peace and
security. In is thus a key challenge for the Security
Council. Let me give some examples, among many.

In Mali, the intervention of French forces, in
coordination with African and Malian forces, helped
to put an end to the jihadist stranglehold over the
population. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali was then able
to deploy with a robust mandate to protect civilians,
which helped stabilize the country and restore the rule
of law. In the Central African Republic, the intervention
by the African-led International Support Mission for the
Central African Republic, supported by French forces,
helped avoid mass atrocities. France commends the
efforts made by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, which provided its support to the creation
of the Special Criminal Court and arrested persons
suspected of serious crimes. Its mandate reflects its
innovative approach to supporting essential action for
France in its fight against impunity, namely, in the
International Criminal Court. By contributing to the
stabilization of situations that remain fragile, its actions
show the connection between the fight against impunity
and the protection of civilians. France reiterates its
support for the International Criminal Court in its task
of trying the most serious crimes in places where the
willingness or ability forjustice to be served is lacking.

Thirdly, given those challenges, more than ever
we must maintain the protection of civilians at the
heart of the Security Council's agenda through an
approach of constant improvement. The Secretary-
General's plan of action for the protection of civilians
and the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) have stressed that.
Although we must never forget that the protection of
civilians is a State responsibility, it is inseparable from
peace. In that regard, France supports tangible action,
such as strengthening the capacities for action of the
human rights and protection of civilians components
of peacekeeping operations, the establishment of early
warning systems, the training of police and gendarme
contingents and the list could go on. However, efforts
will be effective only if peacekeeping is exemplary in
practice and does not let down the people they are in
charge of protecting. To that end, France fully supports
the two priorities of the Secretary-General, the first
of which is the zero-tolerance policy against sexual
abuse and exploitation. Recent allegations of sexual
abuse committed in the Central African Republic
have shown that it is vital for the United Nations, as
well as for contributing countries, to respond quickly
and without concessions to the perpetrators of crimes
if they are confirmed. France is determined, for its
part, and within the framework of the ongoing legal
proceedings, to shed light and impose exemplary
penalties if necessary. With regard to the due diligence
policy, the United Nations must be prepared to reassess
its support for some armed forces when the protection
of civilians is ignored and human rights violations have
been proved. We also share the recommendation of the
High-level Panel to strengthen the investigation and
information efforts when a military or police mission
fails in its protection mandate.

The year 2016 opens with immense challenges
for the protection of civilians. We have to be specific
and resolute in our pressure on the parties to enable
true progress for the civilians on the ground in Syria
and to reinvigorate the political process established
by resolution 2254 (2015). With regard to our on
presence on the ground, the Security Council mission is
preparing to visit Burundi again to promote an inclusive
inter-Burundian dialogue at a time when the worst
tensions seem to be increasing at an alarming rate and
the Arusha Accords must remain more than ever the
guide for the actors concerned. We have to be specific
and show resolve in ensuring the absolute protection
that we owe to health and medical personnel and their
facilities. This is also vital because since October 2015
three Medecins Sans Frontieres facilities have been
bombed in Yemen, as well as one of its hospitals in
Kunduz, Afghanistan.

The protection of civilians, which is the priority
concern of my statement, must, now more than ever,
remain at the heart of the Council's priorities and its
agenda in 2016. That is why we must take inspiration
from the exemplary commitment, courage and
professionalism of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, non-governmental organizations like
Medecins Sans Frontieres and Oxfam, as well as so
many other volunteers on the ground. The stakes are
high and crucial in themselves. Similarly, the credibility
of our entire Organization is at stake.

