Mr. Abrams (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her very sobering
and comprehensive briefing.

We are here today because of the de facto Maduro
regime's refusal to allow humanitarian aid to enter
Venezuela on 23 February, which led to deaths,
injuries and violence on two international borders.
Those actions showed once again the true intentions
and nature of the Maduro regime. Armed gangs, thugs
and criminals released from prisons were mobilized to
control the border. Their actions led to the burning of
humanitarian assistance rather than its protection.

And while Venezuelans were shot, beaten and
killed as they tried to bring food and medicine into
their country, Maduro was literally dancing in Caracas.
Four people died, more than 80 Venezuelans were
injured - it may be many more than that - after
vigilantes from the regime opened fire. Protesters,
aid workers and journalists marched to the border to
welcome much-needed aid and were instead greeted by
tear gas and rubber bullets.

The United States and the international community
must support the Venezuelan people as they strive
to reclaim their democracy. We should respect their
Constitution and their sovereignty, which is why we
must support Juan Guaido's interim presidency. And
we must address the de-stabilizing results of Maduro's
corrupt, fraudulent and incompetent reign, which
just this weekend brought instability and violence
to the borders of two other Member States, Brazil
and Colombia.

Maduro, his cronies and some in this body claim
that delivering humanitarian assistance is a political
show and a cover for military intervention, but it is very
clear that only the Maduro regime is using violence,
only the regime has called in both its security forces and
armed gangs, only the regime has betrayed Venezuelan
independence and sovereignty by submitting to the
influence of Cuban officers who permeate the security
and intelligence agencies, and only the regime has a
history of using humanitarian aid as both a political tool
for social control and a resource for rampant corruption.

Maduro wants to maintain power in the current
crisis, and he has continued to politicize aid, via
the Local Committees for Supply and Production
programme, providing benefits to his supporters while
rejecting the needs-based focus assistance must, as
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo said, have. Any
additional time Maduro spends in power is additional
time he will use to repress the Venezuelan people. That
has been proven time and again, and this weekend was
yet another example. And when he was brought face to
face with the truth - that contrary to his false claims
that aid was not needed, Venezuelan children were
filmed by Univision combing through garbage to search
for food - what did Mr. Maduro do? He detained the
journalists, seized their equipment and ordered them
deported. But the truth remains, and the sad plight of
millions of Venezuelans remains unchanged.

We are grateful for the leadership of our partners
in supporting humanitarian assistance for the people of
Venezuela and supporting their demand for democracy.
The European Union, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama and Peru all
swiftly condemned the use of violence and called for
the delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance.
Their words and their actions can make a real difference
in this crisis.

The cure for this misery and tyranny is a free, fair
and transparent election that embraces all sectors of
society and all political parties. That, ofcourse, includes
Chavistas, whose party has been usurped, much like the
country itself, by Maduro. We believe that both Guaido
supporters and Chavistas can rebuild their country
together and can construct a newly prosperous and
democratic Venezuela. We are also deeply concerned
about the safety of interim President Guaido upon his
return to Venezuela. It is our duty as Council members
to ensure that interim President Guaido is able to return
home freely and safely.

Now is the time to strengthen our commitment to
the brave Venezuelan people. We call on the members of
the Security Council to join us in meeting the growing
needs in Venezuela and the region. We call on Member
States to consider what resources and tools they have to
contribute to Venezuelan democracy and to pressure the
illegitimate Maduro regime to peacefully step down.
We ask that others join us in sanctioning those who

were involved in the violence over the past weekend and
who are fattened by the spoils of the Maduro regime's
corruption. We ask that Member States contribute to
addressing the humanitarian situation in Venezuela,
as dozens of nations generously have already done.
We ask that they recognize the nature of the Maduro
regime and question the purpose and likely outcome
of so-called dialogue with someone who would rather
block and burn donated medicine and bread than see
it in the hands of Venezuelan children. Ask Jorge
Ramos of Univision about the value of dialogue with
Nicolas Maduro.

The people of Venezuela need our solidarity and
our help if they are to prevail against a vicious and
violent regime, emerge into democracy and begin to
rebuild their country. Let us resolve to give them that
help, to give them that solidarity and assistance.

