Mr. Kebe (African Union) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for having invited the African Union to take part in this
debate on the Central African region and to
congratulate Angola on having included many African
issues on the Council's agenda for the month of
November. I also thank Mr. Kalomoh and his
multidisciplinary team for their clear, precise and
comprehensive report (S/2003/1077), which goes
straight to the heart of the problems being endured by
Central Africa.

The African Union recognizes that there is a
cause-and-effect relationship among bad governance,
ethnic and social exclusion and impunity, on the one
hand, and tensions, conflicts and insecurity, on the
other. We emphasize the need to tackle the underlying
causes of the region's conflicts and economic
problems. The diagnosis as well as the remedy
recommended in the report (S/2003/1077) could be
applied to all of Africa's regions and to all African
countries.

The paradox here is that Central Africa - which
is one of the regions most endowed with potential and
economic resources - has been one of the weakest
performers with regard to economic development and
social integration. However, at the initiative of the
region's heads of State, several regional and
subregional organizations have been set up. I would
mention the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), which is concerned with issues of
peace and security as well as economic integration, and
the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (CAEMC), which - unlike ECCAS,
which covers the region's 11 countries - covers only a
limited number of countries and is concerned with
much more specific issues. I should also mention that
other organizations of a regional nature have a
presence in the region, such as the Community of
Sahelo-Saharan States. The United Nations is also very
present in the region with several missions, offices,
programmes and initiatives, the most recent of which is
the project of an international conference on the Great
Lakes.

I would also mention continental initiatives -
two African Union initiatives with regard to peace and
security: the Peace and Security Council, now taking
shape and becoming operational, which is to coordinate
all regional mechanisms dealing with conflict
prevention, management and settlement; and another
continental initiative, the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD), whose programme covers all
the problems related to peace and security and
economic and social development that were identified
in the report.

The African Union is of the View that we must
improve and strengthen the capacities of existing
regional and subregional organizations - particularly
ECCAS - with a view to enabling them to be much
more operational and to better address the subregion's
problems related to peace, security and economic
integration.

The African Union agrees with the analysis
brought out in the report - which I believe has met the
approval of all those who have spoken in this
morning's debate - that, given the diversity of the
challenges facing the region, an integrated,
comprehensive and resolute approach is needed. The
African Union also recognizes that there must be better
coordination of all activities and initiatives in the
subregion. Such coordination is essential at the vertical
level, to prevent duplication, but also at the horizontal
level, to harmonize all activities undertaken.

We believe such coordination work to be
essential, and we support the request by States of the
region that the United Nations ensure a political
presence in Central Africa. As to what form such a
structure should take, we rely on the flexibility shown
by the countries of the subregion that are prepared to
consider this issue further with the special envoy to be
appointed by the Secretary-General.

In addition to supporting the request by countries
of the subregion, the African Union would like to
emphasize the fact that the form of such coordination
matters less than its efficiency and effectiveness. We
also wish to stress that the coordination of all activities
undertaken by the various agencies of the United
Nations and the organizations it has established is
essential.

