Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I want to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate. I also wish to thank the
delegation of South Africa for having requested this
meeting.

I believe we should ask ourselves why we are
gathered here once again today to deal with the
question of Iraq. The answer is simple: on 2 August
1990 Iraq invaded and annexed Kuwait. Once all
peaceful means to resolve the situation had been
exhausted, the Security Council authorized the use of
force to restore the independence and territorial
integrity of Kuwait. In addition, by resolution 687
(1991), which established the terms of the ceasefire,
the Council decided that Iraq had to agree
unconditionally to the elimination of all its weapons of
mass destruction under international supervision. That
is a central aspect of the resolution.

More than 12 years later, Iraq has not complied
with its obligations and continues to defy the will of
the international community and the authority of the
Security Council. That is why we are here today to deal
with this issue. As Argentina's Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Carlos Ruckauf, stated in the General
Assembly last September,
"It is not a good thing when some Member
States do not abide by United Nations resolutions.
It is intolerable that these resolutions remain
unimplemented when issues related to the very
existence of mankind on the planet are involved."
(A/57/PV.IZ, p. 26)

He went on to say that

"The existence of arsenals with bacteriological,
chemical and other similar weapons that can be
used in a traditional or terrorist war is a matter
that affects all men, women and children of the
world." (ibid.)

I think it is appropriate to recall those words, which,
despite being obvious, seem to be absent from the
debate on this matter and from the coverage of this
issue in the international press. No one in the Council
has stated that Iraq has complied with its obligations or
that we are dealing with an abusive demand being
made by a State or group of States of a weaker country.
Argentina shares the view that Iraq must be obliged to
fully meet its disarmament obligations. The Iraqi
regime must understand once and for all that the
international community will not accept any other
alternative and that the Security Council is united in
that objective, even though there may be difference of
opinion as regards methods and, in particular, as to the
time frame for achieving the goal.

The Security Council, acting under Chapter VII
of the Charter, has recognized that the behaviour of the
Iraqi regime constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. That is why, on 8 November 2002, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 1441 (2002),
which gave Iraq one last opportunity.

In our opinion, the Council must exert constant
pressure on this stubborn Government to comply with
what the international community has been demanding
for the last 12 years. The international community has
been very patient. It cannot accept a repetition of the
history of concealment and deceit that took place
between 1991 and 1998. Doing so would not only
affect the credibility of the Security Council; it would
also represent a grave failure to those of us who are
taking part in the struggle against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

The question is how to achieve that objective. In
our opinion, the inspections that resumed last
November have yielded results, and they must
continue. We support Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, who
have an extremely important and difficult task that they
are carrying out with objectivity, professionalism and
efficiency. But in order for the inspections to produce
full results, the Iraqi Government must abandon its
reluctant attitude and provide the active and
substantive cooperation required by resolution 1441
(2002). It is also worth recalling that Iraq must comply
with the other obligations set out in resolution 687
(1991), facilitating the return of Kuwaiti property and
the repatriation of Kuwaiti and third-country nationals.

In the course of the discussion of this issue, there
has been mention of the grave threat to international
peace and security posed by possible links between a
State in possession of weapons of mass destruction and
terrorist organizations, and the Council was given
dramatic examples of the risks of chemical and
biological weapons. My Government shares this
concern and expresses its determination to face the
challenges that the link with terrorism may add to this
issue. At the same time, my Government takes this
opportunity to voice its concern about the continuation
of unjust situations in international economic practice.
Those situations are exploited by terrorism, which
provides an evil opportunity to give voice to the
desperation of vast regions of the developing world.

No sense of urgency should divert us from the
objective of disarming Iraq by peaceful means. All
peaceful options must be explored and exhausted. We
must avoid an avoidable war, in which my country
would not participate.

But once all peaceful means have been exhausted,
if the Iraqi regime persists in its reluctant attitude, and
if the purpose of resolution 1441 (2002), which is none
other than the complete and verifiable disarmament of
Iraq, cannot be fulfilled, then the serious consequences
anticipated in the resolution will take place. But those
serious consequences must not include bombing
defenceless towns and cities. The lives of men, women
and children - who for years have been living under a
genocidal dictatorship and who desire freedom and an
end to death and desolation - must be preserved. It is
in the highest interests of Iraq to seize this last chance.

I would not wish to conclude these remarks
without expressing our sympathy and affection for the
Iraqi people, which is enduring a situation of
deprivation and anxiety for its security, the
responsibility for which lies solely with the regime that
oppresses them.

As we have stated to the Secretary-General,
Argentina is ready, within the framework of the United
Nations, to provide humanitarian assistance in order to
help relieve the suffering of that people.

