Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this briefing. It is
important to maintain a high level of engagement by
the Council in the discussion of the role of the African
Union (AU) and subregional organizations in promoting
peace and sustainable development among the African
States. The outcomes of the joint consultations just
held in Addis Ababa will certainly contribute to this
end. I would like to express our sincere gratitude to
the Ethiopian presidency for this initiative and for
its hospitality.

In addition, I would like to welcome Special
Representative Haile Menkerios and thank him for his
comprehensive presentation.

No one can deny that the African Union has
demonstrated its ability to take the lead in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. During our membership in
the Council, we have witnessed on numerous occasions
how the African Union can adapt itself to both the
ongoing and emerging challenges on the African
continent. This relates specifically to the ability of the

African Union to stand united and to reach consensus
on multifaceted issues. The recent AU master road map
of practical steps to silence the guns in Africa by 2020
serves as a vivid example.

Such an effort should go hand in hand with the
elimination of the root causes of conflict on the
continent, and here the United Nations should continue
to serve as the AU's indispensable partner.

The United Nations should continue building and
enhancing its strategic partnership with the African
continent, working in concert with the AU and using the
comparative advantages of each actor in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and conflict management. In that
light, we are encouraged by the increased efforts of
the Secretary-General aimed at strengthening the
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU,
particularly the signing of the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security.

Let me highlight several aspects of the current
United Nations-AU cooperation that in our View are
worthy of priority attention.

First, the United Nations is yet to succeed in taking
timely and effective preventive measures in response
to situations or tensions that could possibly become a
full-scale conflict or where the civilian population is
endangered and urgently requires protection.

In that regard, we commend the efforts of the
African Union in this area, as the first responder to
crises with the authorization of the Security Council. We
are encouraged by the fact that the AU and the relevant
regional economic communities and mechanisms are
continuing to strengthen the operational readiness of
the African Standby Force. The operationalization
of the Force will ensure a robust and swift regional
reaction in case of need.

In that light, it is important to continue to make
efforts to eliminate shortcomings in AU peace-support
operations, in particular capability gaps. We believe
that ensuring deployment readiness and increased
performance requires collective and coordinated
actions by the United Nations, the AU and other
key partners such as the European Union. We look
forward to the establishment of the relevant trilateral
collaborative mechanisms.

Secondly, it is crucial to ensure sustainable and
predictable financing of the AU operations authorized
by the Council. In that respect, the Secretary-General's
proposals on options for financing AU peace-support
operations provides a range of Viable choices. Given
the complexity of the peacekeeping endeavour, we are
convinced that there can be no uniform approach that
will fit all situations. We therefore support preserving a
maximum degree of flexibility in considering this issue.

Thirdly, in keeping with the people-centered
approach to United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities, we believe that the protection
of civilians is a decisive factor for the success ofthe AU
operations endorsed by the Council. It is clear also that
there can be no peace without human rights. Thus this
component should become an indispensable element of
all AU operations authorized by the Security Council,
with proper adherence to the United Nations human
rights due diligence policy.

Last but not least, in the light of the latest joint
consultations between the two Councils and the further
enhancement of their cooperation, Ukraine underlines
the merit of joint United Nations-AU field missions,
which we see as an important conflict-prevention tool.

