Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): Let me also

join others in thanking High Representative Mogherini
for making the journey to be with us today, for her
briefing and for her consistent leadership in addressing
so many of the challenges she described.

As President Obama has observed, the European
Union (EU)

"remains one of the greatest political and economic
achievements of modern times".

As we all know, the EU, like the United Nations, was
created in response to the horrors of the Second World
War, and built on the idea that a peaceful, united Europe
could provide an antidote to the nationalism that had
led to so much bloodshed in the region and around the
world. In the nearly six decades since the signing of
the Treaty of Rome, what began as a union predicated
mostly on establishing a common market and customs
union among six nations has grown into a union ofmore
than 500 million people in 28 countries, 19 of them
with a common currency, united by a range of shared
political and economic institutions. As it has expanded,
the EU has used the benefits of its membership to
broaden the base of the principles that its countries
hold most sacred: pluralism, human rights, diversity
and, of course, respect for the territorial integrity of its
members. Every member of the Union is a democracy
and, not unrelatedly, since the EU's establishment no
EU country has raised arms against another. That is a
remarkable accomplishment.

We will never know how the countries of Europe
would have evolved over the past half century without
the creation of the EU. But, for all of the challenges the
region faces in present times, the EU has delivered. It
has delivered peace and prosperity of a kind the people
of Europe never before enjoyed in a sustained way.
That is a fact, and one too often obscured by the din
of political debates. Moreover, as the members of the
Security Council know, the benefits of Europe's peace
and prosperity and the common principles the EU has
done so much to advance have extended far beyond
the continent, making it an invaluable partner to the
United States and to so many other States Members of
the United Nations.

The EU continues to provide a model for how
regional organizations can work hand in hand with
the United Nations to advance shared goals, from
promoting sustainable development to seeking
diplomatic solutions to deadly conflicts, to preventing
mass atrocities. In my brief remarks today, I would like
to suggest three lessons we can draw from the EU about
how to make multilateral organizations, including this
one, more effective in advancing international peace
and security.

First, the EU has demonstrated the effective pressure
that regional organizations can exert to help address
serious threats to international peace and security. Take
Iran - the sanctions pressure exerted by the EU was
critical to bringing Iran to the negotiating table, where
the EU went on to play a key role in the negotiations to
seek a diplomatic solution. The combination ofsustained
pressure and determined, relentless diplomacy made it
possible to agree on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, which, if fully implemented, will ensure that
Iran's nuclear programme remains exclusively peaceful.
The EU is playing a central role in monitoring the
ongoing implementation of, and adherence to, the Plan
of Action as the coordinator of the joint commission,
where its ongoing vigilance will allow us to determine
whether or not Iran is upholding its commitments under
the deal.

Consider as well the diplomatic pressure the EU
has applied to seek a political solution to the conflict
in Ukraine, where Russia continues to occupy Crimea
and to arm, train and fight alongside separatists in the
eastern part of the country, in clear violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of its neighbour.
The EU has responded to that threat by working first
to help forge, and then to ensure compliance with, the
Minsk agreements, including through the maintenance
of sanctions on Russia. The United Nations human
rights report released last week, which documents the
widespread abuses to which the 2.7 million Ukrainians
living in the territory controlled by the separatists in
Donetsk and Luhansk are subjected, including arbitrary
arrests and torture, serves to underscore the urgency
of the task and the need for the Council and the EU to
keep the pressure on the parties to resolve the conflict,
including by maintaining sanctions on Russia until it
implements its Minsk commitments in full.

Secondly, the EU shows how a regional organization
can use multiple tools in its toolkit - technical,
financial, military and others - to target the root
causes of instability, thereby helping to prevent violence
before it arises. It has played an instrumental role, for
example, in promoting the normalization of relations
between Serbia and Kosovo, which is vital to ensuring
stability in the Balkans, thus incentivizing Belgrade
and Pristina by linking their respective progress in the
dialogue to their respective paths to joining the EU.
The EU has also engaged much further afield,
as others have noted. In Africa, it is managing nine
civilian and military missions, with projects ranging
from reforming security forces in the Central African
Republic to helping train the Niger's security forces
to combat terrorism, organized crime and smuggling
networks, to building military and security capacity in
Mali and Somalia. The EU missions have complemented
those of the United Nations and the African Union,
thereby contributing to coordinated interventions that
increase impact. At the same time, since 2003, the EU
has provided more than €l.6 billion through the Africa
partnership to support peace operations, capacity-
building and institutional support on the continent.

In both diplomatic efforts and investments in
conflict prevention, the pooling of resources and
influence has enabled EU member States to have far
greater impact than if any one European country were
to act alone. For that arrangement to work, however,
member States must live up to their commitments and
remain true to the common values at the heart of the
Union. When that arrangement breaks down, when
individual members put their narrow shared interests
ahead of their shared goals, they jeopardize the
enterprise and the dividends it yields for the EU and the
whole world.

That is my third, and final, point. We see that risk
today in the responses of some EU member States to the
unprecedented number of migrants and asylum-seekers
who have sought sanctuary in Europe. The scale of the
challenges presented by the largest wave of displaced
people since the Second World War is enormous. Their
influx presents significant political challenges for
many leaders across the continent, as they face calls
to close their borders and abandon the principles at the
heart of their individual Constitutions and at the heart
of the EU. We understand here in the United States just
how powerful those voices, and the fear that drives
them, can be. We are hearing similar calls from some
in the United States, including the governors of many
states, who have said that they do not want to take in
refugees from places like Syria. Nevertheless, we need
to find ways to increase our generosity towards those
desperate civilians, so that the United States and all
nations do their share to meet needs not seen since
Europe's darkest days in the Second World War.
The answer to a challenge as monumental as this
displacement crisis cannot be to close our borders,
jettison our core ideals and revert to a misguided
and short-sighted sense of self-interest. A common
challenge requires a common response, in Europe, in
the United States and here at the United Nations. And
it requires redoubling our commitment to the principles
on which our common security and our common
humanity depend.

