Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to
join other delegations that have spoken before me in
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the entire
delegation of Cote d'Ivoire on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I also wish to
take this opportunity to commend the delegation of
China for efficiently steering the work of the Council
during the month of November. We are grateful for
the report introduced by the Special Adviser and Head
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (S/2018/1031),
Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, to whom we express
our full support in the fulfilment of his mandate.

My delegation wishes to highlight the report
submitted by the Special Adviser on the progress made
in coordinating and establishing the Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, with a View
to fulfilling and implementing the mandate established
under resolution 2379 (2017). We encourage continuing
to work together with all of the institutions that form
the United Nations system, and especially continuing
to develop ties and good relations with the Government
and the people of Iraq.

Today Iraq has a new democratically elected
Government that must now confront the challenges
associated with the transition from a post-conflict
situation, which includes rebuilding practically the
entire country and, in particular, ensuring reconciliation
and judicial accountability. Nonetheless, Iraq continues
to face the threat posed by Da'esh, given that, despite
the defeat of that terrorist organization in large parts
of the country, it is still capable of perpetrating
asymmetrical attacks against the civilian population
and its infrastructure, as well as against the forces of
law and order. That has been proven by the attacks
reported by the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq against the populations in Baghdad, Ninawa and
Kirkuk, among others.

Furthermore, the discovery of more than 200
mass graves that could contain the remains of more
than 12,000 Victims of Da'esh - mainly women,
children, people with disabilities and members of the
Iraqi forces - highlights the brutality and criminality
of that terrorist organization and the urgent need to
identify the perpetrators of those crimes so that they
can be held accountable for their actions. In that regard,
and taking into account the seriousness of the crimes
against humanity committed by Da'esh, we encourage
the Investigative Team to cooperate with and assist
the Government of Iraq in preserving the integrity of
those mass graves, with the objective of collecting and
preserving as much evidence as possible in order to help
carry out the investigations and corresponding judicial
processes that will guarantee that those violations do
not go unpunished, as well as to identify the victims
and return their bodies to their families.

To that end, it is important that the Investigative
Team strengthen capacity-building in order to set up
genetic databases that will allow for the exhumation
and identification of the bodies of victims, which will
strengthen their investigative work. The development
and implementation of measures on the management
and stewardship of all of the evidence collected, as
well as the provision of protection and assistance to
survivors and witnesses, must comply with the highest
international standards.

It is also essential that the Investigative Team
develop synergies and work closely not only with the
different offices and agencies of the United Nations
system, but also with the various subsidiary bodies of
the Council, such as the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities; and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.
We reiterate that the work of the Investigative
Team in fulfilling its mandate should be carried out
while observing and respecting the sovereignty of Iraq
and maintaining its impartiality, independence and
credibility, so that the investigations supported by the
evidence obtained by the Team are able to meet the
highest criteria ofjustice.

Finally, it is important to bear in mind that policies
of regime change, interventionism and interference in
the internal affairs of States have been some ofthe main
causes of Government vacuums and have contributed to
the weakening of the forces of law and order, thereby
facilitating the emergence of terrorism and extremism
in the region.

