Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): It is a great joy, Mr.
President, to see you guide us in this meeting today. I
regret that these are not happy circumstances in which
we could have celebrated your presidency of the
Council. I wish also to express our great respect for
and joy at the stewardship of the Ambassador of Mali
in the previous month.

Unfortunately, this is not the first time that we
have met on a similar issue. Ten years ago, on 12
October 1990, the Council expressed alarm at the
violence which took place at Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
other holy places in Jerusalem.

At that time, the Security Council adopted
resolution 672 (1990) condemning the acts of violence
committed by the Israeli security forces, which had
resulted in injuries and loss of human life.
Furthermore, the Council called upon Israel to abide
meticulously by its legal obligations and
responsibilities under the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War -
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 - which is
applicable to all the territories occupied by Israel since
1967. It is thus with bitter regret that today we gather
again in an emergency meeting to once again condemn
acts of violence related to that holy place. Especially
alarming is the use of live ammunition against civilians
by the Israeli security forces.

Last Thursday, Mr. Ariel Sharon, leader of the
Likud Party, led a defiant and provocative visit to
Al-Haram Al-Sharif in occupied East Jerusalem. This
was done in total disregard of the advice of some in the
Israeli Government and other international role players.
Mr. Sharon acted as a catalyst of this latest occurrence
of violence. It cannot be denied that such provocative
actions serve to arouse the anger and resentment of
Palestinians in what is already a volatile situation.

The invasion of the sanctity of the holy places has
a very harmful effect on the Middle East peace process.
In this regard, the Non-Aligned Movement views all
attempts to undermine the terms of reference of the
Middle East peace process as a serious obstacle to the
realization of peace.

At the September meeting of the ministers of the
countries of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in New
York, the ministers reaffirmed their determination to
actively strive towards the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, on the basis
of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace. In this
context, they stressed the need for the Israeli
withdrawal from the Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem.

Furthermore, the ministers reaffirmed that a just
and comprehensive peace can be achieved only by
upholding international legitimacy and relevant United
Nations resolutions. The Non-Aligned Movement
believes that it is incumbent on all Member States to
uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, international humanitarian law and
all other instruments of international law, as well as
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. The Non-Aligned Movement therefore
calls on the Israeli Government to exercise restraint
and act in accordance with its stated desire to achieve
peace. It further urges Israel to cease its measures of
collective punishment against Palestinians, to restore
the sanctity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and to allow free
access to it by Muslim worshippers.

Speaking as the representative of South Africa, I
should like to say that my Government remains
convinced that the leaders in Palestine and in Israel are
committed to seeking a peaceful settlement of the
conflict. It is for this reason that we welcome the
opportunity for continued peace dialogue in Paris and
Cairo in the coming days. We still look forward to a
breakthrough in the negotiations, despite the violence.
We believe that it is only the speedy resolution of the
final status issues that will ensure lasting peace in the
Middle East.

