Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for his statement, to
which we listened very carefully.

The situation in the Middle East continues to be
difficult. The much-awaited resumption of talks in
September 2010 between Israel and Palestine lasted
only a few meetings. Since then, there has been
considerable erosion in mutual confidence between the
two parties, thereby undermining the peace process.

The events of the past few months have been
discouraging, with stalled talks, the resumption of
settlement activity and human suffering in Gaza. On
the positive side, in spite of the difficult situation in
Gaza, the economy there grew by 8 per cent in 2010.
The World Bank reported that, if the Palestinian
Authority maintains its current performance in
institution-building and public services, it will be well
positioned for the establishment of a State. Also, there
were fewer violent incidents in the 2010 than in
previous years.

Unless broken, the current impasse has the
potential of having a serious impact on the lives of the
people, potentially contributing more fuel to an already
combustible situation in the region. This should
therefore strengthen our resolve in seeking to achieve a
breakthrough in the current impasse so that both parties
return to talks.

India has a long-standing tradition of solidarity
with the Palestinian people. It was expressed recently
by our Prime Minister in his message on the occasion
of the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People. The Prime Minister reiterated
India's unwavering support for the Palestinian people's
struggle for a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living within secure and recognized borders, side by
side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the Arab
Peace Initiative, the Quartet Road Map and relevant
Security Council resolutions. Also, India has long
contributed to the capacity- and institution-building of
the Palestinian people with its material and technical
assistance programmes.

In this connection, I would also like to mention,
as did my colleagues from Brazil and South Africa, the
projects in which India has engaged with those
countries through the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA)
Forum. From the resources allocated from the IBSA
Trust Fund, we are undertaking the partial
reconstruction of the Al-Quds Hospital in Gaza and the
construction of an indoor multi-purpose sports complex
in Ramallah. We believe that such projects will be of
some value to the Palestinian people in improving their
health and recreational facilities.

We feel that genuine peace in the region requires
a resolution of other issues on the remaining tracks of
the Middle East peace process, including the
restoration of other Arab lands that remain under
occupation. Progress on the Lebanese and Syrian tracks
of the peace process are therefore critical for achieving
comprehensive and durable peace in the region.

We are closely monitoring the situation in
Lebanon, which is deeply worrying. The Special
Tribunal for Lebanon must be allowed to complete its
work. We call on all sides to resolve their differences
and maintain peace.

While that has been stated several times before,
and in many eloquent ways, this central truth bears
repetition: a just, fair, durable and credible solution to
this vexed problem can only come from meaningful,
sincere and results-oriented dialogue, a dialogue that is
essentially forward looking. For this, it is important
that the ongoing settlement activities by Israel cease
forthwith. I would also add that the settlements in the
occupied territories are illegal under international law.
We remain convinced that lasting peace in the region
will contribute to global stability and prosperity.

It is therefore critical for the international
community to work closely with the parties with a view
to encouraging them to resume direct negotiations. We
are hopeful that the talks and negotiations will soon
resume, leading to a comprehensive peace process for a
final resolution of the conflict.

