Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank Secretary- General Antonio Guterres for his statement. I also thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. Estonia welcomes all efforts aimed at finding a peaceful solution to the long-lasting Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We welcome the United States initiative aimed at reviving the peace process, which has been stalled for years. It is essential that the European Union and the United States work together as closely as possible on this complex issue. We call on Israel and Palestine to take steps towards resuming direct and meaningful negotiations to resolve all permanent status issues, including issues related to borders, the status ofJerusalem, security and the refugee question, with the aim of achieving a just and lasting peace. Estonia's position on the Middle East peace process remains unchanged. The only way to reach lasting peace is through direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine, taking into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties. We remain committed to a negotiated two-State solution that meets both Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations to statehood, based on the 1967 lines, with equivalent land swaps, as may be agreed between the parties, and that respects the internationally agreed parameters and relevant resolutions. Recognizing that there are sensitivities related to several issues yet to be resolved, we urge all parties to exercise restraint and refrain from any unilateral actions that could further aggravate the tensions and undermine the viability of the two-State solution. We are concerned about the continuation of Israel's settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory. in violation of international law. Annexation of any parts of the West Bank would be in contravention of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. It is crucial that all parties refrain from acts of violence, terror and incitement. An escalation of violence would be negative for all sides and further undermine the prospects for a solution to the conflict. We also reiterate our commitment to the security of Israel.
