Mr. Matondo (spoke in French): Allow me, in my capacity as African Union Special Representative and Head of the African Union Office in the Central African Republic, to express my deep gratitude for this opportunity to address the members of the Security Council, who are once again demonstrating their continued interest in issues relating to peace and security in the Central African Republic and the subregion of Central Africa. In February, we welcomed with guarded optimism the first anniversary of the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. Twelve months after the signing of the agreement, there was neither pomp or circumstance at the ceremony held in Bangui, which was attended by the signatory parties, members of the Government and its institutions, the guarantors and facilitators of the agreement, and former Heads of State of the Central African Republic - all of whom came to witness that historic moment to express their commitment to achieving peace and national reconciliation. After a year since the agreement's implementation, I am pleased to deliver the following statement by recalling the progress made and the many challenges that remain to be met under the peace agreement. With regard to progress vis-a-vis the Government, it is important to highlight the establishment of various entities for the implementation and monitoring of the agreement, the formation of an inclusive Government, the opening of permanent dialogue with the armed groups, the implementation of specific security measures relative to the launching of the special mixed security units in the west, the drafting of several bills envisaged by the agreement and their transmission to the National Assembly for adoption, the gradual return of State authority throughout the entire country, the launch of preparations for the electoral process, including updating the country's electoral map, the launch of several social impact projects under the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, and the gradual modernization of the Central African Armed Forces and the internal security forces. With regard to the progress made concerning the armed groups, it is a matter of renouncing their desire to divide up the territory of the Central African Republic, their recognition of State authority and its institutions, the adherence of certain groups to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, the operationalization of the special mixed security units, and vacating the administrative buildings held by certain armed groups. Generally speaking, with the signing and implementation of the agreement, we note an improvement in the security situation, a decrease in the level of violence and an uptick in the free movement ofgoods and people. However, many challenges remain because the majority of armed groups have not yet laid down their weapons and continue to occupy territories and exploit natural resources to the detriment of the State. Moreover, certain armed groups that are signatories to the agreement continue to be involved in clashes in an effort to exert control over areas in the interior of the country. That is the case of the Front populaire pour larenaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC) and the Mouvement des liberateurs centrafricains pour la justice (MLCJ) in Vakaga, in north-eastern Central African Republic. Clashes between the armed groups in the north-east have devolved into intercommunal conflict, which, although complex, urgently needs to be resolved. Overall, although progress has been made over the past year, much remains to be done in connection with the linked legislative and presidential elections in 2020 and 2021. In that regard, signatories to the agreement must fully honour their commitments in order to create conditions conducive to the holding of elections. Over the past year since the agreement was signed, the signatories were strongly urged to uphold their commitments. Those who attended the event to commemorate the first anniversary of the signing of the agreement called for the sanctions under article 35 to be applied and demanded that we be firm with any parties that breach the agreement. In that regard, we welcome the convergence of views and unanimity of the international community, which, on the first anniversary of the agreement, took the opportunity to reaffirm its willingness to assist the Central African Republic in ensuring that elections take place within constitutional deadlines, and its readiness to mobilize financial resources and the technical wherewithal to attain that objective. The security situation remains of concern, in particular given the clashes between the FPRC and the MLCJ to gain control of Birao. In the second week of February, the forces of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, working together with the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic, repulsed FPRC combatants who had entered Birao. Although the situation in Birao is under control, tensions remain high in the north-east of the country, including in Bria and Ndele. Those areas require considerable attention from facilitators, guarantors and the various partners working for peace in the Central African Republic. In addition, we acknowledge the _ serious humanitarian situation in the three areas of Birao, Ndele and Bria. Despite all the difficulties, which are a source of concern with regard to creating the right conditions for the holding of free and credible elections, efforts continue for the implementation of all aspects of the peace agreement, which is the best political framework for stabilizing the situation in the Central African Republic. It is for that reason that the National Assembly opened an extraordinary session yesterday, 19 February, to review and adopt the draft texts envisioned in the peace agreement that relate to the status of former Heads of State, the charter of political parties, the status of the opposition, the commission on truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation and the municipalities code, among others. The seventh session of the Executive Monitoring Committee of the agreement, scheduled for 28 February, will certainly not only help us to assess the Committee's functioning, but also and above all show us all remaining challenges in the implementation of the agreement. We underscore the role that the countries of the subregion must play to help stabilize the situation in the Central African Republic, in particular since the conflict could very easily spill over to the rest of Central Africa. It is important to underscore the very active cooperation and coordination among the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union, as highlighted by the African Union Commission Chairperson, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, and Secretary-General Mr. Antonio Guterres during the opening ceremony of the thirty-third ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, held a few days ago in Addis Ababa. Such cooperation has been an integrating and catalysing factor for the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and must be welcomed and maintained. Similarly, the harmonization of positions among the other parties to the peace and reconstruction process in the Central African Republic remains a considerable challenge. I have provided a brief overview of the situation in the Central African Republic and the efforts of the African Union. The situation deserves the attentionof the Council, in particular with regard to concerns about improving the security situation, securing the electoral process, funding the elections, ensuring that parties honour their commitments, enforcing the sanctions regime, holding elections in line with constitutional deadlines, launching social projects as peace dividends and mechanisms for the uptake and reorientation of former combatants of armed groups into more useful social activities.
