Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I want to express
my appreciation to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
their important updates.

Kazakhstan takes a balanced approach to resolving
the Ukrainian crisis through peaceful negotiations,
maintaining a mediation process based on key
principles, international legal norms and the Charter
of the United Nations. My country continues to take
part in multilateral consultations on the quest for a
settlement of the crisis. Kazakhstan is determined to
work with all members of the Council on the issue,
without resorting to political expedients and in an open,
objective, responsible and constructive way.

President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan
contributed significantly to the launch of the Normandy
format and the eventual conclusion of the Minsk
agreements, and has repeatedly expressed Kazakhstan's
readiness to give comprehensive assistance in the
process of the peaceful settlement of the situation in
south-eastern Ukraine. We therefore support the efforts
of the international community to resolve the conflict
by political and diplomatic means, including through
dialogue and confidence-building measures. We are
in favour of intensifying the work of the Normandy
format and increasing the effectiveness of the Trilateral
Contact Group for the peaceful settlement of the
situation in the south-east of Ukraine.

Kazakhstan fully endorses the activities of the
Trilateral Contact Group and its working groups
on implementing confidence-building measures.
In that regard, we are concerned about the fact that
the negotiation process to resolve the Ukrainian
conflict has actually been suspended in the past few
months, as evidenced by the lack of contacts in the
Normandy format at higher levels. It seems that the
key international participants in the Ukrainian crisis
cannot devise a common plan of action. Kazakhstan,
like other members of the international community,
recognizes the importance of the Minsk agreements
for settling the conflict in the south-east of Ukraine,
and the implementation of those agreements as the
only mechanism currently agreed to by the parties. We
want to point out that they were endorsed by resolution
2202 (2015) of 17 February 2015, which reinforces
their importance and the responsibility of the parties
for strictly implementing the agreements reached,
including a sustainable and long-term ceasefire, the
withdrawal of heavy weapons and a resolution of
political challenges.
To that end, with regard to the upcoming elections
in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
Kazakhstan calls on all participants in the negotiation
process to resolve the situation in south-eastern Ukraine
and adhere to the provisions of the Minsk agreements.
We have repeatedly called for strict compliance with
resolution 2202 (2015) on those agreements, which
we consider the only viable existing mechanism for a
peaceful solution to the conflict. It is vital to preventing
further escalation of the conflict and an intensified
exchange of sanctions, as well as to continuing the
search for peaceful ways to overcome differences.

It is especially important to our plurinational
country that Ukraine remain sovereign, stable and
independent, with an ethnically and religiously diverse
society in which all human rights are upheld within
the humanitarian space and all civilians are secure.
We thank Ms. Mueller for bringing the humanitarian
dimension to our attention and for her important
information. We believe that sustainable peace and the
full normalization of the situation can also be achieved
through economic recovery. We therefore call for the
establishment of confidence-building measures on the
economic front as well. We should not enable tensions
to escalate further, for the sake of the people who are
suffering under horrible living conditions and the
constant threat of renewed active warfare.

