Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to wish you, Mr. President, every success in presiding over the Council's work this month. I wish your delegation every success and all members of the Council health and safety. The Government of Yemen, led by His Excellency President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, reiterates its eagerness to establish a durable peace in Yemen based on the three agreed terms of reference: the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its implementation mechanism and the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference, especially resolution 2216 (2015), and other relevant Security Council resolutions. Over the past period, the Government has demonstrated greater flexibility and has responded more positively to all initiatives and proposals aimed at achieving progress in the comprehensive peace process. We reiterate once again our support of the efforts undertaken by the Special Envoy of the Secretary- General, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and our positive engagement in all efforts aimed at reaching a ceasefire, as well as humanitarian and economic measures, and the resumption of the political process. On the other hand, the Houthi militias are undermining those efforts. They have continued their escalation and war against the people of Yemen. They are launching ballistic missiles and drones on Yemeni cities, especially in Ma'rib governorate. Innocent civilians, mainly women and children, are falling victim to such attacks. This is a clear indication of their open rejection of peace efforts. The Houthis are undermining humanitarian action, stealing relief aid and assistance and imposing levies, setting a dangerous precedent that violates all principles of humanitarian action. They target homes and houses of worship, exploit children and force them into their absurd war, and detain and assault women. They continue to undermine freedom and use blackmail for their racist, factional project. They exploit the suffering of the Yemeni people for political gains, while committing other violations that run counter to international humanitarian law and human rights law. The Government is committed to implementing mechanisms aimed at accelerating the implementation of the Riyadh agreement, in line with the instructions of the President of the Republic. He is establishing a new phase, uniting efforts to resist the Iranian-Houthi project and put an end to the coup d'etat, while restoring State institutions and establishing the comprehensive peace that the Yemeni people deserve. In this vein, the President has issued decrees appointing a new Governor and security director in the governorate of Aden. The designated Prime Minister, Mr. Maeen Abdulmalek Saeed, is undertaking consultations with different political components to form a new Government, in line with the text of the agreement. He is outlining the priorities of the Government in different economic and development reform areas in order to save the national economy from collapse. He is trying to normalize the situation in the respective governorates. The new Government will comprise competent and experienced officers able to face the current challenges and adapt to new developments. They will work on targeting the necessary reforms, eliminating sources of corruption and reactivating State institutions, enabling them to undertake the duties they owe to citizens. In this vein, we commend our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia who stood by the Yemeni people to alleviate their suffering at the different stages to ensure the implementation of the Riyadh agreement. The Houthi militias continue to undermine the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, in particular the agreement on the city of Al-Hudaydah, which unfortunately has reached a new stage of escalation, intensifying the conflict and aggravating the suffering of Yemenis, owing to the negligence of Houthi militias, who have shirked their responsibilities in connection with the agreement. They have disrupted the work of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement and constrained its movement. The Mission has been unable to investigate the Houthi militias targeting of the Yemeni liaison officer Colonel Muhammed Al-Sulayhi, who supposedly enjoyed the protection of the Mission. Not only have the militias rejected the invitation, but they have also bombarded the observation post where the targeting took place to prevent any investigation by the United Nations. The frequency of the militias' violations has increased, especially with the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah. They have refused to demine the area, open humanitarian corridors or allow United Nations patrols to move inside the city. They have used Al-Hudaydah as a base for air strikes using drones and booby-trapped and remotely operated vessels. They have also violated the agreement on Al-Hudaydah by mobilizing in the governorates of Al-Jawf, Ma'rib and Al-Bayda. Facing restrictions on movement and the undermining of the work of the Mission, the Government is calling for the transfer of the Mission's headquarters to another neutral place in Al-Hudaydah to safeguard its work in line with the mandate of resolution 2452 (2019). We want peace. We want to implement the agreement signed between the Government of Yemen and the Houthis. It should be a positive step towards comprehensive peace, aimed at alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people. What happened after the Stockholm Agreement was reached? Why did the Houthis sign on to the agreement? We were on the verge of liberating our cities from Houthi control. However, in order to comply with the international community and the United Nations, we went to Stockholm to reach that agreement. Who has undermined that agreement? It is the Houthis, unfortunately. They are stealing the revenues of the ports, including oil revenues. They are stealing humanitarian assistance. They are mobilizing and escalating elsewhere in Yemen, such as in Hadur, Al-Bayda, Al-Jawf, and today they are threatening Ma'rib. Who is trying to achieve peace? The Government of Yemen looks forward to peace after the coup d'etat of 21 September 2014, which led to the Yemeni people suffering the worse humanitarian crisis ever. That is why we are calling on the international community to bring pressure to bear on the Houthis to end their escalation in Ma'rib and stop launching ballistic missiles on civilians living in that populous city. They have to stop launching missiles on the territory of the brotherly country of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The Government of Yemen, Mr. Martin and the Council might remember the Kuwait agreement, which took 100 days to negotiate. In this vein, we would like to thank Kuwait for hosting those consultations. Following 100 days of negotiations, the Government of Yemen accepted the terms. It was the Houthis who rejected them because they wanted the conflict to persist. They are using the suffering of the Yemeni people to impose an agenda of continued racial and factional project in Yemen. The Government of Yemen was anxious to facilitate access of oil derivatives to the port of Al-Hudaydah, although the Houthi militias violated the mechanism agreed with the Office of the Special Envoy when they withdrew more than 50 billion rials from the proceeds of oil derivatives from the special account in the Central Bank of Al-Hudaydah, which had been allocated to pay the salaries of civil servants in Yemen. On 26 August, we proposed a new initiative for access of oil derivatives to the port of Al-Hudaydah, including giving access to all vessels conforming to requirements, so long as those proceeds are put into a new special account that is not under the control of the Houthis, using a new mechanism under which the United Nations would guarantee that such revenues will not be used until agreement is reached on their expenditure. We must restore the money that was withdrawn from the special account in the Central Bank and agree on an expenditure mechanism for the money that was collected previously and that will be collected later, so that those revenues can be used to pay salaries based on 2014 payroll records. Such revenues must not be confiscated or used by militias to finance their absurdwar against Yemen and the Yemeni people. They are exploiting the suffering of the Yemeni people, in a desperate attempt to cover up the theft of the proceeds of oil derivatives, which would cover the needs of the areas under militia control for almost seven months. Allow me to make another point. The proposals made by Mr. Griffiths, including the first draft of the joint declaration on a ceasefire, confidence-building measures related to economic and humanitarian measures and the resumption of a political process, have all been agreed upon by the Government of Yemen without any reservations. Mr. Griffiths knows that full well. But who rejected those proposals at the beginning? It was the Houthis, and this begs the question: why? Because they want to change the facts on the ground and want continued suffering for the Yemeni people. The Yemeni Government has warned for almost two years of a potential environmental and economic catastrophe due to oil leakage from or the sinking or explosion of the FSO SAFER oil tanker and of the terrible repercussions of such an incident on Yemen, the countries of the region and international navigation in the Red Sea. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres also warned, in a letter to the Security Council, against the continued delays and procrastination by the Houthi militias, which are preventing United Nations technical teams from reaching the tanker to assess the situation and remove the oil. The international community and the Council have made every effort to prevent such a catastrophe, the possibility of which is looming larger by the day. Despite everything I have mentioned, the Houthi militias continue to exploit this issue and use it for political blackmail, proposing unrealistic conditions to the United Nations with total disregard for all our efforts. We call on the Security Council once again to shoulder its responsibilities and adopt firm measures to counter this intransigence and procrastination. We must bring more pressure to bear on the militias to prevent an imminent disaster. In conclusion, we are concerned that the Council might be holding its next meeting on the issue once the disaster has happened and that we will then just be discussing its repercussions. Such an outcome would only magnify the suffering of the Yemeni people at the hands of the Houthi militias. The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.
