Mr. Mayr-Harting: Mr. President, we highly
appreciate your presiding over this important meeting.
We express our thanks to the Ugandan presidency of
the Security Council for having organized this debate.

Let me also thank the Secretary-General for the
important presentation he made to us today. We also
welcome Ambassador Mufioz, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and the representatives of
the World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme for their contributions.

Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union later in this meeting.

Let me say that seizing the window of
opportunity in the immediate aftermath of a conflict is
a crucial investment in order to lay the ground for
long-term peace and stability. We concur with the
Secretary-General that it is essential for the
international community to ensure that a peacebuilding
perspective is in place from the very first days after the
cessation of a conflict. Peacebuilding efforts must be
undertaken and supported from the earliest stage
onwards, and as the representative of Japan and others
have said, they must go hand in hand with the possible
deployment of integrated peacekeeping missions.

In order for peacebuilding measures to prove
successful, national ownership must be at the centre of
all efforts. All peacebuilding efforts should therefore
draw upon existing national capacities, as the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission has already said, while
at the same time assisting with capacity deployment.
From our point of View, this should also include the
identification of opportunities for local private-sector
engagement. Let me add that local private-sector
engagement can also play a role when it comes to
procurement for United Nations peacekeeping.

The protection of civilians and effective
programmes for disarmament and demobilization and
reintegration must be key priorities in the immediate
aftermath of a conflict. There should be a clear focus
on the long-term reintegration of former combatants
and on the strengthening of the rule of law and
institutional reform, including security-sector reform.
Short-term peacebuilding measures must be undertaken
with a view to long-term peacebuilding. The
establishment of, and support for, effective and
independent justice and reconciliation mechanisms is
crucial. That will contribute to justice, long-term peace
and reconciliation in war-torn societies, thereby
helping to minimize the risk of future violations.

Austria believes that successful peacebuilding
can take place only if all the relevant actors are
included. I would therefore also like to express my
support for the comment made by the representative of
the United States. We need to acknowledge the vital
role played by women in re-establishing post-conflict
societies. Women have specific insight into the needs
of their societies, which is why their involvement in
peacebuilding efforts should be enhanced and the
provision of gender-specific funds ensured.

Enhanced coordination, not only within the
United Nations system but also with other international
partners, is a prerequisite for avoiding duplication and
ensuring the efficiency of peacebuilding efforts. It is
essential to make maximum use of partners with a
comparative advantage on the ground. That is of course
very often particularly true of regional and subregional
organizations. For that very reason, we need to
intensify cooperation with them.

Furthermore, Austria supports the Secretary
General's recommendation to strengthen the authority
of senior United Nations leadership on the ground as a
means of increasing accountability.

Austria also welcomes the crucial role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in addressing a country's
post-conflict needs. We would like to underline the
necessity of involving the Peacebuilding Commission
from the outset. By promoting a coherent and
integrated approach that highlights the principles of
national ownership and regional cooperation, the
Commission provides valuable support for long-term
democratic consolidation and sustained economic
development. It is therefore best placed to develop an
international consensus on peacebuilding, which is
necessary to bridge the gap between early stabilization
and recovery efforts and longer-term development
planning. We attach great importance to building
further on the Commission's accomplishments and
look forward to the refinement of its working methods
and tools in the context of the 2010 review.

To underline our commitment to the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Austria recently asked to
become a member in its country-specific configuration
for Sierra Leone. The Secretary-General has mentioned
that Sierra Leone is a showcase for cooperation and
synergy among United Nations actors on the ground in
the framework of peacebuilding. We are therefore
happy that our request has met with the Commission's
approval. We will actively contribute to its work.

Finally, I would like to thank the Ugandan
presidency of the Security Council for preparing the
draft presidential statement, as well as to express our
full support for it.
