Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to welcome the presence among
us today of Mr. Baron Divavesi Waqa, President
of Nauru; Mr. Eugene Philip Rhuggenaath, Prime
Minister of Curacao, Kingdom of the Netherlands;
and Mr. Yerzhan Ashikbayev, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan. I wish also to thank
Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General;
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister for Water Resources
of the Republic of Iraq; and Ms. Hindou Ibrahim,
representative of the non-governmental organization
International Indigenous Peoples Forum on Climate
Change. We found their enlightening briefings and
important recommendations very instructive on the
issue of climate change and its growing linkage to the
intercommunal tensions and conflicts plaguing many
parts of the world.

In 2007, upon the initiative of the United Kingdom,
the Security Council took up issues relating to the
effects of climate change on peace and security for
the first time. Since then, the Council's interest in
this issue has been strengthened and today reflects
a global awareness of the need to develop collective
and sustainable responses to this challenge facing our
planet. Indeed, the Council's commitment to promoting
sustainable solutions to the impacts of climate change
on peace and security has become concrete over the
years through the adoption of numerous resolutions
and presidential statements, including resolution 2349
(2017) and presidential statements S/PRST/2011/15 and
S/PRST/2018/3. In these texts, the Council expressed its
concern about the effects of climate change, considering
them to be factors that aggravate existing situations
or situations that might trigger crises, particularly in
regions where pre-existing sociopolitical and economic
vulnerabilities constitute fertile ground for the outbreak
of armed violence.

The situation with regard to Lake Chad, on which
some 20 million people depend, is by itself emblematic
of the devastating effects of environmental shortages on
peace and stability. Having lost a large part of its water
volume, the Lake Chad basin region, like the Sahel
region, symbolizes all the environmental, security and
humanitarian challenges facing the African continent.
For the populations living on the shores of Lake
Chad, who derive most of their income and means of
subsistence from this source, the decline in water and
fishery resources can be a factor of tension and even
cause an upsurge injihadist activity, which is the thrust
of resolution 2349 (2017), recognizing the effects of
climate change on the stability of the Lake Chad region.

For Cote d'Ivoire, this is an essential question
whose undeniable impact on peace and security
invites us to go beyond the usual divisions concerning
the relevance of the bodies where these questions
should be discussed, in order to provide consensual
answers capable of reversing the climate change
curve and its harmful effects on peace and stability,
in a continent already facing too many challenges.
My country therefore takes this welcome opportunity
to stress the need to take into account the security
implications of climate change in the analysis of the
root causes of conflicts and in the formulation of
strategies for their prevention and management, in
accordance with the recommendations of presidential
statements S/PRST/2011/15 and S/PRST/20l8/3. This
is particularly necessary when climate factors may
pose challenges to the implementation of the Council's
mandates or compromise peacebuilding processes in a
post-crisis context.

Cote d'Ivoire, an essentially agricultural country,
has not been immune to the large-scale reduction in its
forest cover, largely linked both to human activity and
to a decline in rainfall, itself induced by the climate
change observed in recent decades. From 16 million
hectares of forest in the 1950s, the remaining area of
forest, according to United Nations estimates, had
fallen by 2015 to less than 3.4 million hectares. This
worrying phenomenon, also experienced by other
countries in sub-Saharan Africa, constitutes - along
with desertification, the depletion of arable land
and water shortages due to prolonged episodes of
drought - factors ofinstability in regions where access
to and control of resources have become sociopolitical
issues generating conflicts, which sometimes take
dramatic identity and religious turns.

Shortages of water and cultivable land as a result
of climate change have exacerbated migration and
demographic pressures on scarce existing resources,
as evidenced by the environmental, security and
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin. Indeed,
according to Food and Agriculture Organization
estimates, 6.9 million people are food insecure, and
2.5 million people are internally displaced in this
area of the Lake Chad basin, where Boko Haram and
transnational criminal networks have taken root, taking
advantage of local vulnerabilities and contradictions.

The establishment of these terrorist and criminal
networks is also facilitated by the radicalization of a
fringe of young people confronted with unemployment
and poverty. Moreover, the Sahel region, which is
also still facing the effects of climate change, is
experiencing a resurgence of autonomist movements,
driven by the desire to change political institutions and
governance mechanisms.

The Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, concerned about the security challenges related
to climate change, organized, during its 774th meeting,
held on 21 May 2018, in Addis Ababa, a public meeting
devoted to the link between climate change and conflicts
in Africa and the response to security implications. My
country endorses the relevant recommendations of this
meeting, including the need to strengthen the resilience
of African States in the face of climate change, as well
as the recommendations' integration into national and
regional conflict-prevention strategies. The Peace and
Security Council also reiterated the importance of
multilateralism in the fight against climate change,
of which the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
of 12 December 2015 remains a perfect illustration,
and urged the signatory States of the Agreement to
implement the relevant commitments.

The Peace and Security Council further encourages
the international community to support subregional
strategies to address the root causes of conflicts,
including those proposed by the first Summit of Heads
of State and Government of the Climate Commission
of the Congo Basin, held on 29 April, in Brazzaville,
and the International Conference on Saving Lake Chad,
held 26 to 28 February 2018, in Abuja. The Peace and
Security Council also stressed the importance of the
preventive approach by emphasizing the strengthening
of the capacities of national and community early-
warning and early-response mechanisms, such as the
early warning and response network of the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as the
integration into their indicators of the premises of
community violence, climatic factors and their effects
on peace and security.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the existence in Africa ofnumerous
initiatives based on the commitment of States to taking
ownership of their collective security within multilateral
frameworks that favour a preventive approach through
dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes related
to the management of natural resources and the climate.
These subregional approaches, which enable Member
States, united by the ideals of solidarity, sharing
and peace, to work together to strengthen peace and
security, a guarantee of sustainable development, are
only waiting to be supported by the Security Council.

