Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to welcome Baroness Ashton, High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union, and to thank her for briefing the Council on
the cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations in maintaining international peace and
security. The European Union has been an important
partner of the United Nations in the area of peace
and security. In recent years, the European Union
has actively participated in the discussions within the
Council on regional hotspots and thematic topics.

The European Union has been working closely with
United Nations in carrying out preventive diplomacy,
providing good offices and promoting the settlement of
disputes through peaceful means, such as mediation and
negotiation, as well as through strong support to United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. The European Union also actively participates
in the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and
plays a very positive role in peacebuilding in conflict-
affected and post-conflict conflict countries.

We acknowledge the great importance that the
European Union attaches to its cooperation with other
regional organizations. Recently, certain hotspot issues
in Africa, such as Mali and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, have become more prominent. The European
Union has maintained close coordination with the
African Union and African regional and subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
West African States, the Southern African Development
Community and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, in providing strong assistance to their
good offices and capacity-building efforts.
China appreciates the significant contribution
of the European Union in maintaining regional and
international peace, stability and security. It encourages
and supports the European Union in continuing to play
a positive and constructive role in that regard.

Dialogue and consultation are the fundamental
way to bridge differences and to prevent and resolve
conflicts. While the European Union has extensive
experience and resources in that regard, various
regional and subregional organizations have a profound
understanding of and unique advantages concerning
regional issues. The Security Council should strengthen
its communication and coordination with various
regional and subregional organizations, including the
European Union, in line with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular on
the basis of more pragmatic and effective cooperation
in maintaining international peace and security.

