Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Arab Group, I would like to thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing today. The delegation of Egypt,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, would like to
add its voice to the statements to be delivered by the
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by
the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Since the two statements will reflect the
fundamentals of the Arab position with regard to the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, I shall briefly underline six points to be raised
by the Group of Arab States.

First, the Group ofArab States deplores the ongoing
Israeli violations against the Palestinian population
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including the
blockade and recurrent aerial bombardments of
Gaza, the most recent of which took place yesterday.
We also deplore the extrajudicial killings and note
with concern the Israeli settlers' violence, which has
reached unprecedented levels, and the desecration
with impunity of Christian and Muslim shrines in
the occupied territories, including written phrases
inciting hatred of Jesus and opposing churches in the
occupied lands, in addition to the storming of Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem this month by settlers and Israeli
security forces. All of that deserves special attention.
Undoubtedly, the recent Israeli threats to launch a full
military land operation against Gaza are additional
reminders of the intentions of the occupying Power.
The Arab Group calls for the Security Council to
take urgent measures before the situation deteriorates
irremediably.

Secondly, peace efforts in the region are passing
through one of the most difficult stages in years. That
is due to the absence of any clear political horizon for
the two-State solution. It is also due to the deliberate
manipulative procrastination of the Israeli Government,
which always uses insubstantial pretexts, such as
the forthcoming elections and the expected change
in Government, to avoid compliance with United
Nations resolutions, despite the fact that Security
Council resolutions and peace treaties are international
obligations. This is despite the fact that Security
Council resolutions, as well as the provisions of the
peace treaties, are internationally binding, irrespective
of Government changes or the holding of elections. The
Middle East peace process has become a rote process
dragging on for more than two decades without any real
achievement towards its main goal, which is peace.

Thirdly, the failure of the Quartet to meet at the
ministerial level during the high-level segment of
the General Assembly or even to issue a statement
expressing its position requires a re-evaluation by the
international community of the role of the Quartet and
whether it should remain the key international player
in the Middle East peace process or the question of
Palestine.

Fourthly, Israel continues to claim that it is
willing to consider incremental solutions that would
block any final solution during the various phases of
implementation. The international community has to
set the parameters of the peace process on the basis
of Security Council resolutions. The Group of Arab
States calls upon the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities to address the question of Palestine
in earnest. That question has always been the main
source of instability in the Middle East, threatening
international peace and security. The Arab Group
therefore calls upon the Security Council to adopt a
clear-cut resolution that indicates the parameters of the
final solution.

Fifthly, the Group of Arab States expresses its
full support for all the steps taken by the Palestinian
leadership to achieve the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people. We call upon all Member States to
recognize the State of Palestine within the borders of
4 June 1967 and to support the Palestinian quest for
full membership of the United Nations. We expect the
General Assembly at least to adopt a resolution during
its current session to upgrade the status of Palestine
to that of a non-member observer State, as a first step
towards achieving full membership. Such a resolution
would confirm in practice that the United Nations
organs are applying the principles of justice without
politicization or double standards.

Sixthly, the Group of Arab States reiterates the
decisions taken by the Ministerial Council of the Arab
League with regard to the Syrian crisis, including its
recent decision of 5 September in Cairo. The Group
condemns the ongoing killings of brotherly civilians in
Syria over the past 18 months. Those responsible for the
atrocities have to be brought to international justice and
should be held accountable for their crimes.

On the other hand, the Group of Arab States stresses
the importance of focusing on the main topic of the
monthly briefings on the Middle East in the Security
Council which is the continued Israeli occupation of
Arab lands.

The current situation in Syria should not be used
as a pretext to turn a blind eye to the continued Israeli
occupation of the the Syrian Golan.

The Arab Group requests that all monthly briefings
to the Security Council by the Secretariat on the
situation in the Middle East include a clear reference to
the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan condemning
Israel's continuous violation ofresolution 497 (1981) and
confirming the applicability of The Hague Convention
of 1907 and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 to
the occupation ofthe Syrian Golan since 1967. A similar
reference should also reaffirm the illegality of Israel's
annexation and settlement activities and the application
of Israeli legislation in the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as reaffirm that Israel must fully withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of June 1967.

