Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
about the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. My written report provides details about
our activities and results during the reporting period
in relation to our three primary priorities (S/2019/417, annex II). Today, I would like to highlight just a few
important issues.

MyOffice'sfirstpriorityasalwaysisto expeditiously
complete the ad hoc trials and appeals under the
Mechanism's jurisdiction. During the reporting period,
at The Hague branch, my Office made important
progress towards finalizing the remaining proceedings
transferred from the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Most importantly,
on 20 March, the Appeals Chamber of the Mechanism
affirmed the conviction of Radovan Karadzic' for
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
Appeals Chamber further granted my Office's appeal
and entered a sentence of life imprisonment.

As President of the Republika Srpska, Karadzie
stood at the apex of power, which he abused to
manipulate his people and commit atrocities that
shocked our collective conscience. For 13 years, he
was one of the world's most wanted fugitives. He has
now been held accountable by an international court for
his crimes. This case is a powerful demonstration that
when the international community remains determined,
justice can and will prevail.

In relation to the Stanisie and Simatovie retrial,
my Office completed the presentation of its evidence
and the defence cases have now begun. In that regard, I
note the efforts of the Republic of Serbia to ensure full
cooperation with my Office by quickly responding to a
number of important requests for assistance.

Regarding the Mladie appeal, my Office finished
preparation of the written appeals arguments and
also litigated a number of other matters in this case,
including motions for additional evidence.

At the Arusha branch, on 7 December 2018,
the single Judge decided not to refer the Turinabo et
a]. contempt case to Rwanda and ordered that it be
conducted by the Mechanism. Since that time, my
Office has been engaged in intense pre-trial preparation
and litigation, while concurrently litigating the related
review proceedings in the Ngirabatware case.

Serious crimes against the justice process must be
detected and prosecuted, as the Council recognized
in adopting the Mechanism's statute. My Office is
determined to carry out our mandate by ensuring
that witnesses are protected from interference and by
safeguarding the integrity of ourjudgments.

As I have previously reported to the Council, my
Office has been taking a number ofimportant measures
to strengthen our activities to locate and arrest the
remaining eight fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Over the past
year, our reforms and renewed efforts have generated
important actionable leads. Critically, my Office
has developed credible intelligence on the current
whereabouts of several fugitives. We accordingly
approached a number of Member States to seek
their cooperation.

Unfortunately, I must report that there are a
number of issues in State cooperation that have
negatively impacted our work. While many Member
States have committed to providing cooperation, more
can be done to ensure that their authorities deliver on
that commitment. In part, the challenges we are facing
are symptomatic of a more general lack of capacity in
terms of inter-State cooperation in criminal matters,
including in the search for transnational fugitives. We
are committed to supporting our partners to overcome
those challenges.

At the same time, it also appears that some
countries do not prioritize cooperation with my
Office in bringing genocide fugitives to justice. Since
August of last year, my Office has been seeking urgent
cooperation from South Africa in relation to the arrest
of a fugitive located on its territory. We have continually
renewed our requests and repeatedly sought to engage
directly with South African authorities. Unfortunately,
until yesterday, we had received only pro forma
responses that our requests had been forwarded to the
appropriate authorities and were being considered.
South Africa confirmed yesterday by note verbale that
it is fully committed to cooperating with my Office.
I hope that this time it will actually deliver on that
commitment immediately.

This year marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Rwandan genocide. It is time for the remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR to be brought to justice.
The victims have waited for far too long. It must also be
underlined that this is not just an issue of the past. Some
fugitives remain threats to international peace and
security today by promoting conflict and exploitation.
We will utilize all tools available to us to address
the challenges we face, including formal reports of
non-cooperation to the Security Council, if needed.
In relation to national prosecutions of crimes
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, my
written report provides detailed insight into the current
status and challenges.

It is clear that much more remains to be done to
achieve more justice for more victims. Rwandan
authorities continue to search for more than 500
fugitives. In the former Yugoslavia, thousands of cases
still need to be processed by national courts. Our
national counterparts are unanimous that they need
more support, assistance and advice to successfully
implement national war crimes strategies. Last year,
we received more than 300 requests for assistance
to provide evidence - more than ever before - and
current trends indicate that this year we will again
receive a record number of requests.

Regional cooperation is another area where
strengthened engagement will have an impact. I am
pleased to report that with my Office's support, at
the recent conference in Belgrade the region's chief
prosecutors agreed to transfer specific cases involving
mid-level officials from the countries where the crimes
were committed to the countries where suspects
are living now. They further requested my Office to
facilitate that process.

The countries of the former Yugoslavia have made
commitments to increasing the pace of war crimes
prosecutions and significantly reducing the backlog of
unresolved cases. National prosecutors have made clear
that achieving those goals will depend on continued
and strengthened assistance, and the international
community has an important role to play by ensuring
the requested assistance is provided.
The final topic that I would like to address is the
denial of crimes and the glorification of war criminals.

In relation to Rwanda, genocide denial, in all of
its forms and manifestations, unfortunately continues.
Efforts to minimize the scale of the death and
destruction or point to other factors to detract attention
from the facts of the genocide are unacceptable.

As for the former Yugoslavia, I first reported to the
Council about this topic five years ago. Unfortunately,
since that time the situation has dramatically worsened.
It cannot be tolerated that, just last week, a Government
minister called the Srebrenica genocide false, while a
member of Parliament congratulated Ratko Mladie on
the genocide, which he said was a brilliant military
operation. The truth is that during the conflicts
there was untold human suffering caused by leaders
who used fear, division and hatred. No one emerged
unharmed - not in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Croatia,
in Kosovo or in Serbia - but the denial of the crimes
causes profound pain to the victims. Their suffering
was immense, yet some are determined to insult and
torment them even more.

The glorification of war criminals punishes young
people. What they learn in the classrooms and from
their leaders drives them apart, rather than bringing
them together. The consequence is clear. Denial and
glorification are destabilizing the region and preventing
reconciliation. And so, to begin to move forward,
glorification must stop.

Important lessons can be learned from the
Rwandan example. Every year the Rwandan people join
together for 100 days to commemorate all victims of
the genocide and renew their commitment to ensuring
that such crimes are never repeated. The international
community failed the victims in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia by standing by as the crimes were
committed. We cannot fail them again now by not
speaking out against denial and glorification.

In conclusion, my Office is firmly focused on
completing our remaining functions efficiently and
effectively. In the search for the fugitives, my Office
is generating credible intelligence on the current
whereabouts of several fugitives. However, we are not
yet receiving the cooperation needed to secure arrests,
so we call upon all Member States to adhere to their
international obligations and provide full cooperation
to our efforts.

We also remain committed to providing our support
to the continued implementation of the ICTR and ICTY
completion strategies by national authorities so that
more justice can be achieved for more victims. We are
grateful for the continued support of the Council in all
of our efforts.

