Mr. Yassin (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to address
the Security Council. Allow me at the outset to join those
who have preceded me in congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am confident that, with your diplomatic skills,
your experience and wisdom, a just and equitable resolution
will be achieved. I should also like to express our thanks to
Ambassador Kovanda for his efforts in guiding the work of
the Security Council last month.

We have all heard previous speakers express their
condemnation, or at least their dissatisfaction, in respect of
the dangers now facing the city of Jerusalem, a Holy City
to all revealed religions and particularly for Islam, which
considers Al-Quds Al-Sharif the second most important
kiblah for Muslims and the place whence the prophet
Mohammed ascended, upon whom may God's blessings
fall. Jerusalem is also the cradle of Christianity.

The issue before the Security Council today is
therefore one of the utmost gravity. Any failure to resolve
the issue and arrive at a just solution will inflame the
feelings of the Ummah and lead to fury and the
mobilization of all its resources to deal with the issue.

The Security Council will be put to the test in terms
of its credibility and its will and ability to adopt decisive
and just resolutions. Its resolutions must uphold
international law without double standards and without
exception. The Security Council did adopt resolutions 252
(1968), 271 (1969), 475 (1980) and 478 (1980) and also
672 (1990), all of which relate to the issue of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. They set out Israel's responsibility - Israel,
the occupying Power in the Arab lands - not to
undermine the legal and demographic status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. They also call on the international community
not to recognize any measures taken by the occupying
Power that contravene the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949. Those resolutions deem such measures by the
occupying Power as illegal, indeed null and void. They
condemn Israel's attempts to alter the status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and call on Israel to put an end to its illegal
settlement policies and measures.

The Council heard the statement by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, Mr. Nasser
Al-Kidwa in which he emphasized that Israel has one
objective: the indefinite annexation of East Jerusalem and
the declaration of a unified Jerusalem as Israel's capital.
It is attempting to achieve that objective by emptying East
Jerusalem of its Palestinian inhabitants through a policy
of land confiscation and placing obstacles of all kinds in
the way of Palestinians' building homes.

Furthermore, Israel is continuing to build settlements
and to bring in Jewish immigrants in order to entrench the
policy of fait accompli. Israel is doing this despite the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, without fear of having the clear provisions of
the Charter for such cases applied to it, provisions which
the Security Council has quickly applied in other cases
and without as much justification. The decision by the
Council when it considered the settlements issue on 28
February last not to take any measures against Israel gave
it moral support for its policy of imposing a fait
accompli. These are the facts that must be told.

Israel would not have chosen to confiscate 53
hectares of Palestinian land - bringing the total area of
Palestinian land confiscated by Israel in Al-Quds Al-
Sharif since the 1967 occupation to more than 2,400
hectares - had the Security Council taken firm decisions,
and implemented them, to put an end to such violations.
Israel would not have built 35,000 settler units in and
around Al-Quds Al-Sharif had it expected to suffer the
consequences of flouting international law in general and
the binding resolutions of the Security Council in
particular.

 

While we know full well that Israel would not have
defied the international community without the unjust
support and the reprehensible help it received from its
allies, we must ask where is the wisdom in setting aside all
the progress that has been made in the international arena
in the post-cold-war period and the individual contributions
of States towards peace and conciliation? Will the alliance
policy remain unchanged?

The Council of the League of Arab States adopted its
resolution 5487 unanimously on 6 May 1995. That
resolution reaffirms that Al-Quds Al-Sharif is an indivisible
part of the territories occupied by Israel in 1967 and that
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
apply to it. The resolution also stresses the significance of
the status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif for the Arab world, both
Muslim and Christian. It also condemns Israel's decision to
confiscate the 53 hectares of Palestinian land because it
violates international law, flies in the face of its norms,
contravenes the resolutions of the Security Council and the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
Relative to the Protection of Civilians Persons in Time of
War, and finally because it threatens peace. In addition, the
resolution calls on the international community not to
recognize, under any circumstances whatsoever, any
changes made by Israel - the occupying Power - to the
legal and demographic status of the City of Jerusalem, and
also calls on the international community to reject Israel's
allegation that Jerusalem is its eternal capital.

My Government strongly condemns the measures
taken by Israel in an attempt to entrench its policy of fait
accompli: the annexation of East Jerusalem, the
confiscation of land, the expulsion of Palestinians from the
City and its closure against them, the construction of
settlements and the continuing excavations that threaten the
safety and foundations of the holy Al-Aqsa mosque.

The Government of Sudan believes that the
Palestinians, by signing the Declaration of Principles, have
taken a position that must be respected. We supported that
position although we knew full well that Israel is not
serious in wanting peace. What Israel wants is surrender,
which would allow it to continue to occupy Arab lands,
including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Surrender would prevent the
return of Palestinian refugees to the lands from which they
were dispersed by unending war and by settlement policies
that have allowed Israel to seize all Palestinian territories
and turn the legitimate and inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, which are supported by the international
community and include their right to create their own
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital, into pipe
dreams.

What Israel wants is the surrender of the Arab States
and the international community's support for its
expansionist policies. Israel is placing obstacles in the
way of peace by all available means. It refuses to
withdraw from the Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon
under the pretext of security concerns, even though it is
the aggressor State and the occupying Power. What Israel
wants is the international community's acquiescence to
what it has tried to impose by force.

The peace that we want, a peace based on right,
justice and the rule of law, is a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace. Such a peace will be achieved only if Israel
sets aside its expansionist ambitions and withdraws from
all the occupied Arab territories; will be achieved only if
Israel recognizes the legitimate and indivisible rights of
the Palestinian people, including its right to self-
determination and to the establishment of its own
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital; such a
peace will be achieved only if Israel fully commits itself
to implementing resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978), and also resolutions 252 (1968), 271 (1969),
476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 672 (1990) relating to the
status of Jerusalem.

The Security Council has a great responsibility: it
must stand rock solid for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace; it must reaffirm its credibility by
denouncing the measures taken by Israel to confiscate
Palestinian land in and around Jerusalem, in building
settlements and in continuing the excavations which
threaten the foundations and safety of the holy Al-Aqsa
mosque. The Council must call on Israel to rescind these
measures forthwith and not to undertake any such
ventures in the future. The Security Council must also
reaffirm the unlawfulness of such measures. And it must
act to implement the provisions of the Charter in order to
ensure the full implementation of the Council's
resolutions, without exception.

The international community must make public its
rejection and condemnation of Israel's policies of fait
accompli, which are in violation of international law, of
resolutions that have the force of international law and of
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

The Council must convince Israel that peace cannot
be achieved by unilateral decisions based on the principle
of the use of force.

 

My delegation appeals to the Security Council, and
particularly to its permanent members, to heed the voice of
reason in an issue of great religious sensitivity: it must take
decisive action on the basis of the principles of the Charter
and of international law. We believe that, if the Security
Council derogates from its responsibility on the basis of
unacceptable excuses, there will be an entrenchment of a
serious situation that may well pull the Middle East region
down into a new period of tension, with the concomitant
adverse impact on international and regional peace and
security.

