Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we wish to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing on recent
developments in the occupied territory, which revealed
the serious situation there. We commend him for his
endeavours and reiterate our full support for his efforts
to de-escalate the situation so as to avoid confrontation.
We are meeting once again, unfortunately, against
the backdrop of a tense situation in the occupied
territory owing to the recent escalation there that took
place this past weekend in Gaza. The Israeli occupying
forces continued their acts of aggression and attacks
against the people of Gaza through the most intensive
air campaign against the Gaza Strip since the aggression
of 2014, which killed two children, injured dozens of
people and damaged many civilian facilities.

We heard Mr. Mladenov say that this aggression
had led the situation to the brink of war. This only
compounds the crimes committed by Israel, the
occupying Power, in targeting the Palestinian people
with live ammunition, as has been the case since the
beginning of the Great March of Return, last March,
which claimed the lives ofnearly 150 martyrs, including
22 children. More than 15,000 people were also injured,
and many were permanently disabled. We condemn the
targeting of innocent civilians by anyone, anywhere and
at any time, and hold Israel, the occupying Power, fully
responsible for the latest acts ofviolence and escalation.

We reiterate our support for the struggle of the
Palestinian people in defence of all they hold sacred and
their inalienable rights. We condemn the wide-ranging
practices of Israel, the occupying Power, and its
systematic policies against the unarmed Palestinian
people, which amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity under international humanitarian and human
rights law.

We call on the Security Council to implement its
relevant resolutions to protect the Palestinian civilians,
in particular resolutions 904 (1994) and 605 (1987),
which state that the Fourth Geneva Convention is
applicable to the occupied Palestinian territory. We look
forward to the report of the Secretary-General on the
provision of international protection to the Palestinian
people, in line with General Assembly resolution
ES-10/20, adopted on 13 June.

We condemn the decision of the Israeli occupying
Power to tighten its grip on the Gaza population, which
has been suffering under a more than decade-long
blockade, particularly the closing of the Karam Abu
Salem crossing, which, as we all know, is the only
commercial crossing for the import and export of goods
to and from the Gaza Strip. That will only aggravate
the humanitarian crisis, as it cuts off all vital supplies
and prohibits exports while endangering the entire
Gaza population of 2 million people, half of whom are
children. We stress the importance of working to put
an end to the economic and humanitarian crisis facing
the Palestinian people, particularly in Gaza, as a result
of the unjust blockade. We call on the international
community and international organizations to put
pressure on Israel in order to lift its blockade on the
Strip and open the crossings over which it has full
control, immediately and permanently.

This decision, in addition to the financial challenges
facing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
as a result of the closure and the blockade, as well as
the constraints on the delivery of assistance, will only
increase the humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian
people. We also share Mr. Mladenov's concern over
the annual deficit of UNRWA's budget and stress the
importance of providing the Agency's programmes and
activities with the necessary financial support given
that such funding is an international responsibility.
However, the total of what we have provided to the
Agency over the past five years amounts to $55 million
and we will continue our support.

We recently noted that Israel, the occupying Power,
has continued to change the rules on the ground as it has
begun to undermine the basic rights of the Palestinian
people. The Knesset recently enacted a number of
illegal decisions, including the final adoption of the
law transferring authority over Palestinian occupied
territories from the Israeli Supreme Court to the
Administrative Affairs Court, which would limit the
number of petitions by Palestinians, in addition to the
law pertaining to the nation State of the Jewish people,
which entrenches Israeli racism and threatens the
existence of Palestinians. Another decision allows the
Israeli occupying Power to withhold the tax revenues of
$300 million levied by Israel on behalf ofthe Palestinian
Government. That decision is just one of the punitive
financial measures taken by Israel that contravene
international law and the relevant agreements between
the Israeli and Palestinian sides.

We reiterate our categorical rejection of all illegal
decisions that constitute de facto annexation under
the Israeli High Court's decision of 25 May 2018,
allowing the forced relocation of Palestinian Bedouin
communities located in Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu
and the destruction of their houses so as to build
more new Israeli settlements, which would divide the
West Bank apart and eliminate the possibility of the
two-State solution. Such repeated violations in the
occupied territories should be met with international
rejection. We condemn the expansionist and illegal
settlement policies of Israel throughout the territories
of the State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem,
since 1967. We stress that Israeli settlements are
illegitimate and will never be accepted de facto. They
violate international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Fourh Geneva Convention, and seek
to partition the Palestinian territory and undermine its
geographical connectivity.

All of this demonstrates that Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to disregard all the relevant
international resolutions. We are therefore collectively
responsible for calling for the implementation of all
the relevant resolutions pertaining to the Palestinian
question, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1515 (2003) and 2334 (2016), which emphasizes, inter
alia, that Israeli settlements constitute a flagrant
violation of international law and an impediment
to peace. It also calls on Israel to immediately and
fully cease all settlement activities in the Palestinian
occupied territory, including East Jerusalem, and
stresses that the international community will not
recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 borders,
including Jerusalem.

We welcome Mr. Mladenov's efforts, in cooperation
with the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians, to improve
health-care, energy and water infrastructure in the
Gaza Strip. We affirm that the Government of Kuwait
has decided to disburse $2 million earmarked for the
revitalization and development of infrastructure in
the southern part of the Gaza Strip, and we commend
the efforts of Egypt to promote Palestinian national
reconciliation, especially in the light of recent positive
indications that an arrangement might be reached to put
reconciliation efforts back on track.

In conclusion, we emphasize that we are committed
to the two-State solution and to resolving the Arab-
Israeli conflict in accordance with international
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative in all its
aspects, according to which peace with Israel and the
normalization of relations must be preceded by an end
to the occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories
since 1967. Israel must recognize the State of Palestine
and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to self-determination.

