Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the members of the Human
Security Network, a cross-regional network composed
of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Mali,
Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South Africa
as an observer, and my own country, Panama. The
Human Security Network is an informal group of States
that promotes the integration of the human security
approach into policies and programmes at the national,
regional and international level.

We would like to begin by paying tribute to the
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
for her sterling work and informative reports guiding
this important thematic area. At the same time, we would
like to congratulate the new Special Representative,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, on her appointment, and we look
forward to close collaboration with her in the area of
children and armed conflict.

While we are pleased to hear about the significant
progress that has been made with regard to the protection
of children in armed conflicts, 20 years after the
inception of this mandate, it is nevertheless worrying
to hear of the attacks that continue on schools and
hospitals and thereby prevent children from realizing
their rights; the politicization of war through the denial
ofhumanitarian access to children in conflict situations;
the recruitment and exploitation of children by parties
to conflicts, including their increased use as human
bombs and shields; the detention of children for alleged
association with armed groups; the mistreatment of
unaccompanied children fleeing conflict-ridden areas;
and the killing and maiming of children, rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children.

The Network is particularly concerned about
the continuing, numerous and aggravated effects of
armed conflict on girls and the great difficulties they
face, including conflict-related sexual violence and
stigmatization. The importance of focusing particularly
on supporting and strengthening all efforts aimed at
protecting the human rights of the girl child continues
to be crucial.

While there is clearly no doubt about the fact that
some children are forced into joining armed groups, no
child chooses to become involved in armed conflict.
Rather, desperate children attempting to survive poverty
will be more vulnerable to recruitment into armed
groups. Addressing the root causes and contributing
factors of their situation is therefore crucial to ensuring
long-term peace, security and the achievement of
sustainable development in all three of its dimensions.

We support the Secretary-General's views and
recommendations in his report (S/2017/821), which
calls for increasing the protection of children in all
situations and at all levels, for example by endorsing
the Paris Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration. It
is fundamental to ensure that State and non-State actors
respect, promote and protect international law and can
be held accountable for any Violations. Child-protection
capacities on the ground are key, as is the monitoring and
reporting mechanism of the United Nations mandate to
protect children. The integrity, credibility, impartiality
and objectivity of this mechanism therefore cannot
be overstated.

In conclusion, the Human Security Network would
like to express it unwavering support to the Office of
the Special Representative in carrying out its important
mandate, as well as to reiterate its call urging all
Member States to ratify and universalize the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, in
order to ensure that no child is left behind.

