Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its presidency of the Security Council this month. I also wish to commend you, Mr. President, for rightly choosing the topic of this open debate on how to strengthen respect for the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, especially in the context of maintaining international peace and security. Our meeting comes at a time when the Middle East is at a critical juncture of heightened tensions whose severity needs to be reduced, with diplomatic means used to spare the region further escalation. The signing of the United Nations Charter, approximately seventy-five years ago, was a critical point for the world's transition from war to peace. The provisions of the Charter were drafted amid the effects of the Second World War, with its first sentence underscoring the determination to save future generations from the scourge of war. However, the ratification of the Charter alone is not enough to achieve its purposes and principles; continuous commitment and efforts by all States are required in order to achieve its noble goals. Increasing instances of non-compliance with the provisions of the Charter over the past decades have led to more instability and chaos, particularly in the light of the ongoing violations in our region by State and non-State actors of the principles of sovereignty and non-interference enshrined in the Charter. It is therefore necessary that, at this important stage, Member States strengthen their commitment to the Charter and to international law, which are the main guarantors of international peace and security, especially for small States that rely on the power of international law to protect their sovereignty and security. The United Arab Emirates believes that the peaceful settlement of disputes is one of the main pillars upon which the United Nations was founded. That is evident when it comes to addressing the issue of the three Emirati islands of Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa. My country also supports the United Nations- led political processes for the peaceful settlement of disputes in the region. In that regard, the United Arab Emirates supports the call made by the Secretary-General to halt escalation in the region and revitalize international cooperation with the participation of the States of the region. The United Arab Emirates reaffirms its commitment to seeking political solutions and plays a mediation role and spreads the values of tolerance throughout our region, which continues to suffer from violence and extremism. We note in that regard the importance of benefiting from the good offices of the Secretary- General and activating the powers conferred upon him by Article 99 of the Charter, as an essential element in addressing potential threats to international peace and security at an early stage. The United Arab Emirates would like to make some recommendations to enhance the implementation of the provisions of the Charter within the framework of our individual and collective responsibility to protect future generations from the scourge of war. First, the Security Council must consult and coordinate with the States concerned in order to be able to deal with the cases on its agenda more effectively, provided that consultations and coordination extend beyond the scope of countries experiencing conflicts to include neighbouring countries affected by instability, as they are most capable of understanding the nature and complexities of the conflict. Secondly, regional and subregional organizations can play a greater role in addressing regional tensions and achieving security and stability. The Council should strengthen coordination with the League of Arab States and the African Union to address the sensitive security situation in the region. Chapter VII of the Charter includes a framework to build on the comparative advantages that exist at the regional, subregional and international levels in dealing with today's complex crises. Thirdly, the humanitarian cost of conflict, exacerbated by inconsistencies in the implementation of the Charter, must not be overlooked. In that regard, my country wishes to underscore that it will continue to play a leading role in supporting humanitarian projects in the region and beyond. The United Arab Emirates is among the small number of countries worldwide to have consistently exceeded the United Nations targets by contributing more than 0.7 per cent of our gross national income for development assistance. In that regard, my country supports the suggestion in the concept note circulated ahead of this open debate (see S/2020/1, annex) regarding the need to build the capacity of States in order to abide by their legal obligations arising from Council resolutions. Given the belief of the United Arab Emirates in the importance of friendly relations between countries, which is one of the Charter's goals, my country will host later this year the Dubai Expo 2020 under the theme "Connecting Minds, Creating the Future". The objective is to build partnerships and present innovative ideas that will forge the world of tomorrow. We are confident of States' ability to create a world full of opportunities, security and sustainability through their commitment to multilateral mechanisms, cooperation and abiding by the purposes and principles of the Charter. We invite all States to join us in such efforts. In conclusion, I would like to wish Viet Nam every success in its presidency of the Security Council this month.
