The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that l have received letters from
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Monga Mulenda
Niakonga (Democratic Republic of the Congo) and
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda) took seats at the Council
table.

The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
following documents: 8/1998/581, which contains the text
of a letter dated 29 June 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the report of the Secretary-General's
Investigative Team charged with investigating serious
violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; S/ 1998/5 82,
letter dated 25 June 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of Congo to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
and S/1998/583, letter dated 25 June 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns the massacres,
other atrocities and violations of international
humanitarian law committed in Zaire/Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and especially its eastern
provinces, including crimes against humanity and
those other violations described in the report of the
Secretary-General's Investigative Team
(8/1998/581). It notes the responses to the report
provided by the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (8/1998/582) and Rwanda
(8/1998/583). It recognizes the work of the
Investigative Team in documenting some of these
violations, in spite of the fact that the Team was not
allowed to carry out its mission fully and without
hindrance.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the States of the Great Lakes region.

"The Security Council recognizes the necessity
to investigate further the massacres, other atrocities
and violations of international humanitarian law and
to prosecute those responsible. It deplores the delay
in the administration of justice. The Council calls on
the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda to investigate without delay, in
their respective countries, the allegations contained
in the report of the Investigative Team and to bring
to justice any persons found to have been involved
in these or other massacres, atrocities and Violations
of international humanitarian law. The Council takes
note of the stated willingness of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to try any of
its nationals who are guilty of or were implicated in
the alleged massacres (5/1998/582). Such action is
of great importance in helping to bring an end to
impunity and to foster lasting peace and stability in
the region. It urges Member States to cooperate with
the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda in the investigation and
prosecution of these persons.

 

"The Council encourages the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to
seek international assistance, such as technical
assistance, as needed, in this process. It also invites
the Governments concerned to consider the inclusion
of international observers, as appropriate. It requests
the Governments concerned to provide an initial
progress report to the Secretary-General by 15 October
1998 on the steps being taken to investigate and
prosecute those responsible.

"The Security Council expresses its readiness to
consider, as necessary in light of actions by the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda, additional steps to ensure that the
perpetrators of the massacres, other atrocities and
Violations of international humanitarian law are
brought to justice.

"The Security Council urges Member States,
relevant United Nations bodies and agencies and other
international agencies to provide the necessary
technical and other assistance, as requested, to the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda in the development of independent
and impartial judicial systems.

"The Security Council expresses support for
United Nations and other international activities to
reduce ethnic tensions and promote national
reconciliation in the region, and encourages the
Governments concerned to continue to cooperate in
these activities to bring about a real improvement in
the situation.

"The Security Council attaches great
importance to the role of the Organization of African
Unity and welcomes its decision to establish the
International Panel of Eminent Personalities to
Investigate the Genocide in Rwanda and the
Surrounding Events (8/1998/461). It appeals to
Member States to contribute to the Special Trust
Fund established to support the work of the Panel.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.05 pm.

