Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Military
force is never a welcome option, but it is sometimes the
best, the only alternative among many bad options. It may
be the only option available to save innocent lives.

Of course there was a better option, but despite the
efforts of many - in Paris, London and Washington, and
the efforts of the other members of the Contact Group -
the Belgrade regime has shut the door on this alternative.
Here I would like to take the opportunity to commend the
tireless efforts of the representatives of France, the United
Kingdom, the United States and many others who have at
least brought about the signature of one party to this
conflict: the Kosovar Albanians. We encourage them to
continue their tireless efforts.

Now Belgrade seeks the sanctuary of the Security
Council to hide its own blatant responsibility. A country
that has unleashed its brutal war machine against its own
civilian population cannot now cry victim when the
international community steps in to prevent further ethnic
cleansing and genocide. A country that has most recently
engaged in aggression and military intervention against its
own neighbours, that has committed genocidal acts
against its own population and others, that has refused to
adhere to international law and numerous Security
Council resolutions or to cooperate with the Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia cannot now credibly plead for the
protection of international law. This indeed turns on their
head morality, legality and the principles for which this
institution, the United Nations, stands.

As for those who disdain today's military steps
directed at Belgrade, they should ask themselves whether
more talks would have produced a result? So far, ethnic
cleansing has only worsened. We in Bosnia and
Herzegovina would still be suffering the consequences of
war - war itself - if no action had been taken in the
fall of 1995. For three and a half years in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, people promoted talks, and for three and
half years, the war, the genocide, the aggression and the

 

ethnic cleansing continued. Only after military intervention
took place did diplomacy succeed. Only once the obstacles
to peace were convinced to stop the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina did we in fact achieve peace.

Even the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina
was endangered by the continuing escalation of the war and
the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo. Radicalism, nationalism and
ethnic cleansing were once again gaining the upper hand in
our region. These unfortunate events were a real threat, and
were a real concern to us in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Nonetheless, I think that we should remember that
today's military steps place many lives in danger. We pray
for the safety of those who are now intervening to bring
about an acceptance of peace. We pray for the innocent
Kosovar Albanians, who are already endangered by
Belgrade's military campaign and who are fleeing their
homes. And we pray for the overwhelmingly innocent
Serbian population.

We recall that, even as today's dramatic events
unfolded, the Belgrade regime took final steps to shut down
all remnants of the free media and to bring internal
repression to a new height against Serbs, Albanians,
Hungarians, Montenegrans and Bosniacs alike. But we
cannot ignore the fact that today's military action also
brings greater immediate physical risk to all the people in
Serbia. We hope that the military action will be short-lived
and that by some miracle the current leadership in Belgrade
will come to its senses.

I would like members to recall that to cement peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina we invited the international
military Stabilization Force (SFOR) onto our sovereign
territory. I am not certain why Belgrade fears these
international peacekeepers on its own soil while we in
Bosnia and Herzegovina have welcomed them. We too are
a sovereign State - by the way, a State that has offered its
own forces to help maintain the peace in Kosovo. When I
say its own forces, I mean forces both from Republika
Srpska and from the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Is it that there is a difference in motivation and desired
result in the two capitals? We have opted for peace.

Pompous pride and nationalist stubbornness are not the
answer. The key, the options for peace, do not lie in New
York or in Washington or in Brussels but, in fact, in
Belgrade and in Serbia. We hope that this message gets
back to them.

