It is a great privilege to be asked to brief the Security Council on the timely topic of the contemporary drivers of conflict. May I first congratulate Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and convening this important debate. The concept of collective security enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, from which the Security Council draws the authority conferred on it by the States Members of the United Nations, is accompanied by the parallel objectives, set out in Article 55, to create conditions of peace and stability, "which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples". These objectives include higher standards of living, full employment and conditions of economic and social progress and development; solutions to economic, social, health and related problems and universal respect for human rights. Although little noted and never utilized, Article 65 of the Charter provides that the Economic and Social Council "may furnish information to the Security Council and shall assist the Security Council upon its request". The Charter's framers clearly conceived that the United Nations would both collectively maintain and enforce peace as well as create the "conditions for peace and stability". Speaking at the Bretton Woods Conference, United States President Roosevelt emphasized the essence of collective economic security. He said that "fe]conomic diseases are highly communicable. It follows therefore that the economic health of every country is a proper matter of concern to all its neighbours, near and distant. Only through a dynamic and a soundly expanding world economy can the living standards of individual nations be advanced to levels which will permit a full realization of our hopes for the future". In the 75 years since the Charter's adoption, the States Members of the United Nations have failed to live up to the ideals of collective and cooperative security proclaimed by those who conceived the United Nations. Several reasons can be offered to explain this failure. First, the Cold War intruded into the vision of universal and cooperative security. The world was effectively divided into rival camps. The Marshall Plan rehabilitated United States-allied Europe only and later Japan. Secondly, the rapid process of decolonization did not entirely eliminate the legacy and mentality of colonialism. The decolonization process left behind unequal post-colonial societies and their continued economic, trade, and, often, political and military dependence on former colonial powers. The post-1945 military, political and economic structures and institutions reflected this embedded inequality. Thirdly, and perhaps most important, State power, especially in the most powerful countries, was captured by mercantilist interests, prioritizing profits over the common good and the Charter's vision of collective economic security. The cumulative outcome is a world quite unlike that visualized by the founders of the United Nations. In his Nelson Mandela address earlier this year, our Secretary- General observed that "inequality is the hallmark of our times" - so it is when the 26 richest people own half the world's wealth. The origins of many, if not most of the plethora of conflicts and disputes on the agenda of the Security Council, can be traced to this unequal world order. The root causes of these conflicts range from the internal struggles for scarce resources; external contests for precious natural resources and interventions designed to suppress the struggle of peoples to reclaim their own political and economic destinies. It is a world where power prevails over principle; where the voices of the weak are suppressed and splintered; where the strong enjoy impunity for even gross violations of the Charter's fundamental principles, Security Council resolutions and human rights and where the international cooperation enjoined by the Charter is increasingly absent. It is in this milieu of inequality that the world has been hit by the worst pandemic since 1916 and the worst recession since the Great Depression of the 1930s. The world economy is projected to contract by between 5 and 10 per cent, depending on when the virus can be brought under control. As usual, the poorest countries and the poorest peoples will suffer the most. More than 100 million people will be pushed back into poverty. While the rich have pumped in more than $13 trillion to stimulate their economies, the poor are searching for ways to mobilize the $2 trillion to $3 trillion they need to keep their economies afloat. Unless they are helped to find this money, many developing economies - with lost revenues and laden with unpayable debt - are likely to face economic collapse. This would spread chaos and further inflame regional conflicts and global tensions. As early as April, Pakistan's Prime Minister, Imran Khan, called for global debt relief for developing countries. In May, the Secretary-General, together with the Prime Ministers of Canada and Jamaica, launched the timely financing for the development process. The process has identified 260 options for action. But so far, the response of those in a position to act on these options has been extremely modest and disappointing. The international community must mobilize the political will to implement some of the most important of these options: debt suspension for low income and those small island developing States under stress until the end of the pandemic; the cancellation of debt held by the least developed countries; debt restructuring for other developing countries, including through efficient debt buybacks and swaps; sizable net inflows from multilateral development banks; vastly expanded concessional financing through the International Development Association and other sources; the fulfilment of the 0.7 per cent official development assistance commitment by richer countries; private sector participation in debt suspension and relief, including through mechanisms to lower interest rates on loans to developing countries; and, most important, the issue of new special drawing rights (SDRs) and the repurposing of unutilized SDR quotas for investment in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Our Secretary-General has declared that this crisis offers an opportunity to "build back better" and realize the SDGs and the goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Others have picked up the Secretary-General's slogan. However, we will be unable to achieve these ambitious and vital objectives unless we address and redress the structural inequalities that have led us into the current and previous financial and economic crises. Structural reforms will need to encompass a reform of the financial architecture to enhance the access of developing countries to adequate SDG-linked financing; an inclusive, equitable and transparent debt-management mechanism; preferential banking regulations for developing countries; a fair international tax regime; an end to illicit financial flows from developing countries; a new and democratic trade regime that reverses the restrictive measures imposed by the major economies, restores the adjudication system of the World Trade Organization and places the SDGs at the core of trade objectives; the mobilization of at least a $2 trillion investment annually in sustainable infrastructure in developing countries and preferential access for developing countries to the latest technologies, especially to bridge the digital divide. Unless we can mobilize the political will to implement these goals of equitable and inclusive development, it is unlikely that we will be able to agree to take the ambitious collective actions required to avoid the existential threat posed by climate change. Destitute developing countries struggling for economic survival will be in no position to make a new green deal. The Economic and Social Council will attempt to advance these essential actions in its Financing for Development Forum next April and the High-level Political Forum next July. It is imperative that today, 75 years after the adoption of the United Nations Charter, we do not again fail to reflect its vision of collective economic security. Never before in human history has the well-being and survival of humans depended so much on the actions and decisions of each other. It is distressing to witness that, even in these times when humankind faces existential challenges, there is a rise in the phenomena of intolerance, hate speech, xenophobia, and Islamophobia. The cycle of hate and violence can destabilize and divide societies and States. It can subvert the international cooperation that is essential to collectively address these multiple challenges. We must heed the call for mutual respect issued by the High Representative for the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, Mr. Moratinos, on 29 October. As he has stated, freedom of expression should be exercised in a way that fully respects the religious beliefs and tenets of all religions. Finally, we must also act to reverse the growing rivalries among the most powerful States and the new and deadly arms race that is under way. Unless we do so, regional tensions will rise and conflicts will become more intractable. And, no one can rule out the danger of a global military conflict - precisely what the United Nations was created to prevent. Instead of subscribing to new political blocs and alliances, the Members of the United Nations, and especially the members of the Security Council, must deploy all possible efforts to avoid a great power collision and evolve mutually acceptable ways for revived cooperation on security, development, climate and other common challenges confronting humankind. In these turbulent times, the United Nations is the only universally acceptable instrument available to enable Member States to address the contemporary drivers of conflict. We must rely on the vision and courage of our Secretary-General to chart a clear and bold course to respond to the multiple challenges we face simultaneously. The United Nations system has the capacity, if mobilized, to support this epic endeavour for global peace and security, for equitable and inclusive development and for a smooth and early transition to a sustainable global economic, social and political order.
