Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): At the outset, I would like to join my colleagues in welcoming you, Mr. President, and the other incoming members to the Chamber, and to extend our congratulations on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We look forward to working closely with all Council members. I thank Special Representative Chambas for his remarks. We commend him and his Office for promoting long-term stability and peace in West Africa and the Sahel. The United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) is the region’s leader in preventive diplomacy and, as the security situation deteriorates and political challenges mount, its work is more important than ever. We hope the ideas and the focus that emerged from last month’s intercommunal violence and terrorism briefing (see S/PV.8685), which we co-hosted with Cote d’Ivoire, will support his efforts in 2020. We also note, in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/1005), a long list of the Special Representative’s tireless travel in the region, as well as the use of good offices to ease tensions and unify and sustain peace. As the Security Council considers the mandate renewal of UNOWAS in the coming weeks, the United States supports his team and is committed to ensuring that he can conduct his work as effectively as possible. Let me now turn to the Secretary-General’s most recent report on UNOWAS. The United States is deeply concerned that violence spurred by extremist activity and criminal networks has spiked in the Lake Chad basin and border region between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. Ambassador Abarry, present today in the Council, and his country have experienced that directly. We again extend our condolences to him for the loss of live that his country has experienced and condemn those terrorist attacks. We are troubled by increased displacement and continued limitations on humanitarian access across the Sahel, where there are 25 million people in need of humanitarian assistance. We must all work together to ensure that they receive it. UNOWAS is essential to regional stability, but it cannot maintain stability on its own. We call upon the affected West African nations to increase efforts to ensure that all their citizens have access to education, health care and greater employment opportunities. Improving the scope and quality of services can turn despair into hope for many, which will go a long way in countering violent extremism and criminality in the region. Serious efforts to address basic needs will also further convey to local populations that their Governments are responsible democratic actors. The situation in Mali continues to be especially concerning for the United States, given its impact across the Sahel. We hope that all Council members join us, both bilaterally and multilaterally, in urging the signatory parties of the Algiers accords to meet the implementation benchmarks in resolution 2480 (2019). That would substantially bolster efforts to stabilize Mali and the Sahel. Governments must also continue to align humanitarian, peacebuilding and development goals, with the assistance of UNOWAS, to address more effectively the root causes of violent extremism. Ensuring full and equal participation by women in decision-making and peace processes is just one important way to do that. We also encourage the Security Council to further prioritize adequate and predictable humanitarian financing, and other donors to increase contributions to humanitarian response plans. This year, 2020, is critical for the future stability of West Africa and the Sahel. Citizens will exercise their right to choose their leaders as Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, the Niger and Togo hold presidential and legislative elections. Additionally, the United States is encouraged by the presidential elections that took place in Senegal and Guinea-Bissau in 2019, and by the ongoing work of the Truth, Reconciliation, and Reparations Commission in the Gambia. However, we remain concerned about efforts in some West African countries to restrict fundamental freedoms of political expression. To that end, the United States urges Governments to create peaceful and open political environments, respect the freedom of expression and assembly and facilitate the full participation of media, civil society and opposition groups in public life. We encourage all actors to use dialogue rather than violence to address their differences. In conclusion, as the Special Representative said earlier, the time for action is now. The United States encourages him to redouble the Office’s efforts with stakeholders in order to take concrete steps towards long-term stability in the region. That stability is within reach and it is what the people of West Africa both need and deserve. He has our support.
