Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2006/945) on the situation in Iraq, as well as
Mr. Qazi, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his oral briefing today. We would also like
to thank the representative of the United States for her
presentation on the activities of the Multinational
Force.

The situation in Iraq, which is strongly
characterized by recurring, unabated and varied
violence, is of constant concern to my delegation, and
requires that innovative solutions be found. The
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, cannot stand idly by while the situation in
Iraq disintegrates, as described in the report of the
Secretary-General. Iraq deserves more than the hideous
daily suffering of its people living through a virtual
civil war.
In spite of all the efforts made on security and
national reconciliation by various players, including
the Iraqi Government, and the role played by the
international community through the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq and the Multinational
Force, the level of violence is not abating to any
significant extent. Indeed, the situation is deteriorating
day by day, placing Iraq at the top of the list of places
where daily life is becoming impossible and where
violations of essential human rights are being
trivialized to an extreme. This is reflected in the
number of Iraqis choosing to go into exile, in the many
dead and wounded both among civilians and among
Iraqi and international armed forces.

These many challenges call for a new strategy,
which must be taken up by the Government of Iraq.
Above all, there must be trust in the Government
among the population, which is beset by political and
religious divisions. There is thus need for an inclusive
political approach in which all Iraqi communities will
share in the political power, participate in State
institutions and share in the distribution of natural
resources. In this regard, the possibility of
constitutional review should help lead to stability.

It is also necessary that the Iraqi Government be
able to establish a monopoly over the use of force
throughout the entire national territory, putting an end
to the activities of the militias, which feed on and
perpetuate the prevailing instability and violence, and
the terrorist groups associated with Al-Qaida and other

gangs.

Finally, the Iraqi Government must contribute to
creating a regional environment conducive to
improving relations with its neighbours. In this regard,
my delegation welcomes the meetings of high-ranking
Iraqi leaders with their counterparts in the region, in
particular those of Iran. Similarly, we welcome with
interest the announcement regarding an international
conference on Iraq. Peace and reconstruction depend
on it. My delegation is equally open to the various
proposals put forward and to initiatives aimed at
stabilizing the political and security situation in Iraq.
These are a prelude to the reconstruction and
development of this country, which has been harmed
by many decades of war and fratricidal struggle.

In conclusion, we would urge the international
community, in particular the key donors, to help Iraq in
the effective implementation of the International
Compact with Iraq. We hail the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the
Multinational Force.

