Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I too wish to thank
Mr. Holmes for his very detailed briefing to us today.
He has brought an element of courage and urgency to
the situation in the Great Lakes region, and that is
greatly appreciated. His efforts are indicative of the
courage and commitment of hundreds of non-
governmental organizations and many of our
colleagues, who are working on the ground under the
most difficult of circumstances.

I was moved and very pleased by Mr. Holmes's
statement, particularly when he pointed out that his
mere presence in Somalia gave hope to many of the
people he came across, who had already given up on
the United Nations or even thought that the United
Nations had forgotten them. I believe that, under those
very difficult circumstances, his presence alone did
much to provide credibility and, more important, give
hope to those who are living under the most difficult
circumstances.

It is for that reason that my delegation would like
to pay tribute to the Ugandan soldiers in the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) who have given
their lives trying to bring about a better life for the
people of Somalia. Such setbacks and tragedies should
encourage us to continue to seek a way out of this very
difficult situation.

Like Mr. Holmes, my delegation believes that, as
difficult as the situation may be in Somalia, the
solution lies in a very fully inclusive political process
whereby all Somalis - those who live in Somaliland
and those who are outside the border - can come
together, discuss and try to find a way out of the
tragedy that has befallen their country.

We pay tribute to the humanitarian workers on
the ground, for whom Mr. Holmes assures us the access
they so desperately need is becoming better. We would
hope that the Transitional Federal Government will
continue to make it possible for the humanitarian
workers to do what they do best, and we also hope that
the support that the international community can give
to the Transitional Federal Government and to the non-
governmental people on the ground will one day help
the people of Somalia to overcome the difficulties that
they have had. We thank Mr. Holmes for having had
the courage to really go to that place and see for
himself.

On northern Uganda, we are very pleased and
encouraged by the improvement of the situation there.
However, I must say that Mr. Holmes once again
brought a dose of sobriety to the question of what
needs to happen in that situation when he referred to
the need for a seamless transition from relief to
development. That has always been one of the most
difficult things to achieve because sometimes the
international community is moved by conditions that
require relief, but development - which is far harder
and requires more time and a longer commitment -
becomes very difficult to undertake. Thus, when he
says that the record of the international community in
such transitions is not distinguished, he is absolutely
right, because the international community tends to
grow impatient to move on to the next crisis that we
may have. And yet, without an assurance of some
sustainable development, the areas tend to regress into
even more conflict.

I am particularly pleased that, on the whole,
Mr. Holmes' briefing on both northern Uganda and
Somalia has now given the Council the basis of an
experience that we can work with and build on as we
seek ways to bring about change in those areas. When
one remembers that, maybe a decade or so ago,
northern Uganda was as desperate as Somalia is today,
it gives us hope that, even though Somalia looks to be
at its darkest moment at this time, that may be a sign,
as we look at what is happening in northern Uganda,
that in fact things may happen. I do not know whether
it was by design that Mr. Holmes chose those two areas
to visit, but in doing so he has given us a contrast
highlighting what is likely to happen if the
international community does not lose its commitment
to staying with an issue under the most difficult
circumstances.

Once again, we thank Mr. Holmes very much for
his courage and pay tribute to all his colleagues on the
ground, who are really the heroes of that work and
represent a United Nations that is truly on the ground.
We commit ourselves to assisting him in whatever way
we can.

