Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for convening this debate. We would also
like to welcome Mr. Fernandez-Taranco and thank him
for the report he has given us. We welcome the
presence here today of the distinguished
representatives of Israel and Palestine.

This debate is a timely and necessary one. The
quantity and quality of efforts today seem to show the
conviction of the international community that the time
has come for the conflict in the Middle East, a source
of instability and violence, to be put to rest once and
for all.

Despite the temporary suspension of negotiations,
perhaps never before have there been so many
initiatives, never before have we been so close to
making reality the aspirations of two communities in
neighbouring countries to live as two States, side by
side, in peace and security.
However, the remaining tasks are not easy ones.
There are a number of situations which will require
renewed determination by all parties in the region and
by those who have interest or influence in that region.
In this context, we agree on the need to conclude
prompt peace agreements between Israel and Lebanon
and Israel and Syria. The Arab Peace Initiative is a key
platform for the normalization of relations among all
States in the region. We hope that in the future it will
be possible to extend respect and coexistence beyond
this very reduced environment in which we must work
today.

Costa Rica also knows that the unity of the
Palestinian people is an absolutely essential ingredient
for the progress of any peace initiative between Israelis
and Palestinians. We recognize the valuable mediation
efforts of Egypt and the Arab League, and we call upon
the Palestinian people to place their trust in peaceful
means, to recognize the State of Israel and to comply
with earlier agreements and commitments.

We also hope that once the natural shocks which
a change of regime produces have been overcome the
authorities of Israel and Palestine will return to
negotiate on key remaining issues in the conflict,
without preconditions and with the understanding that
these negotiations will be carried out on the basis of
obligations already undertaken and agreements
previously reached between the parties which are
underpinned by international law and the decisions of
this Council.

In this context, Costa Rica supports the appeal of
the Quartet to the parties to comply with their
obligations in accordance with the Road Map, and we
share their belief that unilateral action will not
prejudge the result of the negotiations and will not be
recognized by the international community. We
believe, therefore, that it is absolutely essential for
Israel to halt its policies of settlements and their
expansion, regardless of what it chooses to call it.
Every new wall built is a new obstacle to peace.

Particularly in this area, Israel must not ignore
international law or the consensus which exists on this
issue in the international community. This persistent
illegal behaviour on Israel's part is one of the reasons i
although not the only one - why its other concerns are
not being considered with the calm necessary for their
resolution. Likewise, we urge the Government of Israel
to contain the violence of some of its settlers against
Palestinians.

Costa Rica has always understood the legitimate
security concerns of Israel. However, we believe that
they do not justify the disproportionate restrictions it
imposes on the Palestinian people, affecting their
human rights and creating an unparalleled
humanitarian situation. The humanitarian situation in
Gaza is dramatic and unsustainable as a result of the
restriction of flows of humanitarian and commercial
goods on which some 1.5 million people depend. It
must change. Access must be allowed for materials to
rebuild the homes, hospitals, schools and medical
infrastructure destroyed at the beginning of this year.
We reiterate our call for international law, in particular
international humanitarian law, to be respected and for
border crossing activity to be normalized.

Costa Rica welcomes the measures that the Israeli
Government has taken to ease restrictions on
movement in the West Bank and hopes for new
conciliatory gestures on its part. Similarly, we
acknowledge the reforms adopted by the Palestinian
Authority to improve its security sector, and we see
Israeli cooperation as a step in the right direction
towards the establishment of robust Palestinian
institutions that one day will be part of its State
apparatus.

I conclude by acknowledging the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for the courage with which it
continues to provide assistance to those affected by the
conflict, despite the difficult conditions in which it
works.

