Mr. Koenigs: I would like to thank the Council
for this opportunity to report on the situation in
Afghanistan during our deliberations concerning the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). The
written report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/145)
describes key events of the past six months, together
with proposals for adjustments to that mandate. My
remarks will focus on developments since Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno's last briefing to the
Council, on 10 February, and on prospects for the
Afghanistan Compact.

As the Council is aware, the London Conference
on Afghanistan, which was held on 31 January and
1 February, reaffirmed the strong commitment of the
international community to support Afghanistan for the
next five years and beyond. In many respects, the
benchmarks and time frames laid down by the
Afghanistan Compact are as ambitious as, and even
more wide-ranging than, those of the Bonn Agreement.
By endorsing the Compact as the framework for
international partnership with Afghanistan over the
next five years, the Council recognized the mutual
obligations and the discipline that is needed to ensure
the implementation of that road map, which aims to
improve the lives of Afghans.

It is already clear that two priorities will be
essential to the success of that agenda. First,
Afghanistan's institutions must be strengthened on all
levels to the point where they are effective enough to
deliver basic services. Secondly, our strategy for
tackling hard security challenges must evolve to meet
outstanding threats.

As to political developments, the first months of
work by the new National Assembly have
demonstrated the promise of Afghanistan's new
institutions. Both houses have established rules of
procedure and sector-based commissions. Security and
development issues have been freely debated. On
27 February, the Wolesi Jirga decided to question and
confirm cabinet ministers on an individual basis.

The coming months will test the ability of the
Afghan Government and parliament to work
constructively to adopt a new budget, agree on the
composition of the new cabinet and forge a legislative
agenda that reflects national priorities under the new
Compact. An assembly of all provincial councils in
Kabul in early March showed the determination of
those elected representatives to deliver early results.

The political agenda is also increasingly focused
on justice-related issues. President Karzai has indicated
his determination to significantly renew Afghanistan's
Supreme Court. He has also agreed to launch the
Action Plan on Peace, Justice and Reconciliation,
together with the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission and myself, in the coming weeks. In the
meantime, initiatives to deal with past crimes in
Afghanistan are gaining momentum. In a much
publicized case, a former head of intelligence in 1978
and 1979 was sentenced to death on 25 February 2006
by the National Security Primary Court for his part in
the assassination of prisoners. The trial was closely
followed by Afghans and was criticized for failing to
conform to international standards of due process. It
nevertheless illustrated the strong aspiration of
Afghans to truth and justice with respect to the crimes
committed over decades of violent conflict.

As to security developments, the bomb attack in
Kabul directed against Meshrano Jirga Speaker and
former President Mojadeddi two days ago illustrated
the importance that Afghanistan's enemies continue to
attach to disrupting the democratic process by violent
means. The attack was emblematic of national trends
with regard to security, which continue to be a serious
concern.

The winter months of 2005 and 2006 have
witnessed a rise in insurgent and terrorist attacks and
more sophisticated tactics. There has been a marked
increase in the incidence of larger and more deadly
explosive devices, including suicide bombings,
particularly in the South and East of the country. The
perpetrators of those attacks have shown a growing
intent to target civilians, Government officials and
reconstruction workers, such as road-builders. The
recent kidnapping of four foreigners in Helmand
province and an unconfirmed report of the Taliban
claiming to have killed them are also of great concern
in that respect.

The prevalence of such attacks in Farah,
Helmand, Kandahar, Kunar and elsewhere points to the
persistence and even consolidation of the command
and control networks of Taliban, Al-Qaida and
associated groups in the region. Any resolution of that
challenge will require redoubled international efforts to
dismantle terrorist structures that represent a common
threat to the security of both Afghanistan and Pakistan.

There are also security concerns in provinces less
affected by insurgency and terrorism. In Farah
province, the senseless killing on 4 March of Afghan
engineer Mohammad Hashim, a contractor to the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme, has
shocked and saddened the United Nations family. In
Helmand and Nangarhar provinces, large-scale poppy
eradication efforts have encountered determined
resistance.

At the same time, the Afghan Government has
moved to address those threats both by policy and
successful crisis management. At a seminar held in
Kabul from 26 to 28 February, the National Security
Council considered a blueprint for Afghanistan's
national security policy. It calls for fully functional
Afghan security institutions addressing internal and
external threats to peace and security in an integrated
fashion, under civilian supervision, and on a fiscally
sustainable basis.

Addressing security issues, the completion of
security sector reform remains crucial to the
peacebuilding process. The Disbandment of Illegal
Armed Groups (DIAG) programme has gained profile
and momentum in recent weeks. In total, over 19,000
weapons have now been collected in all parts of the
country. In Kapisa province, under the leadership of
the Governor, a complete survey of those groups
targeted for disbandment is being finalized, and that
process will be repeated over the coming months in
Farah, Herat, Laghman and Takhar provinces. Since
the nationwide ammunition disposal programme began
last year, over 30,000 tons of unwanted and dangerous
munitions have been consolidated and destroyed.
However, it will require strong and sustained
commitment to meet the benchmarks for DIAG,
munitions and mine action prescribed in the
Afghanistan Compact.

The key development within the international
military forces in recent weeks was the transfer of
Regional Command South under Operation Enduring
Freedom from a United States to a multinational
brigade on 28 February in Kandahar. Once fully
fielded, that force will feature robust capabilities from
the armed forces of Canada, the United Kingdom, the
United States, the Netherlands, Australia and other
countries, with a deployed strength of 6,000 troops in
Afghanistan's five southern provinces. That represents
an increase of 50 per cent over previous levels and
shows international resolve to meet the threat of
terrorist-based insurgency.

Improved border management is also required to
meet several key objectives under the Compact, from
drug interdiction to revenue collection. At the Doha II
Conference, co-chaired by the Governments of
Germany and Qatar on 27 and 28 February, 21 States
and eight international organizations reaffirmed their
commitment to improved cooperation with Afghanistan
on border security and border management. However, I
remain concerned that the resources are not yet
available to implement those proposals, including with
regard to police and border police salaries.

The agenda before the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community is a
heavy one. Whereas the Bonn Agreement was centred
on the re-establishment of legitimate national
institutions, a key challenge under the Afghanistan
Compact will be to extend the reach of Government at
the local level. That will require security, development,
civil society and private sector actors to be more
present in areas not yet touched by recovery. It will
require programmes that ensure the participation of
Afghans in the development of their country, while
meeting the needs of vulnerable groups and poor
regions.

It will also challenge Afghanistan's Government
to make functioning institutions of justice and the rule
of law more and more a reality in the communities in
which most Afghans live. It will also require the
implementation of Afghanistan's new obligations to
protect and monitor the human rights of its citizens.

Afghanistan can meet those expectations only by
reforming and strengthening the Government
institutions necessary to develop its human capital,
harness the potential of agriculture and natural
resources and set conditions for the emergence of a
vibrant private sector. Enhanced regional cooperation
in that regard is also essential.

The report before the Council outlines a number
of proposals on how UNAMA, having completed its
support for the Bonn process, can continue to play a
role as a special political mission, providing advice to
the Government of Afghanistan in particular with a
View to further strengthening its State institutions.
UNAMA would continue to be an integrated mission
and to plan and coordinate United Nations
humanitarian and development activities. As co-chair
of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board to be
established by the Compact, UNAMA would aim to
promote Government visibility in international
assistance activities and to advocate greater coherence
of the overall reconstruction efforts. As the Secretary-
General noted in his report, success in this endeavour
will "also depend on the mutually reinforcing role and
full cooperation of all stakeholders."

As I mentioned earlier, it will be vital for the
Afghan Government to extend its reach to underserved
areas of Afghanistan. The proposals submitted for the
Security Council's consideration therefore include the
possibility of a modest expansion of UNAMA's field
presence to accompany and support the Government in
these efforts, subject, of course, to security conditions.
The implementation of this mandate would require
additional and sufficient security resources, including
air and medical evacuation support.

As the clock of the Afghanistan Compact starts
ticking, the first benchmark - the establishment of a
clear and transparent appointments mechanism for
senior-level civil service positions - will need to be
met after six months.

By endorsing the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness last week, the Government of
Afghanistan underscored the need to harmonize its
efforts and those of the international community to
ensure that our common vision for sustainable peace
and development is realized in Afghanistan.

In closing, I would like to call upon the Afghan
Government to do its utmost to meet the benchmarks
set out in these documents and to encourage the
international community to show continuing generosity
and commitment in this next important phase of the
peace process.

