Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for
convening today's debate. I would like to welcome the
report submitted by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
entitled "Support to African peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations" (S/2009/470). I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy, Mr. Antonio and Mr. Prodi for their briefings.

At present, peace and stability on the African
continent are gradually improving. But regional
conflicts still constrain faster progress in Africa.
Maintaining peace and stability in Africa remains a real
and pressing challenge facing the international
community. Without peace and stability in Africa, there
will be no sustainable development there. Without
peace and stability in Africa, there will be no lasting
peace and prosperity in the world.

Comprehensive peace in Africa cannot be
promoted without joint efforts by the international
community. In recent years, the United Nations has
been increasing its attention to and contribution to
settling issues of peace and security in Africa. Sixty
per cent of the items on the Council's agenda are
related to Africa, and nearly half of the Council-
authorized United Nations peacekeeping operations are
in Africa.

We welcome the fact that in recent years, the
African Union has displayed a high sense of its
political responsibilities regarding regional peace and
stability and has actively engaged in good offices and
peacekeeping operations in dealing with hotspots and
difficult issues in Africa. The African Union has been
playing an increasingly important role in maintaining
peace and stability in Africa and settling disputes there.
It has also served as a bridge and linkage for more
effective United Nations interventions in addressing
African hotspot issues. However, issues related to
African Union peacekeeping operations, bottlenecks in
fundraising and capacity-building are becoming more
prominent; here, the African Union needs the support
and help of all international actors, including the
United Nations.

We support the establishment of a strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union aimed at maintaining peace and stability
in Africa, and we support the provision of practical
help by the United Nations to African Union
peacekeeping operations. United Nations assistance has
played an important role in enabling the African Union
to better respond to problems such as those in the
Darfur area of the Sudan and in Somalia.

That is a concrete display of the Council's role in
maintaining international peace and security. In the
future, the Council should strengthen its
communication with the African Union Peace and
Security Council and assist the latter in increasing its
collective capacity to respond to the challenges in
Africa. The United Nations Secretariat and the African
Union Commission should also step up their
cooperation. As for the recommendation proposed in
the Secretary-General's report for the establishment of
a joint United Nations-African Union team, we
consider it to be generally feasible. How such a team is
to be implemented will require further consultation
between both sides.

We maintain that the United Nations should assist
African Union peacekeeping operations in finding
more reliable sources of funding. United Nations-
authorized African Union operations currently suffer
from financial shortfalls, as a result of which mandated
levels of troops for deployment have not been reached
even after long delays, funding has fallen far below
projected targets, and troop-contributing countries'
forces have encountered difficulties in performing their
duties.

Due to various constraints, a predictable,
sustainable and flexible financing mechanism has yet
to be established. This is most regrettable. We believe
that all parties should study the five financing
mechanisms mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report, define fair, balanced and effective mechanisms
as early as possible, and ensure their full use by all
parties, including United Nations support.

We also support stepping up the institutional
capacity-building of peacekeeping operations. In
addition to the shortage of funds, inadequate
institutional capacities in management and strategic
planning pose another major challenge to African
Union peacekeeping operations. We call for capacity-
building to be made a priority in United Nations-
African Union cooperation. Through personnel
training, information-sharing and the exchange of
experience, the United Nations should also step up
cooperation with the African Union and accelerate
implementation of the Union's 10-year capacity-
building programme. We support the United Nations in
helping the African Union to address, via the short-,
medium- and long-term measures discussed in the
report, such problems as logistics and human
resources. The African Union, meanwhile, should also
work out a long-term, comprehensive capacity-building
plan.

At present, the new strategic partnership between
China and Africa is developing in a sustained, steady

and rapid manner. China has consistently advocated
and supported a greater role for the African Union in
maintaining peace and stability on the continent. In
recent years, through bilateral and multilateral
channels, we have provided various forms of assistance
to a number of peacekeeping operations in Africa. The
fourth Ministerial Conference of the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation is scheduled to be held in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, in early November. We believe that
the meeting will further enhance pragmatic cooperation
between China and Africa in all areas. In future, China
will continue to help the African Union and countries
of Africa to the best of its ability and to support the
United Nations and the African Union in strengthening
their comprehensive cooperation.

Finally, I thank Uganda and other African
countries for drafting the presidential statement under
the agenda item under discussion today. China supports
the Security Council's adoption of the draft statement
to demonstrate to the international community the
Council's political will in support of United Nations-
authorized African Union peacekeeping operations.

