Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me join others
in congratulating you, Sir, and your team on assuming
the Council presidency and in thanking our Dutch
colleagues for their outstanding work in the month
of March.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his briefing.

I associate myself with the statement that will
be made by the observer of the European Union later
this morning.

Sweden commends Haiti for the achievements it
has made in the consolidation of democracy, stability
and peace. Progress is now needed on the priorities
that President Moise and his Government have set out,
including the rule of law, respect for human rights,
improved socioeconomic development, infrastructure,
resilience and security. These are priorities with
which the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is also
aligned. The Government must now spare no effort in
delivering on its commitments, with the support of the
international community.

The benchmarks presented in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/24l) will help support these
efforts by linking progress in the core areas of the
Mission's mandate with other key preconditions for
stability in the country. As the Council has stated before,
it is important to ensure a clear end state for the Mission
to work towards. Adequate planning is needed for a
future hand-over to the United Nations country team in
the spirit of sustaining peace. As more and more tasks
are given to the United Nations country team, donors
must step up to ensure that the United Nations agencies
have adequate resources and capacity to effectively
support the peacebuilding process in Haiti.

It is important that MINUJUSTH continue to
integrate gender throughout its work, including
measures to increase women's security and
participation, as well as to ensure protection against
sexual and gender-based violence. Integrating gender
is also key to gender-budgeting and to ensure adequate
information-gathering, monitoring and reporting.

MINUJUSTH was created as a rule-of-law mission,
and, as with other United Nations missions, it is vital to
have anintegratedrule-of-lawapproachthatencompasses
the whole justice chain, from police and corrections to
prosecution and courts. In this vein, Sweden continues
to contribute both police and corrections personnel
to MINUJUSTH. The Mission's police component's
mentorship and advice to its counterparts in the Haitian
National Police are a part of the transition strategy, and
we are encouraged by the work being undertaken in
that area. We know from experience that policing and
other rule-of-law institutions play an important role in
providing a bridge between security and development
in transition processes.

MINUJUSTH is the only current United Nations
peacekeeping mission that consists solely of civilian and
police components. We should draw on this experience
when looking at the drawdown and transition of
other United Nations peace operations. This is in line
with the Council's ambition to take more phased and
layered approaches to transitions and drawdowns in
peacekeeping operations.

We welcome the efforts described in the report
to strengthen protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse. We need to continue to ensure that alleged
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse are reported and
investigated, and that all necessary steps are taken to
apply disciplinary measures and/or undertake criminal
prosecutions to hold perpetrators accountable.

We were happy to co-sponsor the General Assembly
resolution 72/260 in support of the Secretary-General's
new approach to eradicating cholera and building
resilience in Haiti. We have supported the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund and encourage others to contribute to it in a
collective effort to bring an end to cholera in Haiti.

In conclusion, much has been achieved by the
Haitian people in recent years. The establishment
of MINUJUSTH provides an opportunity for a
reinvigorated partnership with Haiti towards longer-
term stability and sustainable development. We will
remain a committed partner for Haiti as it continues its
efforts to consolidate democracy, stability and peace.

