Mr. Moura (Portugal): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict, which is an issue to which
Portugal attaches great importance.

Let me start by thanking today's briefers for their
presentations. I take this opportunity to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
for her briefing. I take this occasion to commend her
work and efforts to ensure the protection of children in

situations of ongoing armed conflict.

Portugal fully supports the "Children, not soldiers"
campaign launched by the Special Representative
yesterday with UNICEF and in collaboration with
Luxembourg and other United Nations partners.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union, but I would like to
underline some aspects ofparticular significance to my
country.

Portugal bears a strong commitment to the
promotion and protection of human rights and to
international humanitarian law. The first debate held in
the Council on the issue of children and armed conflict
was, in fact, promoted by my country in 1998 (see S/PV.3896). We were then already convinced, as we
remain today, that the issue has serious implications for
international peace and security.
We welcome the Security Council's commitment
to addressing the grave violations committed against
children in situations of armed conflict and the progress
achieved over the years with the adoption of a number
of resolutions that have reinforced the mechanisms to
deal with that pressing issue. Despite the significant
progress and establishment of a strong normative
framework and a mechanism to monitor, report and
respond to grave violations against children, huge
challenges remain, due in particular to the changing
nature of conflicts.

It is troublesome that in his latest report (S/2013/245),
the Secretary-General notes the increasing trend of the
use ofschools for military purposes, as well as attacks on
education. We are gravely concerned about widespread
and intentional attacks against schools, teachers and
students as an instrument of war. As a recent study
launched by the Global Coalition to Protect Education
from Attack demonstrates, there is a very concerning
pattern of deliberate attacks against education
perpetrated by armed non-State groups, State military
and security forces and armed criminal groups in more
than 70 countries. Schools and education facilities are
being systematically used as bases, barracks, weapons
caches, detention centres and even torture chambers by
regular armed forces and armed non-State opposition
groups. Hence, education infrastructures become
strategic targets of attack, putting children and teachers
at risk and denying children their right to an education.

As we sit here today, children are being forced out
of their classrooms and playgrounds and such attacks
not only affect children and communities as a whole
but also should affect our consciousness. In Syria, more
than 2,500 schools were damaged or destroyed by April
last year, and the number now exceeds 3,000. We urge
all Member States to act to protect schools, teachers
and students from attack and to hold perpetrators
accountable. We salute the efforts of Luxembourg,
as Chair of the Working Group, to agree on tangible
measures aimed at preventing the attacks on education
and the military use of schools and to ensure the
accountability of perpetrators.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) continues
to play a fundamental deterrent role, complementary to
the roles of tribunals at the national and international
levels, by holding perpetrators accountable and by
investigating and prosecuting those responsible for
committing atrocities against children. The need to
tackle impunity regarding persistent perpetrators
already clearly identified should certainly guide our
work in the near future. It is striking that we are referring
to individuals or entities that have been identified as
persistent perpetrators for five years or more, most of
whom are non-State actors. It is the credibility of the
system that we have built that is at stake. The Council
needs to address those difficult cases and to ensure
that such individuals are accounted for and sanctioned.
Further institutional dialogue between the ICC and the
Security Council is fundamental in that regard.

On peacekeeping operations, Portugal strongly
supports the inclusion of child protection advisers
in mandates. It is fundamental that in scenarios of
hopelessness, such as armed conflicts, United Nations
peacekeepers on the ground are a symbol of the core
values of respect and protection of human right for which
the Organization strives. In this sense, predeployment
training in child protection for peacekeepers, and the
effective screening of peacekeepers to ensure that
individuals who have committed grave violations
against children do not serve with the United Nations,
are essential. It is particularly paradoxical that, in spite
of the existence of normative international instruments,
such as the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
most inclusive of all instruments of international law,
children continue to be the main victims of armed
violence, being injured, raped and killed.

Let me conclude by saying that Member States and
the Security Council share the common responsibility
for taking collective action to overcome this scourge.
Protecting children in armed conflict requires the
commitment of the international community as a whole,
and my country is fully dedicated to this objective.

