Ms. Bird (Australia): This Security Council debate
comes at the end of a difficult year for Afghanistan.
The National Unity Government, under the leadership
of President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah,
has confronted a determined insurgency, significant
economic challenges and the imperative tasks of reform
and countering corruption. Progress has been made, but
there is much still to do.

Security remains a major challenge, as the brief fall
of Kunduz reminded us. The insurgency has continued
its horrendous attacks against civilians. The Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces remain bravely
resolute in their mission to confront the insurgency,
and we honour their sacrifices. International forces also
face a constant threat of violence. We commend their
efforts.

Australia remains committed to assisting the
Afghan Government to deliver a secure and stable
future for its people. To that end, we are one of the
largest donors to Afghan security forces sustainment,
providing $A500 million from 2009 to 2017. Since
2001, over 25,000 Australian personnel have served in
Afghanistan, with 250 continuing to serve in NATO's
Resolute Support Mission at the current time.

Afghanistan continues to face human rights
challenges. Violence against women and children is
of particular concern for Australia. Through our aid
programme to Afghanistan - Australia's fourth largest
at $A80 million per year, we provide shelter and support
to over 2,300 women and children, and training for
over 2,800 police- and justice-sector officials to uphold
women's rights.

Electoral reform is another area that requires
urgent action. We welcome President Ghani's approval
of most of the recommendations of the Special
Electoral Reform Commission. Implementation must
be a priority. Parliamentary elections should be held in
a timely manner to meet the expectations of the Afghan
people.

Economic reform is key to a brighter future for
Afghanistan. The Government's Self-Reliance through
Mutual Accountability Framework will be an important
mechanism to improve the effectiveness and efficiency
of donor funding. We welcome President Ghani's vision
for Afghanistan's economic future, and we encourage
his Government to persevere in its efforts to combat
corruption.

While it has been a difficult year, much has been
accomplished in Afghanistan by both the Afghan
Government and the international community. Australia
recognizes the role that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has played. We
applaud the efforts and dedication of all United Nations
personnel in Afghanistan. The work of the Tripartite
Commission on future priorities for UNAMA provides
a useful assessment of the role, structure and activities
of all United Nations entities operating in Afghanistan.
We look forward to the Council renewing the UNAMA
mandate in March 2016 so that UNAMA can continue
to play its important role in Afghanistan effectively.

