Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me thank the
presidency of Peru for having put the issue of Colombia
on the agenda. Your presence here today, Mr. President,
is a sign of the importance that you attach to this agenda
item. The visit to Colombia was, for me personally,
an eye-opener. I think it was a very important trip; it
showed the unity of the Security Council.

I can only echo what my friend Ambassador
Nebenzia said about friendly competition with regard
to the tree tomatoes. Ambassador Nebenzia actually
gave the tree tomatoes to the wonderful pilots of the
helicopter. I took them home and gave them to my
children, who loved them. He is indeed right that
it is very difficult to buy them in New York, but if
Ambassador Nebenzia is ready to support Colombian
products, I am happy to show him where he can buy
Colombian avocados in New York. I could tell him
now, but we are probably not allowed to do any product
placement here in the Security Council.

I would also like to thank Colombia and the
Colombian Government for their wonderful hospitality.
Foreign Minister Trujillo Garcia spent two days with
us there. I do not know how much how much work or
pleasure there was for him in this visit, but for us it was
a pleasure and I would like to thank him, as well as the
Counsellor and the Ambassador. When we were there,
it was very clear how important this peace process is
for the country, the Government and the people. When
he mentioned that this struggle endured for 50 years, it
made me think of how it has gone on for longer than the
division of Germany. We saw how deep this conflict
runs and how difficult it is to overcome, with its many
wounds, the many victims and the distrust. Therefore, I
would like to highlight two things.

First, the current situation in Colombia really
serves as a source of inspiration to all of those around
the world who are still coping with conflict, proving
that even long-lasting conflicts can be overcome. I
believe that this is what Ambassador Ndong Mba said
earlier; he also gave a very impressive speech when we
were at the territorial area in Cauca.

Secondly, I would also commend the Colombian
Government. Of course, we know that in the election
campaign for the presidential elections, then-candidate
Duque Marquez was perhaps not the most enthusiastic
about the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. But having
met with him, I must commend him for his political
leadership, because he has clearly demonstrated
that now, as a President, he is fully committed to the
agreement. The fact that, during our trip, he gave the
presidency a letter asking for the continuation of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is a
clear indication of his political commitment. Moreover,
the fact that the Colombian Government has decided to
prolong financial support for the reintegration of former
combatants is another indicator of their commitment to
the peace agreement.

I would also like to reiterate our strong support
for the Verification Mission. While we were there,
we saw how popular Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu is in the country. I do not know who is more
popular - Mr. Ruiz Massieu or footballer Mr. James
Rodriguez - but in any case he does a very important
job and we wish to thank him and his team, as well as
the United Nations country team.

I do not want to speak for a long time, but I would
like to echo a point that Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu made. The implementation of the agreement
is very important. The former combatants that are
not in the territorial areas now need to be included.
We saw how committed the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) fighters in the territorial areas are and
how engaged they are in their work. The way in which
this community has been established among former
FARC-EP fighters and indigenous populations is
truly exemplary. However, many of them remain on
the outside. Therefore, including them and including
women - both former women FARC-EP fighters and
women and children in general - is really important.
Here I would like to commend the Mission for its youth,
peace and security strategy.

Everyone around the table has spoken about the
killing of former FARC-EP fighters, social leaders
and human rights defenders. This something that we
are all concerned about, including the Government. We
can only encourage the Government to do its utmost to
fight impunity and fight for accountability. I know how
difficult that is. Colombia is a huge country, but I think
that no effort can be spared to enlarge the presence
of the State in in all regions. Ensuring the presence
of the Administration, security and also some very
basic infrastructure, such as schooling for children, is
extremely important.

I would also like to highlight one part of our very
full, rich programme - our Peruvian friends did not
allow us one minute of free time. We had a meeting
with the Commission on Truth, Coexistence and
Non-Repetition, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and
the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing in
the Context of and Due to the Armed Conflict. I was
really impressed by their commitment, professionalism
and willingness to really contribute to the reconciliation
of the Colombian people. I would urge the Government
to continue adequate financial support for these
institutions. Given regional activity in the wake of the
new provisions, one should not raise uncertainty about
the legal status of former FARC-EP fighters.

I would like to echo what my American colleague
said with regard to coca production and counter-
narcotics. The figures are indeed alarming. Germany
fully supports the eradication programme and call for
them to be conducted on a voluntary basis. I know it is
very cumbersome, but the voluntary programmes linked
with the new cadastres that are being established for the
distribution of land are, I think, the only way. Germany
is opposed to the forced eradication and forced aerial
spraying of coca crops. I know it is an easy solution
and some are in favour of it, but we believe that it is not
good for the environment, it is bad for people's health
and it does not serve its purpose. There are statistics
according to which voluntary eradication sees l per
cent of people going back to grow coca again, while
with forced eradication that rises to 40 per cent. We
therefore call for the continuation of the voluntary
programmes only.

Germany will continue to support Colombia
bilaterally. We have had wonderful, long-term relations
with the country since the era of Alexander von
Humboldt. We know the burden it is bearing due to the
refugees from Venezuela and we support it bilaterally
as well as through the post-conflict multi-partner trust
fund for Colombia. We also support the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund, which we discussed yesterday
in our meetings on transitions (see S/PV.8579), as we
know how important it is for Colombia, too.

