Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I, too, would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for the clarity of
his introduction of the Secretary-General's report

(S/2010/3l8) on developments in the situation in that
country. I would also like to congratulate him on his
commitment to promoting stability and peace in
Afghanistan despite an especially difficult security and
political context. Finally, I would like to thank
Ambassador Apakan for his outstanding leadership
during the mission and the briefing that he just
delivered, which my delegation fully endorses.

The presentations we have just heard provide us
with a clearer understanding of the current situation in
Afghanistan and prompt my delegation to speak to the
three following points: security concerns, the evolution
of the political process and future prospects.

My delegation remains deeply concerned by the
fresh wave of violence against the civilian population,
UNAMA and NATO personnel and humanitarian
workers in Afghanistan. In this regard, we welcome the
plan currently being formulated to transfer some
support functions from UNAMA to Kuwait in order to
reduce its overall personnel numbers in Afghanistan
without compromising the implementation of its
mandate.

Concerning the security of United Nations staff,
the Security Council should seize the opportunity
presented by the upcoming debate on the protection of
civilians to include this specific case in its
consideration of the topic.

Despite the alarming security situation, it
behooves us to pay tribute to the efforts of the Afghan
Government, with the support of NATO, in the field of
security sector reform, and in particular in training
military personnel and civilian police. These actions
are part and parcel of Afghanistan's National
Development Strategy adopted at the London
Conference of January 2010 and support the political
process under way in the country.

The implementation of priorities identified at the
London Conference - in particular the return of
refugees, national reconciliation, the organization of
legislative elections and the strengthening of regional
cooperation - are all essential to leading the country's
peace and development process to a successful
conclusion. The Kabul Conference of 20 July will
afford the Government an opportunity to present a
national development plan focused on security,
economic and social governance. The meeting will
afford the people of Afghanistan an opportunity to take
ownership of the peace process.

On the elections scheduled for September, my
delegation welcomes the democratization of the
mechanisms tasked with organizing the legislative
elections, namely, the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission. These reforms, which contribute to
ensuring transparent elections and credible results,
enjoy the significant assistance of UNAMA and the
international community. The national reconstruction
strategy will be effective only if it is accompanied by
ongoing constructive dialogue among Afghanistan and
countries of the region.

Regional cooperation is indeed crucial in the
context of security, development and the fight against
narcotics trafficking. A military strategy alone will
never suffice to resolve the Afghanistan issue. The
international community must invest itself more in
favour of the political process already under way with
a focus, inter alia, on inclusive political dialogue. We
therefore support the strategy being implemented by
NATO's International Security Assistance Force which
takes security, political and development aspects into
account in its operations.

Gabon, which participated in the Security
Council's recent mission as a member of this body,
welcomes the fact that the mission gave the
international community an opportunity to reiterate its
solidarity with the people of Afghanistan, as well as its
resolve to backing the Government of Afghanistan and
its people in their efforts for peace and reconstruction
in their country.

Finally, I cannot conclude without reiterating to
UNAMA, Mr. De Mistura's team and the Government
of President Karzai our gratitude for having hosted and
welcomed the mission during its visit to Afghanistan.

