Mr. Paswan (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this quarterly open debate at the ministerial
level on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for his briefing.

Our position on the Middle East peace process
is very clear. India supports a negotiated solution
resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living within secure and recognized borders, side by
side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the Quartet
road map and the relevant Council resolutions. India
has always played a proactive role in garnering support
for the Palestinian cause in multilateral forums. We
supported the recent adoption of General Assembly
resolution 69/320, on raising the flags of non-member
observer States at the United Nations.

Recently, the President of India concluded a State
visit to Palestine, where he met with the Palestinian
leadership and discussed a whole range of bilateral,
multilateral and regional issues. That visit reinforced
India's strong commitment to the Palestinian cause
and renewed our political and diplomatic support for
the State of Palestine in its endeavours to realize an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine.
Apart from giving political support to the
Palestinian cause, India continues to support Palestine's
development and nation-building efforts with ongoing
technical and financial assistance. During a visit to
Ramallah, the President of India inaugurated the India-
Palestine Centre for Excellence in information and
communications technology at the Al-Quds University,
and handed over a cheque for $5 million as budgetary
support to the Palestinian Authority. We have announced
several other new projects, in addition to the important
bilateral development projects in health, education,
skill development and vocational training that we are
currently undertaking. India contributes $1 million
annually to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East, and has
pledged and contributed $4 million to the Palestinian
National Early Recovery and Reconstruction Plan for
Gaza. We are also implementing development projects
in Palestine jointly with Brazil and South Africa within
the India-Brazil-South Africa framework.

We are holding today's debate at yet another
unfortunate time, when violent incidents and military
responses to them, regardless ofthe reasons for them, are
once again taking a toll on people's lives on both sides.
We are distressed and saddened by the ongoing situation
and the loss of life. We welcome efforts to mitigate
the situation and urge both sides to exercise restraint,
in order to reduce the levels of tension and create an
environment conducive to the resumption of peace
talks. India remains firmly convinced that dialogue
is the only viable option for effectively addressing
the issue. Restraint is imperative if provocation and
unilateral actions are to be avoided and a return to
the peace process achieved. We remain hopeful and
urge both sides to resume the peace process as soon as
possible in order to work towards a comprehensive, just
and lasting resolution of the Palestinian issue.

India remains deeply concerned about the worsening
political and security situation in Yemen. We have
urged all the parties concerned in Yemen to resolve their
differences amicably, and we hope that the mediation
efforts of the United Nations can help the people of
Yemen to find a consensus-based solution.

Turning to Syria, we continue to be very concerned
about the ongoing violence and loss of human life in
Syria. India has consistently called for a comprehensive
and peaceful resolution of the crisis that can bring all
the parties to the conflict to the negotiating table. This
must be a Syrian-led process that takes into account
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.We also
derive hope from and support the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to advance the political process by conducting
parallel negotiations with four sub-groups focusing on
various issues.

