Ms. Smith (Norway): Let me first express our
firm support for Special Representative De Mistura and
commend him for his dedicated leadership in a time of
transition to greater Afghan ownership.

Norway has a stake in the future of Afghanistan.
We make a significant contribution of troops and we
provide $150 million a year in development assistance.
Our engagement is based on the principles of Afghan
ownership and responsibility, as expressed in the joint
Kabul Declaration last year.

In this respect, Norway supports a transition of
security responsibilities to Afghan lead beginning this
spring, provided that certain fundamental conditions
are met. Yet only a political transition can bring long-
term stability to Afghanistan. This, in turn, requires
improved governance and substantial reforms in many
areas. To implement a viable political reform agenda,
the Afghan Government must continue to work closely
with the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the international
community.

Future success is to a large extent dependent on
developments at the provincial and district level,
pending the implementation of the Afghan subnational
governance policy. The continued presence of UNAMA
offices is therefore a precondition for a successful and
gradual political transition. Afghanistan needs a strong,
well-functioning UNAMA just as much as UNAMA
needs a reliable and responsible partner in the Afghan
Government.

We strongly support Special Representative De
Mistura's call for a surge for the protection of civilians,
particularly as 2010 was the deadliest year for civilians
since the fall of the Taliban regime in 2001. We expect
all parties to fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law.

Although the parliamentary election process was
far from perfect, it is now important that the Parliament
assume its functions and pursue the best interests of the
Afghan people. The political crisis caused by the
parliamentary elections once again showed the urgent
need for electoral reform in Afghanistan. Norway will
continue to support an Afghan-led electoral reform
process that is sustainable and based on the joint
commitment made at the Kabul Conference.

A structured political dialogue is vital in order to
meet the challenges facing Afghanistan today. Norway
supports an Afghan-led peace process as part of a
broader, viable and sustainable Afghan political
settlement. The achievement of a peaceful and durable
solution will require broad participation on the part of
religious, ethnic and civil society groups from all over
the country. The substantial participation of women is
key to any durable peace process.

We note with concern the continued assaults on
freedom of speech and the media, and we commend the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
for its resolute efforts to monitor, protect and promote
respect for human rights in Afghanistan. Norway is
pleased to note that human rights units have been
established in the Afghan Ministry of Justice. This is
an example of the Afghan Government's commitment
to mainstreaming human rights in all national
legislation.

Violence against women remains a major
problem. Much has been achieved in terms of a
strengthened legal framework for women's rights.
However, there are still many obstacles to its
implementation. A joint effort between Government
authorities and civil society is likely to give the best
and most sustainable results in terms of achieving
long-term gender equality in Afghanistan.

UNAMA's mandate has to reflect today's political
realities, including principles for a gradual and
conditions-based transition. UNAMA must continue to
assist the Afghan Government and the Afghan people
in their continuous efforts to build a stable and
peaceful Afghanistan. This requires a viable and
credible Afghan leadership.

