Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important open debate today.
Jamaica is deeply concerned about the escalating crisis
in Gaza, which has resulted in rising civilian casualties,
claiming the lives of more than 600 Palestinians and
injuring in excess of 3,700 people, many of whom are
women and children.

We strongly condemn the targeting of civilian
populations, which constitutes a blatant violation of
international humanitarian law. While acknowledging
that Israel has legitimate security concerns and
recognizing its right to self-defence, we are dismayed
at the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
against an unarmed civilian population that has limited
options for shelter. We also condemn the actions of
Hamas and call for an urgent end to its ongoing rocket
attacks on Israeli cities and population centres.

The Security Council and the wider international
community cannot remain a bystander to those tragic
events. The focus of the international community must
be on brokering an immediate cessation of hostilities,
even as we redouble our efforts to bring humanitarian
relief to those thousands under siege within the dense
confines of the Gaza Strip. We cannot turn a blind
eye to the unfolding and mounting humanitarian
catastrophe. We call on the international community
to respond to the appeal made by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East for $115 million to be mobilized in order to
meet the urgent humanitarian needs of the people of
Gaza for food, water, medicine and sanitation services.
The generous contribution of $47 million by the United
States is most welcome.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's visit to
the region and greatly appreciate the briefing from
Ramallah that he provided this morning, in which
he outlined the intense discussions in which he is
currently engaged. Those discussions are geared
towards a cessation of the fighting, the commencement
of dialogue and tackling the root causes of the crisis.

Jamaica believes that the cycle of violence will
continue in the absence of a negotiated political
settlement on the basis of a two-State solution. We
remain committed to a just, lasting and comprehensive
agreement that recognizes the Palestinian State within
the pre-1967 borders and guarantees the security of
Israel. Achieving such a solution must be based on the
implementation of confidence-building measures by
both sides.

We have a collective responsibility to address those
deep-rooted problems, which is the only pathway to
achieving sustainable peace and security in the region.

