Mr. Jevremovie (Serbia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Judge Patrick Robinson on his
appointment to the post of President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would also like to take this
opportunity to recognize the contribution that Judge
Fausto Pocar made to the proceedings of the Tribunal
while he was its President.

Serbia expresses its gratitude to Judge Robinson
and Mr. Serge Brammertz, the ICTY Prosecutor, for
their efforts in compiling their comprehensive reports.
We appreciate the fact that the substance and thrust of
the reports are in agreement with our own assessment
of the level of cooperation achieved so far. The reports
recognize Serbia's efforts to comply with its legal and
moral obligations, as well as the difficulties
encountered with regard to cooperation, such as in the
areas of witness protection. They also acknowledge the
commitment of Serbian authorities to address those
difficulties and affirm that joint efforts will be made to
overcome them. That recognition is an illustration of
the growing belief in the political will and commitment
of Serbia to fully cooperate with the Tribunal and in its
resolve to apprehend the two remaining fugitives,
namely, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic.

Over the past two weeks, following the
publication of the Prosecutor's report, Serbia provided
additional information to the ICTY Prosecutor's Office
in connection with the case of Momeilo Perisie and
redoubled its efforts to resolve the issue and improve
its overall cooperation with the Tribunal. Also, in order
to keep the international community informed, Serbia
circulated a detailed report yesterday on the
Government's activities related to cooperation.

We fully support the ICTY completion strategy,
defined by resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).
Based on that strategy, the ICTY has identified the 12
most important functions of the residual mechanism to
be set up upon the completion of the Tribunal's
activities. The issue of the ICTY's archives is
described as one of the most important of those
functions. Serbia is interested in the ongoing dialogue
on functions, in particular on the issue of the archives.
On 23 October 2008, the Government of Serbia took its
own position on the issue and advised the ICTY and
the Security Council accordingly. We would like
interested States to be given greater consultation
possibilities, with a View to enabling them to make
constructive contributions to the process of formulating
the residual mechanism.

In conclusion, let me reiterate once again Serbia's
commitment to full cooperation with the ICTY. The
reports presented to the Council also take note of that
commitment. My country is resolved to continue to
make its contribution to the proceedings of the
Tribunal and will make every effort to assist the
Tribunal to bring its work to a successful conclusion,
thereby ensuring the Tribunal's lasting legacy.

