Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, Sir, on behalf of the Arab Group, which I
have the honour to chair this month, I should like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. I should like also to pay tribute to the
exceptional wisdom and ability that you have shown in
presiding over the deliberations of the Council. In addition,
I cannot fail to thank your predecessor, His Excellency
Ambassador Wlosowicz, whose great skill in presiding over
the Security Council was witnessed by all those who follow
the Council's actions.

We come today before the Council to debate the
situation in Somalia, in particular following the
developments we have witnessed there at all levels -
political, security and humanitarian. I do not believe that I
need to speak at length of the grave situation in Somalia
and the terrible suffering of its people, beset by a relentless
civil war that has serious security and humanitarian
repercussions.

That civil war prompted the international community,
led by the Security Council, to take steps that we had
hoped would put an end to the conflict among waning
factions in Somalia. The main objective was first and
foremost to alleviate the suffering of the Somali people and
to save them from the scourge of a conflict that from the
outset had no justification.

The Arab Group, of which Somalia is a member, joins
its voice to those of all the States and parties that have
repeatedly called for the Security Council to pay continuing
attention to, and debate, the situation in Somalia. In this
way we, as befits a responsible international community,
can defeat the merchants of war and destruction. We can
foil their attempts to exploit a fertile land in a conflict
whose principal victims are a people whose only fault has
been not to find a serious and consistent position from the
international community.

The Arab Group therefore welcomes the positive
developments on the political level in Somalia, which began
with the Nairobi meeting, at which Hussein Aidid joined
other factions. Successful Ethiopian mediation led to the
meeting between 26 factions on 3 January in Addis Ababa,
which culminated in the agreement forming the Somali
National Salvation Council and in a pact to continue
dialogue with the other Somali factions that were not
parties to that agreement.

As a member of the League of Arab States, we are
pleased that one of the positive indicators was the
participation of the National Salvation Council in a
special session of the Council of the League of Arab
States, held from 12-14 March of this year. In this
context, we must pay tribute to the efforts of the Italian
mediator, Mr. Cassini, to intensify consultations among
factions leaders so as to promote reconciliation in
Mogadishu and reach an agreement on a speedy solution
to reopen the capital's airport and port. This in turn
would enhance security and stability in Mogadishu. The
Arab Group emphasizes the need to make the most of all
of these developments in order to bring about the
necessary national reconciliation and to create stability.

The Arab States, in their endeavours towards
Somalia, proceed from the following principles.

First, Somalia's sovereignty and territorial integrity
must be respected, in accordance with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.

Secondly, they stress the commitment of the Security
Council to a lasting and comprehensive settlement in
Somalia.

Thirdly, they call on all Somali factions to cease
hostilities forthwith and cooperate with all international
and regional efforts aimed at achieving peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia.

Fourthly, they encourage States to contribute
generously to United Nations appeals to continue
emergency assistance and rehabilitation efforts in
Somalia.

In this context, I should like to pay tribute to Egypt,
Qatar and to my own country, Kuwait, for the financial
and in-kind assistance they have provided towards
national reconciliation, as well as for their humanitarian
assistance and educational support throughout Somalia.

In conclusion, I should like, on behalf of the Arab
Group, to appeal to all Somali factions and to the Somali
people. We would first urge them to make every effort to
convince the international community that they want
peace and stability. They can do this only by

 

demonstrating unity and a positive intent towards
reconciliation. We also call on the international community
to continue its support and assistance to the fraternal
Somali people in order to re-establish stability and
normalcy in a State that has been torn asunder by savage
ambition, which cares little for the dreams of children, their
happiness or a people's desire to live in peace and security.

