Mr. Sousa (Cape Verde) (spoke in French): In
April 1997 - when, in the framework of the Lusaka
Protocol, the normalization of State administration
began in M'banza Congo - hopes were high among
the entire Angolan population and the international
community, because everyone thought that the time had
come when peace and political stability would be
restored to Angola and national reconciliation and
reconstruction could begin.

Regrettably, it took only a few months for these
hopes to fade due to UNITA's delaying tactics. The
Angolan people were stunned by these developments,
and the international community was at a loss.

Despite the persistent efforts of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola and of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation,
once again UNITA, headed by Jonas Savimbi, opted for
war over peace.

Angola and Cape Verde have a very special
relationship because of their many historical and
cultural ties. We have therefore been following with
great concern the development of the situation in this
fraternal country, to which we have always lent our
support, in a spirit of solidarity, in its quest for a
lasting peace - a prerequisite for its development.

The Angolan people have suffered greatly
because of the war, which has sown death and
destruction and ruined the country's economy.

However, the efforts of the international
community and of the Angolan people themselves to
restore peace and political stability and to rebuild the
country continue to be hindered by the actions of
UNITA, which increasingly is resorting to terrorist
attacks, ravaging the civilian population and the
infrastructure in an attempt to hinder the normalization
of the political situation in Angola.

That is why Cape Verde has supported sanctions
against UNITA and is pleased that they have without a
doubt contributed to reducing that group's military
capacity.

The President of the Security Council, in a
statement made on 20 September last, condemned in
the strongest possible terms the terrorist acts
perpetrated by Jonas Savimbi's organization and
emphasized the fact that no political objective
whatsoever could justify them.

The Republic of Cape Verde has noted with
satisfaction the contents of the letter dated 8 October
from the Government of Angola to the Security
Council, which states that, as a consequence of the
sanctions and the increased international pressure on
the military wing of UNITA to compel it to respect the
commitments entered into within the framework of the
Lusaka Protocol, positive results are beginning to be
seen.

Given the fact that individuals and organizations
outside of Angola are continuing to support the rebel
movement and are profiting from the illicit trade in
weapons, means of transport and communications
equipment, as well as illicit financial transactions and
trafficking in the natural resources of the country,
additional measures should be taken to put an end to
such criminal activities.

Such measures can be taken only through
effective monitoring mechanisms within the context of
a review of the sanctions, which, I am convinced, the
Council will be able to reinforce.

At a time when the combat against international
terrorism is becoming an increasingly important
priority for the international community, the terrorist
acts perpetrated by Jonas Savimbi's UNITA - which
have already been the subject of general condemnation
on the part of the international community and of the
Security Council - should be thoroughly reviewed by
the Council to determine whether additional measures
should be taken in this framework in order to put a
definitive end to criminal attacks against civilians.

The Angolan Government has taken important
initiatives to promote the peace process, national
reconciliation and the stabilization of the situation in
the country. It has already announced that it intends to
hold elections in the framework of the democratization
process in Angola, in accordance with universally
accepted democratic norms and principles.

We welcome these measures and the manner in
which the Angolan Government has complied with its
commitments vis-a-vis the international community in
the framework of the peace process. We would like to
reiterate our frequently reiterated position that the
Lusaka Protocol remains the appropriate legal and
political framework for the establishment of a lasting
peace in Angola.

