Ms. Sison (United States of America): I wish
to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his
briefing and for his leadership. The Security Council's
consideration of the Iranian nuclear issue is entering an
important period oftransition. Two months ago, Council
colleagues roundly welcomed the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, a landmark understanding reached
among the P5+1, the European Union and the Islamic
Republic of Iran. If fully implemented, the Plan of
Action will prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear
weapon. Because of our combined diplomatic efforts,
the international community will be able to verify that
Iran's nuclear programme is exclusively peaceful going
forward, and we will have taken an important step in
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons in the Middle
East.
The Security Council's unanimous endorsement
of the deal in resolution 2231 (2015) has helped lay
a foundation for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action's successful implementation. Over the long
term, the Security Council must play an active role in
supporting the deal and ensuring that resolution 2231
(2015) is fully enforced. As of today, we are still in an
initial phase of the Plan of Action. Its commitments
will not actually go into effect until 90 days after
the resolution's adoption. At that point, all the Plan
of Action participants are to make the necessary
arrangements and preparations for implementing their
commitments. For Iran that will mean taking a series
of initial nuclear-related steps, such as eliminating
98 per cent of its enriched uranium stockpile, removing
thousands of centrifuges, repurposing the facility at
Fordow, removing a key component of the Arak reactor
and filling it with concrete, and making arrangements
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
for new transparency measures.

During this interim period, however, the current
United Nations sanctions remain in full effect and all
States must continue to implement them fully. Similarly,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1367
(2006) and the Panel of Experts should continue to carry
out their mandates just as before, including answering
inquiries about the sanctions, analysing information
about compliance and investigating reported sanctions
violations. Countries that detect violations should bring
the information to the Committee for its review and
action. As soon as the IAEA reports to the Security
Council that Iran has completed all of its initial nuclear
steps, resolution 2231 (2015) provides for a significant
change in the United Nations sanctions architecture.
When the report is received, the provisions of the
previous Security Council resolutions will terminate
and the Iran Sanctions Committee and its Panel of
Experts will be dissolved. At the same time, however,
resolution 2231 (2015) puts in place binding Chapter VII
restrictions related to Iran's nuclear, ballistic-missile
and arms-related transfers, as well as ongoing sanctions
on designated Iranian individuals and entities. Those
measures will be in place for years to come.

As long as these binding restrictions are in force,
the Security Council has a vital role to play in ensuring
their implementation. Going forward, the Council must
be prepared to respond swiftly to any reports of illicit

arms smuggling, prohibited ballistic-missile-related
transfers, violations of the assets freeze and travel ban,
or any other activity in violation of the resolution. As
part of that effort, the United States will continue to
work closely with its partners to stop and seize shipments
that are in violation of resolution 2231 (2015), such as
prohibited transfers of weapons and sensitive nuclear-
and ballistic-missile-related technology.

The Security Council should be proud of the role
it played in helping to bring about the negotiations
that led to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Over a period of years, the Council's decisive action,
combined with a sustained focus on the issue, supported
diplomacy and defused tensions. We call on the Council
to continue with the same determination to support the
implementation of the Plan of Action and resolution
2231 (2015).

