Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to align itself with the statement that
will be made by the representative of Costa Rica on
behalf of the Rio Group. I wish also to refer to some
matters of particular interest to my country related to
the fight against terrorism, and particularly regarding
the role of the Committee established by Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001).

The creation of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) has given vigorous and unprecedented impetus
to the efforts of the international community and the
United Nations in combating terrorism. Although it is
too early to reach conclusions based on preliminary
results, we can say today that the Committee has
breathed life and dynamism into its mandate, in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001). As has been
stated on other occasions, there is no doubt that one of
its specific contributions is that it has encouraged
States to conduct an in-depth analysis of their legal and
institutional pillars in order to effectively combat
terrorism.

Another positive element stemming from the
submission of national reports has been the broad
dissemination of resolution 1373 (2001) within States
through inter-institutional cooperation in the drafting
of every report.

Recognition for these achievements must be
directed also to the creativity of the Committee
Chairman, Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, and to the
staff members who assist him in the United Kingdom
Mission. Mexico also expresses its gratitude to the
Vice-Chairmen of the Committee for efficient presiding
over the subcommittees. We also congratulate the
experts on their effective work in their respective areas.
The Secretariat too has contributed to the functioning
of the Committee.

During the debate last April, my delegation stated
that five premises should guide the Committee and the
United Nations in its work in combating terrorism.
Now that we are on the eve of the second phase, we
reaffirm that these premises remain valid.

My country believes it is essential for the
Committee to work through transparency and
cooperation. We insist that one central element in
combating terrorism is respect for human rights, as
well as observance of international law, the Charter of
the United Nations in particular.

Perhaps the greatest challenge now facing the
Committee is technical and financial assistance for full
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). It is
becoming increasingly clear that greater cooperation
between countries is required in order to combat
terrorism effectively. The dimension of this challenge
has a number of aspects that need to be considered.
One of them is the close relationship of assistance with
compliance with paragraph 6 of resolution 1373
(2001). The Committee has succeeded in getting the
great majority of Member States to comply by
submitting reports. As for the States that have not yet
done so, the Committee could cooperate with them
through a dialogue aimed at support, which the
Committee experts themselves could provide, in order
to find the most viable means for each country that has
not yet done so to comply with resolution 1373 (2001).
We would like to thank the Government of Norway for
the support and cooperation it is providing to various
regional organizations in Africa to ensure full
compliance with the resolution.

Another aspect of particular importance to
Mexico is the dialogue established between the
Committee and the various regional and subregional
organizations. We believe it is necessary and
appropriate to strengthen cooperation between the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and regional
organizations on the basis of dialogue, exchange of
information and respect for their respective spheres of
competence in order to broaden the possibilities for
support required by States to implement resolution
1373 (2001).

To the extent allowed by their mandates, regional
organizations have been developing an array of
activities in order to strengthen the fight against
international terrorism. The activities carried out by the
Organization of American States (OAS) have been
particularly fruitful.

One of the major achievements in our hemisphere
has been the conclusion, under the presidency of
Mexico, of the Inter-American Convention against
Terrorism. This instrument, which complements the
international legal framework in combating this
scourge, was adopted and opened for signature in
Barbados at the thirty-second General Assembly of the
OAS on 3 June. I am pleased to report that 30 of the 34
member States of the organization, Mexico included,
have signed this new instrument. Not only does the
Inter-American Convention against Terrorism
strengthen hemisphere-wide cooperation; it also
supports international efforts in this sphere.

In this new phase of its work, the Committee
must continue to comply with its mandate to promote
international cooperation to combat international
terrorism. Furthermore, we feel that the Committee
should assist in identifying additional measures that
should be adopted by the international community to
combat terrorism, without losing sight of the fact that
any measure adopted to combat terrorism should, in
addition to criminal focus, have a preventive
dimension. The new instruments to be adopted should
put greater emphasis on prevention and also be aimed
at strengthening the capacity of States to implement the
necessary measures.

