Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for her briefing.

When considering the Syria humanitarian issue, we
always have in mind the powerful plea last December by
the Russian Permanent Representative that we should
keep our differences over the politics in Syria out of our
consideration of humanitarian issues - a view that we
strongly continue to endorse.
Last week, Mark Lowcock briefed us on his visit
to Syria. It was the first time that an Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs had visited Syria in
more than two years, having been blocked previously
from visiting. The United Kingdom commends the
Under-Secretary-General's efforts to start a meaningful
dialogue between the United Nations and the Syrian
regime in order to improve the humanitarian situation
for the people of Syria. On the basis of discussions
and as we iterated today, the Under-Secretary-General
set out five clear asks to enable the United Nations to
sustain and improve its aid efforts. The United Kingdom
fully supports those asks. Unfortunately, the Security
Council has been unable to reach agreement on a text
that would unanimously call upon the Syrian regime to
ensure that those five asks are granted without delay. I
want to reflect on this disappointing situation.

One of the five key asks of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is the regime's
agreement to allow three or four United Nations and
Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoys each week across
front lines to provide assistance to up to 2.5 million
people in besieged and hard-to-reach areas. These
convoys are needed to deliver aid, including both food
and medical supplies, to civilians who have lived in a war
zone for almost seven years. That request for consistent,
regular access to all people in need is crucial. In 2017,
only 27 per cent of United Nations inter-agency convoy
requests were approved by the Syrian regime in full.
That is significantly worse than in 2016, when 45 per
cent of requests were approved. Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller's briefing was especially concerning
in that respect. We cannot let that happen again in 2018.

Ninety-four per cent of those living under siege
are located in eastern Ghouta. The Al-Assad regime is
using humanitarian aid as a weapon ofwar by restricting
access to the besieged population. There were no aid
deliveries to the area for the whole of December, and
nearly 12 per cent of children under five years of age
in eastern Ghouta suffer from acute malnutrition. It is
appalling that innocent children are once again suffering
the most. The Under-Secretary-General also requested
the immediate evacuation of hundreds of people who
are in need of medical assistance from eastern Ghouta.
We call on those who can influence the regime to use
all of their authority to allow for rapid, unhindered and
sustained humanitarian access and medical evacuations
for those in need. According to the Secretary-General,
18 people have already died while waiting for the
regime's permission to leave the besieged city. People
are dying for want of health care and services that are
available fewer than 10 miles away, in Damascus.

Let us recall that the backdrop of the Under-
Secretary-General's visit was the escalation in air
strikes in eastern Ghouta and the north-west, including
Aleppo, Idlib governorate and northern Hama.
Yesterday at least five people, including a child, were
killed by an air strike on a hospital supported by
Medecins sans frontieres in Syria's Idlib governorate.
The facility was also seriously damaged and at least
six people, including three medical staff, were injured
as a result of the attack. The air strikes on the hospital
occurred while the doctors were receiving people who
had been injured an hour earlier in another air strike on
a market. Those strikes had already killed 11 people.

These events are taking place are in areas where
there are meant to be ceasefires with the stated aim of
putting a prompt end to violence and improving the
humanitarian situation. Unfortunately for the people
of Syria, that could not be further from the reality.
The deliberate targeting of civilians and civilian
infrastructure in Idlib and eastern Ghouta continues, in
blatant violation of international humanitarian law and
human rights law. The intensification of hostilities has
displaced approximately 270,000 people within Idlib
since 15 December 2017, stretching scarce resources
beyond their limits. The escalation of air strikes in
eastern Ghouta has resulted in hundreds of civilian
deaths since 30 December. UNICEF reports that, in the
first 14 days of 2018, more than 30 children were killed
by escalating violence in the enclave.

It is against that backdrop that I call on the regime
to allow for immediate, safe and unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance to meet fully the needs of
those who require food and medical supplies. Let all
with influence exert it to ensure that. It is our must
crucial, immediate request. It is also imperative that all
parties adhere to agreed ceasefires and cessations of
hostilities, uphold international humanitarian law and
protect civilians.

Yesterday, a number of us visited the United States
National Holocaust Museum's exhibition on Syria. We
saw the photographs of those killed and tortured by the
regime and we read their biographies, their life stories.
It had a profound effect on me, and it brought home how

the tragedy in Syria is not just a geopolitical one - it is
a human one. For humanity's sake, all of us around this
table must ensure that we have done our all.

