Mr. Galouzeau de Villepin (France) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei for the information they have just given
us on the ongoing inspections in Iraq. I would like to
reiterate to them France's confidence in and complete
support for their work.

One knows the value France has placed on the
unity of the Security Council from the outset of the
Iraqi crisis. Today this unity is based on two
fundamental elements.

Together we are pursuing the objective of
effectively disarming Iraq, and therefore we are
obligated to achieve results. We must not call into
question our common commitment in this regard.
Collectively we bear this onerous responsibility that
must leave no room for ulterior motives or
assumptions. Let us be clear: none of us feels the least
indulgence towards Saddam Hussain and the Iraqi
regime.

In unanimously adopting resolution 1441 (2002)
we collectively expressed our agreement with the two-
stage approach proposed by France: disarmament
through inspections and, if this strategy should fail,
consideration by the Security Council of all the
options, including resorting to force. Clearly, it was in
the event that inspections failed, and only in that case,
that a second resolution could be justified.

The question today is simple: do we believe in
good conscience that disarmament via inspections
missions is now a dead end, or do we believe that the
possibilities regarding inspections made available in
resolution 1441 (2002) have not yet been fully
explored?

In response to this question, France believes two
things. First, the option of inspections has not been
exhausted, and it can provide an effective response to
the imperative of disarming Iraq. Secondly, the use of
force would have such heavy consequences for the
people, the region and international stability that it
should be envisaged only as a last resort.

What have we just learned from the reports by
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei? We learned that the
inspections are producing results. Of course, each of us
would like more, and we will continue, together, to put
pressure on Baghdad in order to obtain more. But the
inspections are producing results.

In previous reports to the Security Council, on 27
January 2003, the Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
identified with precision the areas in which progress
was expected. Significant gains have now been made
on several of these fronts.

The Iraqis have provided the inspectors with new
documents regarding chemical and biological weapons
and also announced they are establishing commissions
of inquiry led by former officials of weapons
programmes, in accordance with the requests of
Mr. Blix. In the ballistic area, the information provided
by Iraq has also enabled the inspectors to make
progress. We now know exactly the real capabilities of
the Al Samoud 2 missile. Dismantling of unauthorized
programmes must now begin, in accordance with
Mr. Blix's conclusions. In the nuclear domain, useful
information has been given to IAEA on the important
points discussed by Mr. ElBaradei on 27 January: the
acquisition of magnets that could be used to enrich
uranium and the list of contacts between Iraq and the
country that may have provided it with uranium.

We are now at the heart of the logic of resolution
1441 (2002), which must ensure effective inspections
through precisely identifying banned programmes and
then eliminating them. We are all well aware that the
success of the inspections presupposes that we get full
and complete cooperation from Iraq, something France
has consistently demanded.

We are starting to see real progress. Iraq has
agreed to aerial reconnaissance over its territory. It has
allowed Iraqi scientists to be questioned by inspectors
without witnesses. A draft legislative bill barring all
activities linked to programmes for weapons of mass
destruction is being adopted, in accordance with a
long-standing request from the inspectors. Iraq is
providing a detailed list of the experts who witnessed
the destruction of military programmes in 1991.

Naturally France expects these commitments to
be verified. Beyond that we must maintain strong
pressure on Iraq so that it goes further along the path of
cooperation.

Progress like this strengthens us in our conviction
that the inspections can be effective, but we must not
close our eyes to the amount of work that remains to be
done. Questions remain to be clarified, verifications
must be made, and installations or equipment
undoubtedly remain to be destroyed.

In order to do this we must give the inspections
every opportunity to succeed. On 5 February I made
proposals to the Council. Since then we detailed those
proposals in a working document addressed to Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei and distributed to Council members.
What is the spirit of those proposals? They are
practical and concrete proposals that can be quickly
implemented and are designed to enhance the
efficiency of inspection operations. They fall within the
framework of resolution 1441 (2002) and consequently
do not require a new resolution by the Council. These
proposals support the efforts of Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei, who are the best to tell us which ones
they wish to accept to ensure maximum effectiveness
in their work.

Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have already made
useful and operational comments in their reports.
France has already announced it has additional
resources to make available to Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei, starting with our Mirage IV
reconnaissance aircraft.

Yes, I hear the critics: there are those who think
that, in principle, inspections cannot be at all effective.
But I recall that they are the very foundation of
resolution 1441 (2002) and that the inspections are
producing results. One may judge them to be
insufficient, but they are there. Then there are those
who believe that continuing the inspection process
would be a kind of delaying tactic aimed at preventing
military intervention. That naturally raises the question
of the time allotted to Iraq. Here, we are at the centre
of the debate. What is at stake is our credibility and our
sense of responsibility. Let us have the courage to see
things plainly.

There are two options. The option of war might
seem, on the face of it, to be the swifter. But let us not
forget that, after the war is won, the peace must be
built. And let us not delude ourselves: that will be long
and difficult, because it will be necessary to preserve
Iraq's unity and to restore stability in a lasting way in a
country and a region harshly affected by the intrusion
of force. In the light of that perspective, there is the
alternative offered by inspections, which enable us to
move forward, day by day, on the path of the effective
and peaceful disarmament of Iraq. In the end, is that
not the surer and the swifter choice?
No one can maintain today that the path of war
will be shorter than the path of inspections; no one can
maintain that it would lead to a safer, more just and
more stable world. For war is always the outcome of
failure. Could it be our sole recourse in the face of
today's many challenges?

Therefore, let us give the United Nations
inspectors the time that is necessary for their mission to
succeed. But let us together be vigilant and ask
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei to report regularly to the
Council. France, for its part, proposes another meeting
at ministerial level, on 14 March, to assess the
situation. Thus we would be able to judge the progress
made and what remains to be accomplished.

In that context, the use of force is not justified at
this time. There is an alternative to war: disarming Iraq
through inspections. Moreover, premature recourse to
the military option would be fraught with risks. The
authority of our action rests today on the unity of the
international community. Premature military
intervention would call that unity into question, and
that would remove its legitimacy and, in the long run,
its effectiveness. Such intervention could have
incalculable consequences for the stability of a scarred
and fragile region. It would compound the sense of
injustice, would aggravate tensions and would risk
paving the way for other conflicts.

We all share the same priority: fighting terrorism
mercilessly. That fight requires total determination;
since the tragedy of 11 September 2001, it has been
one of the main responsibilities of our peoples. And
France, which has been struck hard several times by
that terrible scourge, is wholly mobilized in this
struggle, which involves all of us and which we must
pursue together. That was the sense of the Security
Council meeting held on 20 January at France's
initiative.

Ten days ago, the United States Secretary of
State, Mr. Powell, cited alleged links between Al-
Qaeda and the Baghdad regime. Given the present state
of our research and information, gathered in liaison
with our allies, nothing enables us to establish such
links. Moreover, we must assess the impact that a
disputed military action would have on that level.
Would not such an intervention be likely to deepen
divisions among societies, among cultures, among
peoples - divisions that nurture terrorism?

France has always said that we do not exclude the
possibility that, one day, we might have to resort to
force if the inspectors' reports concluded that it was
impossible for inspections to continue. Then the
Council would have to take a decision, and its members
would have to shoulder all of their responsibilities. In
such a scenario, I want to recall here the questions that
I stressed at our last debate, on 5 February, to which we
must respond. To what degree do the nature and the
extent of the threat justify immediate recourse to force?
How do we ensure that the considerable risks of such
an intervention can actually be kept under control?

In any case, in such an eventuality it is the unity
of the international community that would guarantee its
effectiveness. Likewise, it is the United Nations that,
whatever may happen, will remain tomorrow at the
centre of the peace to be built. To those who ask with
anguish when and how we will yield to war, I should
like to say that nothing will be done in the Security
Council, at any time, in haste, out of a lack of
understanding, out of suspicion or out of fear. In this
temple, the United Nations, we are the guardians of an
ideal; we are the guardians of a conscience. The heavy
responsibility and the immense honour that are ours
must lead us to give priority to disarmament through
peace.

It is an old country, France, of an old continent
such as mine, Europe, that speaks before the Council
today, that has known war, occupation, barbarity - a
country that does not forget and that is aware of all it
owes to the fighters for freedom who came from
America and elsewhere. And yet France has always
stood upright in the face of history and before
mankind. Faithful to its values, it wants to act
resolutely with all the other members of the
international community. We believe in our ability to
build a better world together.

