Canada would like to thank Estonia for convening this early open debate and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for its leadership of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions. Their dedication to these issues is clear, and we salute their commitment. The Council has been a lynchpin of the global order for 75 years. Two months ago, we would not have imagined the world we live in today. Nor can we fully predict the world we will face in two weeks, two months and two years from now. What has become clear, however, is that the world needs a Council with the wherewithal and clarity of purpose to respond to a global crisis. While the Council is its own institution, with rules of procedure, precedent and process, the beating heart of the Council is the membership. Today we would like to recognize the elected members of the Council, in particular, for their incredible efforts to adapt to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis and its myriad facets. What they have accomplished proves that the Council can indeed evolve. They have demonstrated that the Council cannot depend on the old ways of working. Evolution has been an area of focus for elected members for many years. Recent initiatives such as the innovative retreat convened by Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, along with Kuwait, in Kingstown in January are now paying dividends. Canada believes that, fundamentally, the workload of the Council should be shared across all its members. That means leveraging the ideas and energy that elected members bring to the Council. We continue to support efforts for greater consultation, transparency and burden-sharing in the distribution of Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the Council. As a first step, elected members should take on new penholder roles to move the Council away from processes that limit the exchange of ideas and input. The current system reduces the horizon for the Council at a time in which new and creative approaches are critical. Elected members also understand the challenges of assessing the Council's work when watching with one's nose pressed up against the glass. Like Canada, they are some of the strongest advocates of transparency of the Council. With physical distancing measures, the lack of transparency of the Council has become more acute. Nevertheless, we applaud Estonia's efforts during its presidency this month, and those of the Dominican Republic beforehand, to leverage technology in the service of effectiveness, efficiency and inclusivity. There is clearly more to do in that regard. As an example, open debates should allow for the full and active participation of all interested Member States in the official United Nations language of their choice. The global pandemic carries significant economic repercussions and will have long-lasting impacts on peace and security. This demands that the Security Council focus more on conflict prevention and economic security. If elected to the Council, Canada will continue to focus on the economic dimensions of international peace and security to make sure the voices of the poorest and most vulnerable are heard. This will be all the more important in a post-COVID-19 world. We also believe that the Council can do more to institutionalize linkages with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We welcome the practice of informal interactive dialogues between the PBC and Council on countries and regions where both organs have important roles to play, such as the Sahel. The Council could also consider inviting the PBC Chair or Chairs of its country-specific configurations to join Council missions to countries where both bodies are engaged. The PBC has recently strengthened its advisory role to the Council by providing written advice on thematic, regional and country issues ahead of open debates and mission mandate renewals, including regarding West Africa and the Sahel, the Central African Republic, and youth, peace and security. We hope to see that become standard practice, and believe the Council should consider a standing referral to the PBC of countries undergoing United Nations mission transitions. This would help ensure that adequate attention is paid to addressing root causes of conflict, including economic insecurity, and longer-term risks to peace so as to avoid relapses and the need for a return of peacekeepers. The Council needs to better leverage its role in the broader United Nations system. The annual report to the General Assembly should be substantive, informative and timely and work to strengthen the linkages between these bodies. As Chair of the Working Group of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, Canada would welcome opportunities to improve the efficiency of both bodies through greater exchanges of information. This year, Canada worked effectively with all delegations to bring an innovative approach and reform the Committee's annual report to align with the Secretary General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Another crucial element of the Security Council's evolution needs to be limitations on the use and threat of use of the veto. Canada calls on all that have yet to do so to join the French-Mexican initiative and the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group's code of conduct regarding Security Council action against genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes. In that regard, Canada is working with partners towards a future reformed, more inclusive and democratic Council - a larger Council that addresses historic injustices in its membership, with corrections to regional underrepresentation. But, without adding to the imbalance of privilege, our strategic goal remains elimination of the veto. Above and beyond the incremental recommendations contained in presidential note S/2017/507, Canada also believes far more needs to be done to make the Security Council gender-responsive. The meaningful participation of women will be even more critical as the current pandemic exacerbates inequalities around the world. With the adoption of new working methods, more must be done to integrate women civil society briefers into Council meetings. Women must not be relegated to participating in informal briefings and side events. Finally, please accept our gratitude once again for your leadership, Mr. President, in convening this open debate and compiling and circulating the input of all Member States. Canada looks forward to participating in future such meetings, and to advancing the work of the Informal Working Group as a Council member for the period 2021-2022 if we are fortunate enough to be elected.
