Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Assistant-Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her very
informative briefing on recent developments in Mali.

(spoke in French)

I also welcome the presence among us of Her
Excellency Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.

(spoke in English)

I would like to focus my intervention around three
issues: the political process, the security situation and
the human rights and humanitarian situation.

First, on the political process, we commend steps
taken by the Government of Mali and the Platform and
the Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad to deliver
on their remaining obligations under the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, including the creation
ofthe Ministry for Social Cohesion, Peace and National
Reconciliation. However, lasting peace and stability
cannot be established without inclusive and sustainable

development. Therefore, we call on all parties to
redouble their efforts to implement key provisions of
the agreement so as to improve security conditions and
establish sustainable development, including access to
basic social services.

The full and timely implementation of the agreement
will require strong support across Malian society.
In that regard, we welcome the broad endorsement
for the Pact for Peace signed by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the Government. We call on all stakeholders
to join the Government in its efforts to move forward on
the critical political and institutional reforms necessary
for improved governance and sustaining peace. The
meaningful inclusion and participation of individuals,
especially women and youth, remains essential to
securing the progress already made.

Secondly, we remain seriously concerned about the
security situation in Mali, particularly in the centre.
This situation needs to be urgently addressed through
a more integrated and comprehensive approach so as to
prevent further deterioration. Therefore, we call on the
Government to step up its efforts to address the root
causes of conflict and security challenges in affected
areas. We hope that the implementation of adequate
national strategies and plans - including the integrated
security plan for the centre - will prove its efficiency
in this context.

We strongly condemn the attacks against civilians
in the village of Koulogon Peul in Mali and call for the
perpetrators to be held accountable. If the situation in
Mali is to improve, the effective implementation of the
peace agreement will be crucial. We express our deep
condolences to the families of the victims.

Thirdly, with respect to human rights, we remain
seriously concerned about the human rights situations,
particularly in the centre of the country in the Segou
and Mopti regions, as well as along the border of
the Timbuktu, Gao and Menaka regions, where
serious human rights violations and abuses continue
to be reported. Let me reiterate that all national and
international military forces operating in Mali must
ensure that their operations comply with international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
No effort should be spared to hold the perpetrators of
human rights violations accountable.

We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. Access to basic services and
assistance, such as food, water and sanitation, shelter,
as well as education and health care, remain limited
and challenging. Therefore, we call on the signatory
and other armed groups to engage in dialogue with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mahamet Saleh Annadif, and the United Nations
country team to improve humanitarian access.

In conclusion, there is no doubt that Mali's stability
remains key to that of the whole Sahel region. Therefore,
Poland commends Special Representative Annadif for
his excellent leadership and all United Nations civilian
and uniformed personnel for their continued hard work
in a challenging environment.

