The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Egypt, Germany, Iraq, Italy,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Nepal, Norway, Pakistan, Peru,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Slovakia, South Africa,
Spain, Switzerland, and Uganda in which they request
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In accordance with usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Alfredo
Mantica, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan Egeland,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Egeland to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jacques Forster,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Forster to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/740, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

At this meeting the Council will first hear a
briefing by Mr. Ian Egeland, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator.


