Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your timely initiative in holding today's debate.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
At the same time, I would also like to make a statement
in my national capacity.

This year we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the end of the Second World War and of the founding
Member States' signing of the Charter of the United
Nations, in their quest to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. To that end, they set out clear
purposes and principles that for 70 years have remained
a cornerstone of international relations. Remarkably, it
was the Ukrainian representative who led the committee
that worked out that crucial part of the Charter so long
ago in 1945. Seventy years later, the world order based
on the noble purposes and comprehensive principles of
the United Nations Charter is under major attack.

The Russian Federation has blatantly violated the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. It has used every possible means ranging
from interference in Ukraine's internal affairs to direct
military aggression and partial occupation of Ukrainian
sovereign territory, and from political and economic
coercion to a massive propaganda assault. It is not an
exaggeration to say that Russia has unleashed a full-
scale hybrid war on Ukraine. It is horrifying that such
flagrant violations have been committed by a permanent
member of the Security Council, which bears a special
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Russia ignores the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and does not respect its political and
legal obligations emanating from other international
agreements, including the Budapest Memorandum on
Security Assurances to Ukraine. To justify its actions,
it hides behind barefaced misinterpretations of the

relevant documents and its related commitments.

As we prepare to mark the anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations and its principles,
we must do everything possible to ensure that the
Organization remains a key player in maintaining
international peace and security. To that end, three
actions are necessary.

First, we must make all possible efforts to uphold
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is essential to reaffirm their universal and
unconditional validity as a basis for peaceful relations.
Secondly, we must elaborate mechanisms to verify
compliance with the United Nations principles against
clear benchmarks. It is unacceptable to see gross
violations masterfully misinterpreted, concealed or
merely denied, and thereby ignored. Historically, many
hopes have rested on the bona fide adherence ofMember
States to the rules. Yet an old diplomatic adage, "Trust,
but verify", has at times proved especially fitting.
Thirdly, we must ensure that States that violate United
Nations principles are brought to justice. The concept
of international responsibility should be reinforced
with a clear set of sanctions on the infringers. It is the
only way to restore trust and order in the world.

It is clear that reform of the United Nations is
absolutely necessary to address its limitations. If the
Organization had been upgraded, Ukraine would not
have to pay a blood tribute now. However, the reform
process will take time, whereas the drastic situation in
the eastern part of Ukraine, which Russia has turned
from fertile fields into scorched land, requires an
immediate response. As we prepare to commemorate
the victory of the Second World War, we must do
everything possible to curtail Russia's growing
militarism and expansionism and avert its defiance of
international law.

The Russian side ignores the recent Minsk
agreements outlining comprehensive measures towards
a political settlement. In particular, Russia and its
proxies in eastern Ukraine have not only disregarded
the ceasefire that was designed to trigger the entire
Minsk package, but have also undertaken an offensive
on the town ofDebaltseve and have continued attacking
other Ukrainian towns and villages. Militants and their
Russian masters have blocked the activities of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission, which was vested with
the special authority to monitor the ceasefire and
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the contact line.

We cannot afford to lose more servicemen, whose
death toll has already exceeded 1,500. We cannot
tolerate our innocent civilians continuing to die under
the constant shelling by terrorists and Russian regular
forces. We cannot stand by while Ukrainian citizens in
the occupied areas are deprived of the basic conditions
of normal life and subjected to abuse of their rights.
We cannot watch while the Minsk agreements are
continuously violated as Russia persists in transferring
the most sophisticated offensive weapons into the
eastern part of Ukraine and in turning Ukraine into
a shooting range. We cannot accept that Russia has
turned Crimea into an isolated military camp and its
residents into pariahs.

Lastly, we cannot accept that some are still behaving
as if nothing is happening and as if there are no red
lines for aggression. In that regard, we are considering
requesting the United Nations to deploy a mission,
possibly a peacekeeping operation, to Ukraine. That
initiative would not supersede the Minsk agreements.
To the contrary, we view such operation as an
indispensable instrument to ultimately help implement
the agreements and restore peace. We expect that the
Member States of the United Nations and, above all,
the Security Council, will support such a request for
assistance. In our view, it will be a crash test of the
United Nations ability to maintain international peace
and security.

