I thank Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams for her briefing, as well as the Secretary-General for his written report on the latest developments in Libya (S/2020/832). The coordinated calls for ceasefire by the Government of National Accord and the eastern-based House of Representatives on 21 August were a welcome step in bringing Libya closer to peace, but now both parties need to follow that up with concrete action. It is extremely important that the talks in the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission continue at a good pace and result in an effective ceasefire agreement. Furthermore, we fully support the calls from the Libyan parties to cease all foreign intervention in Libya, including the departure of all foreign fighters and mercenaries who are present in Libya. Lasting peace in Libya can come about only through a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process, and we need to create space for it. The only acceptable international framework to support that is the Berlin process conducted under the auspices of the United Nations. All international efforts to stop the blatant violations of the Libyan sanctions regime must continue. The European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI will continue to make an important contribution to those efforts. The already dire humanitarian situation in Libya took a turn for the worse over the past months. We are extremely concerned about the growing suffering of civilians amid the frequent and significant power and water cuts, and call on all parties to stop the attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure. I would like to express Estonia's concern about the increasing number of reports of human rights violations in Libya. All people must be able to exercise their fundamental rights to peaceful assembly, protest and freedom of expression without having to fear excessive use of force by the authorities in retaliation. All incidents of international humanitarian law and human rights law violations must be thoroughly investigated and those responsible must be held accountable. I would also like to reiterate Estonia's full support to the work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the United Nations-facilitated political process in Libya. We support the further extension of the UNSMIL mandate for another 12 months.
