Mr. Hume (United States of America): Given the
lateness of the hour, I will be brief.

I would like to thank our two visitors for the
briefings they gave us today. I think they have given us
a great deal to think about as we look at how to go
ahead with the international community's continuing
responsibility to support the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Accords.

The streamlining process that we have heard
about reflects the evolution of the international
community's role in Bosnia and Herzegovina and is a
clear signal to its leaders about the need to work
together ever more diligently to make progress on
refugee returns, joint State institutions and economic
reform.

On hearing the High Representative's report
about the slow progress in building healthy joint State
institutions for Bosnia, it strikes me that this is a
problem not only because citizens are deprived of
necessary services but also because the investment
required for economic growth and for security is
discouraged. I think that we will have to find some way
to institutionalize the sense of urgency rather than
accept practices of procrastination. If we are able to do
that, we are more likely to find overall success.

We think that there must be a concerted effort by
the Office of the High Representative and Bosnia's
leaders, recognizing the progress that has already been
made in some of these areas, to strengthen border
controls, passport issuance and the fight against the
organized smuggling of women and other transnational
crimes that are often linked to terrorist activities.

We have appreciated what we have been briefed
on in this regard, but obviously this is an effort that has
to be pushed even further. We are encouraged that
progress on refugee returns continues to improve -
quite dramatically, in fact. But this will not be
sustainable without progress in consolidating and
strengthening Bosnia's joint institutions. One of the
key issues in the streamlining exercise is addressing
the police-related mission that will remain after the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
completed its work next year. This fundamental task is
one of the priority considerations that is guiding our
thinking about the future.

