Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2485
(2019), illustrating the Security Council's collective
support for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), whose role is essential to preserving peace
in a volatile regional context. As it does every year,
France worked energetically to maintain this Council
unity. We thank all the members for their involvement
in the negotiations and for their spirit of compromise.

UNIFIL is vital to stability in Lebanon and the
region and must remain the guarantor of the cessation of
hostilities between Lebanon and Israel, in keeping with
resolution 1701 (2006). We, members ofthe Council, are
all guarantors of UNIFIL's credibility. It is important
that UNIFIL remain a peacekeeping and dissuasive
force seen as neutral by all the parties It must remain a
mediation tool in the service of conflict resolution.

Under the impetus of the Council, UNIFIL has
made considerable efforts over the past two years
to implement resolutions 2373 (2017) and 2433
(2018) - for example, by stepping up patrol operations
on the ground, in close cooperation with the Lebanese
Armed Forces. We wanted this momentum to continue
this year on the occasion of the mandate renewal. We
also wanted to reflect the concerns raised by several
of the delegations, all the while maintaining consensus
within the Council.

This new text clearly reiterates the need to
guarantee UNIFIL's freedom of movement and security
throughout its area of operation, in coordination with
the Lebanese authorities. Protecting the integrity of
UNIFIL's mandate contributes to the political stability
and security of Lebanon and the region at a time when
the balance is fragile. France repeats its attachment to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
In the light of recent tensions, it is imperative that all
parties show the utmost restraint and adhere to Security
Council resolutions by refraining from any violation
of the Blue Line. In the end, only the presence of the
Lebanese State and ofits armed and security forces will
create the conditions for long-term stability in southern
Lebanon and in Lebanese territorial waters. It was with
this ultimate objective in mind that we this year again
approached the mandate renewal.

