Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tahin, for his
comprehensive briefing, to congratulate him on his
appointment to his new position and to wish him every
possible success in his endeavours. Similarly, I would
like to welcome Mr. Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister
of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Citaku, and thank
them for their statements.

We have noted the positive progress that has
been achieved in Kosovo. We welcome the untiring
efforts deployed by the Kosovo authorities to develop
institutions and enshrine the values of justice and
equality among all citizens. This has been reflected
over time in concrete successes on the ground, and
these successes have shown quite clearly that the people
of Kosovo are able to meet the challenges and make
progress on the path towards a modern and prosperous
State.

Similarly, Jordan welcomes the adoption by the
Government of Kosovo of a strategy for combating
violent extremism and radicalization. We also pay
tribute to the Government of Kosovo for its ongoing
commitment to protecting cultural and religious
diversity. There are a great many religious sites in the
country. We call on the authorities in Kosovo to bring
to justice all those who have defaced or defiled these
cultural and religious sites, once the incidents have
been duly investigated by the relevant authorities.

We call on the authorities in Kosovo to endeavour
to make progress on the issue of disappeared
individuals and internally displaced persons. We urge
the authorities in Kosovo to continue to bolster the rule
of law and transcend all obstacles to that end. In this
respect, we reaffirm the importance of the activities of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
which is making a valuable contribution by helping the
authorities in Kosovo to strengthen the rule of law and
justice.

The existence of a common vision for cooperation
and regional integration in the Balkans and the good-
faith efforts made by the countries of the region to
implement that vision will inevitably lead to economic
recovery and a stabilization of the security situation
in the region. Furthermore, it is very important to
forge relationships of good-neighbourliness among
the countries on the principle of mutual respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of each and
every State, without, of course, forgetting the critical
principle of non-interference in the domestic affairs of
States. All of this will strengthen social, economic and
security progress.

We therefore call on all the States in the region of
the Balkans to promote cooperation among themselves
in various fields and settle pending issues. To this end,
Jordan welcomes the progress made in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue between the Republic
of Serbia and Kosovo and backs the efforts to fully
normalize relations between the two States. We would
also like to welcome the positive result between the
two countries with respect to the setting up of the First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between the two countries. We reiterate
the call of the Secretary-General to the parties to
preserve the current momentum in their relations by
implementing that agreement.

Furthermore, we wish to see all disputes settled and
all obstacles overcome on the path to implementing the
array of agreements that will have to be implemented
through agreed upon specialized channels. Jordan
supports the legitimate efforts of Kosovo to expand
international recognition of it as an independent State,
including its efforts to join various international
organizations and United Nations agencies, for
which it meets all the necessary criteria. We urge the
international community to back Kosovo's efforts.

A strengthening of Kosovo's international status is
an investment in peace and will lead to stability and
security in the region. It will also ensure socioeconomic
growth. Jordan again urges the members of the Security
Council to request that the reporting period for the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) be extended from three to six months
because, generally speaking, the situation in Kosovo
is stabilizing and there is palpable improvement at all
levels.

In conclusion, we wish to convey our gratitude
to the Head and staff of UNMIK and to welcome and
praise their efforts.

