Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I welcome the participation in our debate
of the ministers present with us today and the
Secretary-General.

At a time when the international community is
striving to reach agreement on the best way to address
the political challenges and the various manifestations
of armed violence to which Somalia has been subject
since 1991, the emergence of the criminal enterprise of
maritime piracy has further complicated the situation.
That is why we must all work together to eliminate that
new scourge as soon as possible. My delegation
therefore thanks the United States and Croatian
delegations for their initiative to call this meeting on
piracy in Somalia.

During the first half of 2008, the International
Maritime Organization had already reported an almost
70 per cent increase over all of last year in acts of
piracy along the Somali coast. The scope of the piracy
and armed robbery at sea and its increasingly
sophisticated methods require the international
community to act. Having supported resolutions 1816
(2008), 1838 (2008) and 1846 (2008), my delegation
voted in favour of resolution 1851 (2008) today.

However, while recalling that the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea must remain the
legal framework for combating piracy in general, we
sincerely believe that the increase in the number of
attacks is primarily the result of the ongoing
deterioration of the overall situation in Somalia. Thus,
no effort to combat piracy can succeed unless it
addresses the tragedy of Somalia as a whole. Aware of
that truth, the African Union, having closely followed
the situation in Somalia, has launched numerous
initiatives to support Somali efforts to move towards
peace and reconciliation and to mobilize the
international community.

Thus was established the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), giving effect to Africa's
resolve to assume its responsibilities to help settle the
problem of Somalia. Since its establishment, AMISOM
has worked tirelessly in extremely difficult
circumstances to discharge its mandate. My delegation
takes this opportunity once again to congratulate and
thank Uganda and Burundi for their invaluable
contributions to AMISOM. and all States and
organizations that have supported it.

Unfortunately, despite its unwavering
commitment and the loss of several soldiers, the lack
of human and logistical resources have severely limited
AMISOM. If the prevailing situation persists, there is a
real and serious danger that the Mission could be
forced to withdraw from the country, as certain sorry
indications to that effect have suggested for some time.
While no one can predict all of the consequences of
such a development, we can be certain that they would
be deeply tragic for Somalia, the region as a whole and
the entire international community. A withdrawal by
AMISOM. would certainly lead to the further
deterioration of the security and humanitarian situation
and leave the field free to the forces of chaos. That
would sound the death knell for the current political
process and ring in a new state of lawlessness in
Somalia.

Thus, we need to save AMISOM. by strengthening
it, but also work towards the subsequent deployment of
a peacekeeping force in Somalia, as the United States
delegation suggested.

AMISOM. is an invaluable tool, the pillar upon
which the United Nations can build a future
international presence in Somalia. But in order to do
so, it must enjoy the financial and logistical support
that it needs, so that it can first remain on the ground
and then discharge its mandate and effectively support
the implementation of the Djibouti Agreement. Burkina
Faso reiterates the need for a positive response to the
request of the African Union to strengthen AMISOM.
We would like to recall that in its resolutions 1772
(2007) and 1814 (2008) and in its presidential
statement of 19 December 2007 (S/PRST/2007/49), the
Security Council called on the Secretary-General to
consult with the African Union with regard to
additional support and to continue to develop the
existing plans for the possible deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping mission that would take over
from AMISOM.

In that regard, we urge the Security Council to
fully shoulder its responsibility to help Somalia, a
Member State of the United Nations that has been
suffering from a devastating civil war for over 10
years. No one today can reasonably question the
difficulties in security and political terms, but that is
precisely what justifies a resolute international
commitment.

We owe it to the Somali people, hostage to the
situation and primary victims of the war. Since the
signing of the Djibouti Agreement on 19 August 2008,
and as stressed in the report of the Secretary-General
of 17 November 2008 (S/2008/709), despite the ups
and downs inherent in the coexistence of parties of
often conflicting views, there is no doubt that the
Somalis themselves are now committed to emerging
from the crisis.

In conclusion, Burkina Faso reiterates its strong
condemnation of the criminal activities of the pirates
off the coast of Somalia and supports the general
mobilization of the international community to find the
most appropriate solution.

Solving the crisis in Somalia is a test for the
United Nations in general and for the Security Council
in particular. We very much hope that the same
political will that inspires us today with regard to
suppressing maritime piracy may support our action in
resolving the whole Somali issue.

