Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his very informative
presentation, andI especially want to welcome President
Vucic' and President Thaci to our meeting.

This meeting comes in the wake of recent decisions
by Kosovo's Parliament on the evolution of the Kosovo
Security Force over the next 10 years. In the light of the
issues that Mr. Lacroix has just outlined for us, France
has taken note of those decisions but, as the Secretary-
General has done, wishes to express its concern about
the possibility that the situation could deteriorate.
We deplore the fact that since the beginning of the
year, and particularly in the past few weeks, several
incidents and unilateral decisions have affected the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. I am referring
specifically to the Kosovo Government's decision to
impose a 100 per cent tax on products from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which, like the European
Union, we call on the Kosovo authorities to rescind.
More generally, and like the Secretary-General, we ask
both sides to exercise the greatest possible restraint and
urge them to do all they can to resolve their disputes
through dialogue in order to limit the risk of escalation.

Two principles must guide our views on this
subject - respect for Kosovo's sovereignty, which is
the basis for the decision to initiate the transition of
the Kosovo Security Force, and strict respect for the
remit of the Kosovo Force (KFOR), as established by
resolution 1244 (1999). While it seems legitimate to us
that Kosovo, which we recognize as a State, should be
able to acquire an armed force, this is not a good time
to enact such laws, because it is likely to damage the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina at a moment
when it is more necessary than ever. We also deplore
the fact that the laws were not enacted in concert
with NATO and did not go through the constitutional
process. Finally, we hope that the Kosovo Security
Force's deployment to the north of the country follows
the current arrangements, which stipulate that such
deployment can take place only with the prior agreement
of KFOR.

The implications for the stability of the region of a
comprehensive and definitive settlement of the dispute
between Serbia and Kosovo are huge. The goal of
advancing towards a comprehensive and legally binding
agreement normalizing their relations, endorsed by
both sides at the highest level, must remain an absolute
priority. It is therefore crucial to sustain and promote
efforts to that end and ensure a sustainable environment
that fosters progress in that direction. In that regard, we
encourage the leaders of both countries to resume the
demanding path of dialogue as soon as possible and to
demonstrate the essential spirit of responsibility and
political will. Each party must refrain from any action,
statement or measure likely to exacerbate tensions and
undermine the spirit of normalization.

Beyond the urgent need for regional stabilization and
reconciliation for current generations, everyone must
look decisively to the future with a view to overcoming
the difficulties of today. High Representative Federica
Mogherini, whose mediation efforts France supports,
reminded both parties of that on 8 November. Our
authorities at the highest level fully support the efforts
to make progress in the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. Only by fully normalizing their relations will
they be able to realize their European prospects, and
that is the shared compass that should guide and unite
them. That is where their future lies, and it is a shared
future.

