At the outset, I would like to congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and express my appreciation for its convening of today's open debate on the very important topic of linkages between terrorism and transnational organized crime. International terrorism and transnational organized crime continue to pose major threats to international peace and security. Moreover, they undermine regional and international efforts to ensure stability, economic and social development and fundamental human rights. We believe that efforts should be focused eliminating the military infrastructure of international terrorism, thereby depriving terrorists of political, military and, most important, financial support. Acknowledging the seriousness of those threats, the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan has been taking decisive and comprehensive measures aimed at preventing and combating these phenomena. Among such measures are the approval of the National Concept on Countering Money-laundering, the Financing of Terrorism and Weapons of Mass Destruction for the period 2018 to 2025. Following the Financial Action Task Force guidance on national risk assessments of money laundering and terrorist financing, Tajikistan implemented a similar assessment at the national level. According to our assessment, it was revealed that the funds generated through illegal activities have become more sophisticated and the volume of terrorist financing has increased. In addition to monetary funds, advanced technologies are being employed in the financing of terrorism. Moreover, our assessment indicates that drug-related crimes have become a significant source of illicit money that can considerably contribute to the financing of terrorism. Drug trafficking, as one of the channels of financing terrorism and violence, is yet another challenge causing deep concern in the region and across the world. Combating illicit drug trafficking requires concerted and coordinated actions at the regional and international levels. There is still a need for extensive international cooperation to counter narcotics. To address these challenges, last year the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan, in cooperation with the United Nations, the European Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, hosted a High-Level Conference on International and Regional Cooperation on Countering Terrorism and its Financing through Illicit Drug-Trafficking and Organized Crime. Following the results of the Conference, the Dushanbe Declaration was adopted, in which the participants reiterated their intention to deepen the understanding of the links and synergies between efforts to counter terrorist financing and those to counter illicit drug-trafficking and organized crime, such as illicit trade in natural resources, cultural artefacts and weapons, as well as trafficking in human beings. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Tajikistan stands ready for open and constructive dialogue in this area. Once again, Mr. President, please accept my sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency in the Security Council. I wish you and your team every success in fulfilling your noble commitments.
