Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank High Commissioner Guterres and
Assistant Secretary-General Kang for their briefings
and for the remarkable work that both the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
are doing to alleviate the suffering ofthe Syrian people.
I welcome the fact that we are holding today's meeting
in an open format. It is vital that our horror at the scale of
the humanitarian crisis in Syria and its neighbours, and
our condemnation of Al-Assad and his brutal regime,
be heard loudly and clearly outside this Chamber.

Next month will see the start of the fifth year of the
conflict in Syria. More than 220,000 people are dead
and 12.2 million reliant on humanitarian assistance.
Almost half of the Syrian population is displaced;
7.6 million people have fled their homes within Syria
and 3.8 million have taken refuge in neighbouring
countries, causing massive security, economic and social
challenges for all of Syria's neighbours, particularly
Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey. Those statistics have been
heard many times in the Council, but we have failed to
take the action necessary to put an end to this terrible
conflict. Al-Assad's regime bears direct responsibility
for the situation.

Some Member States claim that terrorism lies at the
heart of the conflict, but the Chair of the Independent
International Commission ofInquiry on Syria was quite
clear on that point last week when he said that terrorism
was not the cause ofthe conflict but a consequence ofit.
Al-Assad's regime continues to target civilians and use
barrel bombs and chemical weapons indiscriminately.
He continues to abuse those held in detention, recruit
child soldiers, deny civilians access to essential medical
supplies and collectively punish them through the denial
of essential services such as water and electricity. That
has created an environment that has spawned terrorist
organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). Al-Assad's actions, and others reported
by the Commission of Inquiry, represent clear violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights,
and amount to crimes against humanity.

As Assistant Secretary-General Kang has reminded
us, we must end the shameful culture of impunity
in Syria, and hold the perpetrators of those crimes
to account. Nor should we ignore the heinous acts
perpetrated by ISIL and other extremist groups, which
include sexual violence, kidnappings and torture. It is
manifestly obvious that the situation in Syria should be
referred to the International Criminal Court.

A negotiated political transition based on the 2012
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) is the only
sustainable way to end the horror. We welcome the
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria to
establish a freeze in aerial and heavy artillery attacks
in Aleppo, which may be a first step to a broader
political process. We encourage Mr. De Mistura to
work with both the regime and the moderate opposition
in the development of that proposal. Experience shows,
however, that we should not take the regime's promises
at face value. In particular, we must do all we can to
avoid a tragedy such as that which took place in Homs.

The Syrian regime must allow greater humanitarian
access to besieged areas. More than 200,000 people
now live their lives under siege, and 80 per cent of
those people are besieged by regime forces. Another
4.8 million people remain in dangerous and hard-to-
reach areas. Last year, the United Nations submitted
twice as many requests for cross-line aid convoys than
in 2013, and yet reached less than half as many people.
A year after the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), that
is wholly unacceptable. We must preserve the few gains
we have made with regard to cross-border access and be
resolute in applying pressure on the Al-Assad regime
to grant access to other areas. I call on all Council and
non-Council members to join our efforts in that regard.

We have been able to make a difference where we
do have access. It has been over a year since the last
reported polio case, and international assistance has
averted starvation and mass malnutrition. However,
funding is not keeping up with the needs on the ground.
The needs of the Syrian people are growing at more
than six times the rate of funding. The 2015 United
Nations appeals for Syria and the region now stand at
$8.4 billion, 40 per cent higher than last year. Kuwait
has shown great leadership in agreeing to host a third
international pledging conference for the Syrian crisis
next month. We must match its leadership by pledging
the support needed to meet the growing crisis. Hundreds
of thousands of lives are at stake.

The United Kingdom is determined to play its role.
During her recent visit to Jordan, the Secretary of State
for International Development announced a further
$154 million of funding, bringing the United Kingdom's

assistance for Syria's humanitarian reliefto $1.2 billion.
That includes $145 million to provide education,
protection and trauma care for children affected by
the crisis, and to help prevent a lost generation of
Syrians. I call on all Members of the United Nations to
do their part and pledge further funding at the Kuwait
conference.

Let me conclude by again thanking the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Guterres,
and Assistant-Secretary General Kang for their
briefings. Their input and the input from experts on
the ground are very useful for Council members. We
should be open to other such briefings, including from
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Syrian activists, in future months.

