Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me to begin by offering heartfelt congratulations,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We have confidence in your
wisdom and in your ability to lead the deliberations of the
Council to positive and just results. We would also like
to express our appreciation to your predecessor,
Ambassador Dejammet, the Permanent Representative of
France, for the wisdom with which he conducted the
deliberations of the Council last month.

Sudan's firm condemnation of terrorism has been
expressed in all international forums, including in the
United Nations and in the Security Council. Our
condemnation stems from our firm principle of refraining
from violence and following a path of peace and security.

I should like to reiterate my country's position for
all who would like to open their hearts, to understand and
to listen. The Sudanese Government and people forcefully
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of the reasons or motivations of those
responsible.

Sudan has not, and will not, allow its territory to be
used for any act of terror or to be used as a shelter for
terrorists or by those who have eluded justice. Sudan, like
many other States, suffers day after day with those
innocent civilians who lose their lives or who are harmed
as a result of terrorist acts perpetrated in many parts of
the world. Killing women and children, terrorizing
peaceful citizens, destroying property and taking innocent
civilians hostage cannot be accepted under any divine
law; nor can they be accepted by any human being who
believes in justice and peace.

My delegation reiterates its firm positions of
principle, which have been repeated time and again and
have not been heeded. We hope that this time the Council
will listen and understand the seriousness and sincerity of
our position.

 

Sudan renews its strong condemnation of the tragic
terrorist attempt on the life of the Egyptian President Hosni
Mubarak and firmly believes that those who participated in
this terrorist crime must be brought to justice and punished.
Sudan expressed its full readiness to cooperate with all
parties to bring the suspects to justice, and took tangible
steps in this respect even before the subject was brought
before the Central Organ of the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), which discussed the
question before it was brought to the Security Council.

Sudan sent a special presidential envoy to Ethiopia to
communicate the results arrived at by the commission of
inquiry established by the President of the Republic on the
basis of the information provided by Ethiopia about the
Egyptian suspects a month after the incident took place. But
I would like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the fact that at that time Sudan gave Ethiopia the
landing card received by one of the suspects upon landing
at Khartoum airport immediately after the incident. Our
dealings with Ethiopia were completely open. We wanted
to cooperate in the search for and apprehension of the
suspects. It is strange that that very same card was
presented by our neighbour, Ethiopia, as proof of Sudan's
involvement.

From the very beginning, Sudan approached the issue
with good intentions and in a spirit of cooperation and
confidence in our integrity and innocence.

I speak in full knowledge of the arrangements that
were undertaken. The relevant authorities investigated this
suspect who had entered Sudan, and they failed to find any
trace of him there. We tried to trace him and find him,
even before the adoption of resolution 1044 (1996), and we
continue to do so. It has been proved beyond any doubt that
the period that elapsed between his entry into Sudan and
our receipt of the information from Ethiopia, when we
started the search, provided him with the opportunity to flee
the country.

According to the information provided by Ethiopia, he
carries passports from many States, including Ethiopia, the
country making the complaint, and Egypt, of which he is a
national. It is well known that Sudan is a vast country with
many points on its borders that cannot be controlled. But
here I would like to mention in particular the fact that we
continue to carry out our investigations into the route he
took when he fled. Sudan is fully committed to providing
any information it can in that respect.

This is the stage we have reached in trying to trace
one of the suspects whom Sudan was asked to extradite
under resolutions 1044 (1996) and 1054 (1996). All
members of the Council are aware of the press reports
published about the other suspect, Mustafa Hamza. They
also know about his interviews with reporters from his
hiding place, which was outside the control of the
Government of Afghanistan. Sudan drew the Council's
attention to this fact before the adoption of resolution
1054 (1996). Sudan tried at the time to verify the
information included in these reports by requesting the
Council to establish an investigative committee to verify
the information provided. When Sudan did not receive a
positive response to the request, it tried unilaterally to
verify the information and then intensified its contacts
with the Afghan Government. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan confirmed the presence of the
suspect inside Afghanistan, in an area outside the control
of the Afghan Government.

We concur with the members of the Council who
said that press reports cannot be considered hard evidence
of the presence of the suspect in Afghan territory.
However, the letter from the Afghan Foreign Minister
confirming the press reports is before the Council today
in document S/1996/513. Furthermore, many members of
the Council have already verified the information and
know that the suspects are not in Sudan.

What is asked of Sudan now? How can you give
what you do not have? To request Sudan to extradite
suspects it does not have is like asking it to try to square
the circle, and is unjustified - unless the objective is to
find an excuse to impose unjust sanctions.

Security Council resolutions 1044 (1996) and 1054
(1996) refer to three suspects. The issue of the third
suspect still raises many questions. What information
about him is available in Sudan, Ethiopia or Egypt? His
name is Izat or Yasim. There is no photograph of him.
However, it is known that he is an Egyptian national, 34
years old, is married and lives in the Amarat quarter of
Khartoum. That is the information that is available - it
is the only information about him that Ethiopia has
provided.

At the beginning, Sudan tried to verify the
information provided about the character of the suspect,
and the investigative commission tried to search the
quarter where Ethiopia claimed he lived. However, we
could find no trace of him and concluded that this person
does not exist, but is merely a fictitious character,

 

unknown to us or to any of the other parties concerned with
the matter.

I would like to refer to a comment that attracted our
attention in a letter of 25 July 1995 from the President of
Ethiopia, delivered to Sudan. This document claimed to
include all the information about the suspects. Its annex 2
says of this fictitious suspect:
(spoke in English)

"His full identity can be obtained from Mustafa
Hamza and from Husayn Ahmed Shair'Ali".

(spoke in Arabic)

This sentence persuaded me to re-examine the press
interview with Mustafa Hamza, and compare it with the
comments in the Ethiopian letter. I found out that he stated
that two, not three, people had participated in the
assassination attempt in Addis Ababa and were able to
leave the country. That confirmed our belief that this
suspect did not exist. Some might say that we cannot
depend on press releases by the suspect; that may be true.
What is clear is that the information presented about the so-
called third suspect is insufficient and unprofessional. No
security or police force, regardless of how qualified, could
trace a suspect on the basis of that information. Is Sudan
required to chase mirages? That is my question.

Despite my comments about the suspects, and the fact
that we made sure that they were not present in Sudan, we
seriously and earnestly tried to trace them and obtain any
additional information about them. In particular, we fully
understand our responsibility towards the Sudanese people,
who have been subjected to sanctions because of the
extremely difficult demand made of Sudan to extradite the
suspects for prosecution. Sudan spared no effort, employing
all its technical and professional capability. It requested the
assistance of Interpol in trying to locate the suspects and
the participation of a security team from Ethiopia and
Egypt in searching for the suspects. We got no answer. I
admit that we have so far failed to find the suspects. This
confirms our belief that they are not in Sudan.

Sudan shares the Council's View about the need to
punish those who attempted to assassinate the Egyptian
President. Sudan is committed to extraditing them if they
are in its territory. It is also committed to cooperating with
the Member States concerned, the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations in this respect. We hope that
this cooperative spirit will be reciprocated.

Sudan is also committed to turning over all available
information, now and in the future, stemming from the
ongoing investigations. However, Sudan cannot accept
responsibility for the disappearance of the suspects or the
failure to find them, especially since we are certain they
are not in Sudan. Those who claim they are in Sudan
must provide us with the information that will lead us to
them.

The rationale for holding Sudan responsible for the
presence of those people on its territory during a certain
time period because they used Sudan as a transit point, or
even because they resided in Sudan, can also be used to
make each State through which they have passed or in
which they have resided during different periods
responsible at those times. In this sense, Ethiopia, where
the crime took place and where the suspects remained for
a considerable period of time, entering and leaving
Ethiopia over a two-year period, as mentioned in the
Ethiopian document, can be considered directly
responsible. Why did Ethiopia not discover them at the
time of their entries and departures? It is unacceptable to
fail to provide adequate information that would help us
find the suspects. Nor is it acceptable to use the pretext
of protecting classified and delicate sources, because these
sources are usually made available precisely at the critical
moment when they are needed, and not afterwards. I
really do not believe that punishing and depriving people
should be so easy or that protecting sources and witnesses
should be more important than human lives.

I do not wish to take up much of your time.
However, the entire people of Sudan is being subjected to
sanctions, and the embargo is a result of unfounded
accusations from secret sources that cannot be revealed.

Here I would like to raise some questions. Why
were those suspects brought to justice in secrecy? Why
were Egyptian lawyers not permitted to see them? Why
was Mr. Garekhan not able to meet them? Why were the
Ambassadors of the permanent members of the Security
Council not able to meet them? Why did the court
proceedings stop? It is ridiculous. It is astounding that
some parties would depend on information provided in a
press conference with those suspects, who are protected
by law. However, they could not be brought to a court
where they could say what they wanted to say.

Security Council resolutions 1044 (1996) and 1054
(1996) call on Sudan to desist from supporting terrorism
and terrorists and from providing them with shelter. Thus
was a grave accusation levelled against Sudan and used

 

as a pretext to punish it, despite the fact that no one has
given any firm evidence of actual occurrences. However,
Sudan took the matter seriously and with great interest and
it discussed the pretext that prompted this accusation. Sudan
is a country known throughout history for having avoided
any path that might lead to violence or terror and a country
that has always advocated peace and love.

The Sudanese Government seriously sought to enter
into contacts with the countries that levelled these
accusations because we in Sudan understand the reasons
that led some States to do so. We took immediate actions
after our dialogue and contacts and undertook specific
security measures, in accordance with their advice. We
expelled from Sudan all foreigners that aroused these
States' concerns, especially those called the Arab Afghans,
whether or not they had engaged in hostile activities.

Some might ask why these people are in Sudan, and
this is a legitimate question. Here I would like to clarify a
very important fact. The presence of many Arabs and
Africans in Sudan is a result of the policy adopted by the
Sudanese Government six years ago. We do not require an
entry visa for some Arabs and some nationals of African
States. We in Sudan would like to encourage interaction
with our Arab and African brothers and to encourage
investment in our country. Such a policy is followed by
many States, including States of the European Union. This
policy was not invented by Sudan. It is a well-known
practice in the international community. As a result of this
policy, many nationals of Arab and African States have
entered Sudan, and with an increase in their numbers and
in the absence of any record of their presence, because they
have never applied for entry Visas, some States started
expressing concern with regard to some individuals or
groups.

The first reaction by the Government of Sudan,
following the attempt on the life of the Egyptian President
and the accusations levelled by certain Egyptians residing
in Sudan, was to reintroduce the visa system. We were then
able to create a record of all foreigners residing in Sudan.

Pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1044 (1996)
and 1054 (1996), Sudan requested all foreigners to leave
the country. Here I would like to clarify a very important
point. Sudan did not receive accusations from any State
against any of those expelled from Sudan. None of those
expelled is anyone who should be brought to justice in this
or any other country. All foreigners were expelled as a
result of a decision taken by Sudan because we wish to be
outside the circle of suspicion and to comply with the
Security Council resolutions. We also wish to spare our
people any suffering and to be fully dedicated to our
economic development, in cooperation with friendly and
brotherly countries.

Holding Sudan solely responsible for all terrorist acts
that occur in neighbouring countries, in our region and in
the entire world will not solve the problem of
international terrorism. The solution to this disaster facing
humanity today lies in trying to tackle the real causes of
the problem and then in addressing them, one after the
other. Making unfounded accusations against States -
simply condemning them under the pretext of fighting
terrorism - is not a solution to the problem.

I would like to mention that Sudan shares with the
Security Council members and the international
community the desire to fight terrorism and wishes to
express its sincere willingness to cooperate with any State
to reach this objective. The Victims of terrorism are our
brothers, our fathers, our mothers and our children.

I want to reiterate that the steps taken by Sudan
were not a diversionary tactic, as some sought to make
them appear. They were genuine measures that yielded
tangible, well known results. They have become the
policy of the Sudanese Government, and these security
measures can be verified, because Sudan is open to
anyone who wishes to investigate and confirm the
situation.

In its two earlier resolutions, the Security Council
called upon Sudan to improve its relations with its
neighbours. I shall not discuss the details of those
resolutions or the circumstances of their adoption; I shall
merely say that Sudan has 10 neighbour States, and has
extremely good, friendly relations with six of them, to
which we are committed through various agreements and
joint ministerial committees that meet regularly.

What are the facts about our relations with the other
four States? Let us begin with Ethiopia, the country which
submitted the original complaint. Relations between
Sudan and Ethiopia had been very good, and were
gradually developing, apart from a few border problems
that were resolved through understandings reached
between the parties. Relations continued to be friendly
even after the tragic attempt on the life of the President
of Egypt. Owing to its gravity, that incident caused a
misunderstanding between the two countries, which will
come to an end as soon as the problem is resolved. That
is why Sudan has been eager to continue its contacts with

 

Ethiopia to try to settle the problem and move forward. Our
efforts culminated in a meeting between the Presidents of
Ethiopia and of Sudan at the African summit held at
Yaounde, at which they discussed matters of interest to
both countries. They both reaffirmed their intention to
cooperate to prevent relations from deteriorating. We see
this as a first step, and want to reiterate our determination
to continue on this path. We are confident that our
neighbour Ethiopia shares that determination.

Our second neighbour is Uganda, with regard to which
we inevitably harbour some resentment. It is very well
known that Uganda has supported the insurgency movement
in southern Sudan. From the start of that movement in
1984, it has provided financial and moral support to the
insurgents, enabling them to attack Sudan from Ugandan
territory. That support has continued since the current
Government came to power. Sudan has constantly sought
a rapprochement between our two countries. Even when our
efforts seemed to yield success, this was only temporary,
for Uganda would soon return to its customary practices.
Sudan has tried to improve its relations with Uganda, and
has undertaken initiatives with respect to third-State
mediation: Malawi and, earlier, Libya and Austria have
engaged in mediation efforts. But whenever a date was set
for a meeting between officials of our two countries,
Uganda would fail to appear and make excuses to avoid the
meeting. Ugandan troops have tried to support the
insurgency by entering Sudanese territory, but these
Ugandan attempts have been doomed to failure. Sudan has
always hoped that a solution to the situation could be found
on a bilateral basis, and that Uganda would respond to one
of the mediation efforts. We have hoped too that the
situation could be resolved in an African context. That is
why we have never brought the Ugandan aggression before
the Security Council and have not spoken of the Ugandan
invasion.

But we now despair of a response by Uganda,
especially since Uganda has accused Sudan of supporting
Christian fundamentalists within its southern border, even
though it knows perfectly well that the border area is not
under Government control, but is controlled by the
insurgents supported by Uganda itself.

I think that members of the Council are well aware of
the many problems between Uganda and all its other
neighbours without exception. Some of these have come
before the Security Council. Hence, I think that members
know which party is attempting to destabilize the region.

Sudan continues to try to pursue the mediation
efforts to which I referred earlier. I thank the many States
that have undertaken endeavours in that connection, and
today I urge them to continue to try to convince Uganda
to accept negotiations and consultations to settle all
disputes between our two countries. I reiterate that Sudan
is serious, and is ready to sit down at the negotiating table
with its neighbour to the South, Uganda, with a View to
normalizing relations.

I turn next to Eritrea. Eritrea is a poison dagger; it
is truly a wound festering on our eastern borders; it poses
dangers that threaten to spread throughout the Horn of
Africa.

Eritrea is the only State in the world whose
President declares, in public and before the international
mass media, that it will provide armed assistance to any
opposition groups aiming to topple the legitimate
Government of Sudan. Speaking about this support, he
said to the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)

(spoke in English)
"I would say the sky is the limit."
(spoke in Arabic)

Yes, that is what the Eritrean President himself said to the
BBC. I leave it to you, Mr. President, and to the other
members of this Council, to assess this statement by the
Eritrean President.

In addition, there were intrusions into Sudanese
territory and the laying of mines inside residential areas,
which killed many Sudanese citizens. This prompted
Sudan to draw the attention of the Council to such
practices. Here we can refer to Security Council
documents S/l995/569, S/1995/522, S/1994/133 and
S/l994/7l.

While some try to blame the Sudanese side, let us
look at Eritrean relations with its neighbours. Those
relations were the subject of daily editorials in the
international press. Even yesterday there were reports of
attacks and military hostilities, and the Council and
international courts were made aware of it. The efforts
made by some members of the Council for Eritrea to
improve its relations and settle its disputes with some of
its neighbours are known to everyone.

 

I would simply ask if Eritrea's conduct and its
aggressive attitude towards the Sudanese people and its
Government - its legitimately elected Government - are
Sudan's responsibility. Sudan and the Sudanese people
have hosted and shared with the Eritrean people for years,
due to the frivolous policies of the Eritrean
Government; - will they now be punished? Will they have
to suffer the harsh and repeated Eritrean acts of aggression,
and then have to bear the blame?

The members of the Council will remember what we
said in document S/l996/358 about the Eritrean act of
military aggression on Sudanese territory and the opening
of the Sudanese embassy in Asmara to the armed Sudanese
opposition in a step that had no precedent in international
law or in civilized behaviour. Nevertheless, I would like to
recall that Sudan did not initiate hostilities against Eritrea.
It stands ready to eliminate the tension between the two
countries if Eritrea shows its good intentions towards
Sudan, and if it desists forthwith from providing outlaws
with armed support, from destabilizing Sudan and from
terrorizing Sudanese citizens in the eastern part of our
country.

Let us turn once more to a country that is our sister
and our neighbour, Egypt. We would like to state, as we
have done in the past, that the time-honoured relationships
between our two peoples and our two countries are very
special. This is a relationship that goes far back in history.
It is as old as the Giza pyramids near Cairo and the
Birawia pyramids in the northern part of Sudan. It is as old
as the Nile valley, through which flows our life-giving
blood. It is very difficult for people outside Egypt or Sudan
to understand the depth and the complexity of this
relationship that has always been limited - at its best and
at its worst - to the two parties.

Perhaps it was destiny that led us today to this
landmark moment in the relationship between our two
countries, a moment when the very special nature of our
relationship is brought before international and even
regional forums. This fills us with bitterness. However, we
want to comply with the Security Council's resolutions,
which obligate us to discuss our relationship with our
sisterly neighbour through the Security Council.

Major efforts were made between the officials of our
two countries; they were crowned with success at the
summit meeting between President Hosni Mubarak and
President Omer Hassan Ahmed Al-Bashir in Cairo. No
observer could describe the meeting as anything but a
success. Proof of this success is that it was followed by a
series of meetings between the two countries' Foreign
Ministers, their Ministers of the Interior and their
Ministers of Information. It was agreed to establish
security committees to solve the security problems
between the two countries.

The first meeting of these committees was held on
3 July 1996 in Khartoum. It was a general preliminary
meeting devoted to discussing the problems of the two
parties with a View to reconvening within a week. Our
security delegation in Sudan has been ready for the
convening of the second meeting since 10 July 1996. We
are still attempting to contact the Egyptian leadership
regarding the holding of this meeting.

I would like here to speak with the transparency
required in this Council. We heard our Egyptian brothers
accuse us of procrastination and a lack of seriousness. I
would like to ask how a short preliminary meeting
intended to discuss a general framework and procedural
matters and to decide upon the details to be discussed can
be said to lack seriousness or be an occasion for
precrastination? How could our relations have deteriorated
to a point where such a judgement could be made?
I would not like to speculate that the real intention
was simply to waste precious time so that the matter
would be brought to the attention of this Council in order
that more pressure would be brought to bear on Sudan.

I would like to confirm here that in our View these
steps represented a very good and encouraging beginning,
especially if we take into consideration the fact that these
meetings were considered the first of their kind between
the leaders of the two countries in six years.

That is why it may not be easy to hasten the results
and to expect an immediate resolution to all pending
questions between the two countries. Arriving at a
solution to such questions with sisterly Egypt is one of
the first strategic priorities of the Sudanese Government.
Sudan is very serious in its approach. Sudan is fully
committed to the framework laid down by the Presidents
of our two countries to bring about a rapprochement and
to solve all pending problems between us. The Sudanese
Government has genuine and honest intentions that it
would like to translate into tangible joint endeavours in
order to improve our relationship.

Ultimately, Sudan would have hoped that sisterly
Egypt would not be a force behind attempts to impose
sanctions on the Sudanese people, a people that has

 

always had sincere concern for the problems and worries of
the Egyptian people. Sudan has always been a natural
extension of Egypt, as Egypt has been of Sudan. Allow me
to quote a line of Arabic poetry that describes the situation
between us and the Egyptian people: the injustice of
kinsmen is more painful than the blow of a sword.

These are the efforts that we in Sudan made, in all
honesty, in an effort to comply with the Security Council
resolutions. Despite the many concerns and objections we
voiced at the time, Sudan has been fully committed from
day one to the implementation of all the resolutions.
Sudan's continued efforts are not made with regard solely
for our neighbouring countries, but for all countries of the
world, and especially for the major Powers. Our efforts
genuinely express our respect for international legitimacy
and for the basic principles of peaceful coexistence between
countries and peoples.

All we are asking of the international community in
general, and from the Security Council in particular, is
fairness and justice. We ask that the whole question be
viewed objectively in the light of the steps already taken by
Sudan. N 0 one can really deny that these steps were taken;
Sudan knows that all members of the Council, without
exception, admitted that Sudan had taken some positive
steps. What was the result? Did the Council encourage
Sudan to proceed with these steps by lifting some of the
sanctions, or at least give us the chance, to take further
positive steps? Or did it warn of further sanctions which, if
applied, would have adverse humanitarian and economic
effects, not only on Sudan, but on the Horn of Africa
region in general?

The draft resolution before the Council today follows
the path of the imposition of sanctions. Members of the
Security Council and of the United Nations in general are
well aware of the destructive results of these sanctions and
of their repercussions on people. The View of the
international community on the imposition of sanctions was
reflected in the consensus arrived at by the Subgroup on
sanctions within the framework of the Open-ended Working
Group on An Agenda for Peace, which confirmed, among
other things, the need to avoid the adverse long- and short-
term effects inflicted upon people as a result of sanctions.
Sudan holds the Security Council and its members
responsible in the eyes of history for the draft resolution
they are about to adopt. Logic would indicate that the
Sudan's cooperation and serious attempts to comply with
the Council resolutions should be met with encouragement
by the Council, not by a warning that further sanctions will
be imposed on a suppressed and weak people. The measure
that the Council intends to take today, although some
believe it was simply a means to delay discussion of the
subject with a view to granting Sudan more time, is an
attempt to prejudge Sudan. The victims will be the
peaceful Sudanese people and the region as a whole.

Allow me to pose a legitimate question. Is the
international community keen on punishing people by
imposing sanctions, or is it using this means to maintain
international peace and security and to solve problems?
We are faced with a situation in which positive steps are
being taken: things are moving forward, not backward.
Imposing sanctions in this case reaffirms that the intention
is to punish people. Here, I would like to say that the way
in which the Council has discussed this subject will be a
very bad example for other States seeking justice from the
international community, particularly since all Sudan
wanted was justice and nothing more. For many States,
what Sudan has come to face in the Security Council is
simply injustice in its worst form.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
principles that Sudan has set forth are truth, justice,
consultation and peace. That is why the accusations
levelled against Sudan run counter, in principle, to the
premises on which we base our policies and practices.
Sudan will for ever remain true to these principles, in
conformity with our heritage and our history as a Member
State that effectively participates in the maintenance of
international peace and security. As such, Sudan will
spare no effort and leave no stone unturned to consecrate
these principles and to continue to comply with all the
resolutions of the Security Council, because we are fully
committed to international legitimacy.

