Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay welcomed the presence of the United Kingdom
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Boris Johnson, in presiding
over our work, and we are grateful to him for organizing

today's briefing on the situation in Somalia. As I
said yesterday, my Government once again wishes to
express its solidarity in connection with the shocking
attack that occurred yesterday in the city of London.

I welcome the presence through video-
teleconferencing of His Excellency President Farmajo
of the Federal Republic of Somalia, and would also like
to thank Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), and the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose'
Madeira, for their briefings.

Uruguay welcomed the establishment of the
new Federal Government of Somalia on 8 February
following the election of its new President. At the start
of this new phase, it is important to decide how the
Security Council and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia can best support Somalia on issues
relating to State-building, including the revision of the
Constitution and the completion of the establishment
of the Federal State. That is why Uruguay supported
the extension of the UNSOM. mandate this morning, in
order to give the Council sufficient time to develop an
effective mandate that benefits the people of Somalia.

This is a decisive and historic moment on the path
towards the consolidation of a democratic, inclusive,
stable State with full powers. Somalia has embarked
upon preparations for general elections in 2020 based
on the principle of one person, one vote. Uruguay
acknowledges the efforts made to achieve the 30 per
cent threshold of parliamentary seats set aside for
women, even though that goal was not reached in
this particular instance. However, the result of the
elections did show the transformation in the political
representation and participation of women in Somalia
and, given that important precedent, efforts should be
stepped up to achieve that goal in 2020.

Uruguay strongly condemns the continuing threat
posed by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, which is the
main threat to peace and security in Somalia. Security-
sector reform, and in particular the rapid and effective
development of the Somali National Army, is vital if
the Government security forces, including police, are
to be able to assume a greater responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security and the protection
of Somali citizens.

For Uruguay, it is urgent that the international
community respond to the worsening humanitarian
crisis and famine in Somalia. Unless those problems
are addressed, there may be grave consequences that
could undermine the recent political achievements.
Uruguay would especially like to underscore the need
to protect civilian populations, particularly children,
women and the elderly, and we encourage the Federal
Government of Somalia to broker agreements and
achieve stability, especially in areas where access to
supplies and humanitarian assistance is essential.

Uruguay reiterates that UNSOM. and the international
community should work in an increasingly close and
coordinated manner with regional administrations and
the Federal Government to prioritize capacity-building
and institution-building at the regional level, strengthen
regional administrations and gradually create the basic
conditions needed for governance, security and the
provision of basic services for local populations.

Uruguay is very concerned about the recorded
increase in human rights violations. Without prejudice to
the important commitments that the Somali authorities
have made in recent years regarding the protection of
children, the detention of children for alleged links
to Al-Shabaab remains a matter of concern. Uruguay
therefore urges the Government of Somalia to treat
children as victims first and foremost, and to ensure
that the Government's guiding principles should be the
best interests of the child and international standards
of protection.

