Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me start by thanking
Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel, for his briefing. I would
also like to thank his team for its outstanding work.
Allow me to also thank Ambassador Ion Jinga,
Permanent Representative of Romania and Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Hafez Ghanem,
Vice-President of the World Bank for Africa, and
Mr. Remy Rioux, Chief Executive Officer of the French
Development Agency, for their valuable contributions
to today's debate.

The root causes ofconflicts in many countries ofthe
region are similar and interdependent. The challenges
they face are cross-border in nature. In that context,
cooperation among neighbouring countries and regional
organizations is crucial. Cross-border threats in the
Sahel require transnational responses. We commend the
ever-greater role of regional organizations in improving
effective cooperation among Sahel countries. We
welcome the adoption of a regional strategy and
continue to work on subregional strategies. However,
much remains to be done and the obstacles that need to
be overcome are diverse and complex. The Sahel is also
a high priority for the European Union. It has mobilized
support in the amount of €4 billion over the period from
2014 to 2018 in order to address the various challenges
faced by the region, including with regard to resilience,
access to basic social services, climate change, social
cohesion, stability and conflict prevention.

We welcome the positive developments in Cote
d'lvoire, a member of the Security Council. Thanks to
its return to peace, security and stability, it has gained
more importance in the subregion and in the community
of nations. We hope that Cote d'Ivoire will seize that
opportunity to maintain and even reinforce its active
role in the challenging process of restoring peace and
stability in the Sahel region.

We remain deeply concerned about the multifaceted
challenges in the Sahel. The spread of insecurity and
terrorism to other parts of the region, including into
eastern Burkina Faso, is particularly worrisome.
Terrorism continues to have devastating effects on lives
and livelihoods, thereby depriving entire communities
of access to basic social services, as well as to long-
term opportunities and prospects. Winning the hearts
and minds of a population is crucial in the fight
against terrorism. Addressing violent extremism and
terrorism with security measures is essential but must
be supported by a broader political and institutional
framework that can guide operations, be aligned with
the regional strategy and help to translate strategic
decisions into operations and tactical measures.

In that context, the United Nations Support Plan
for the Sahel should promote the comprehensiveness or
adequacy of regional and subregional initiatives. The
opportunity must also be seized to create a platform
of cooperation aimed at ensuring wider respect for
international law and standards, including human
rights law and international humanitarian law because,
as our leaders acknowledged in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document, peace and security, development
and human rights are the three interconnected and
mutually reinforcing pillars of the United Nations. We
must address all three pillars if we want to address
stability and peace over the long-term.

The lack of good governance, neglect by States,
underdevelopment, socioeconomic exclusion and
inequalities, exacerbated by climate change and
population growth, remain at the core of instability
in the region. It goes without saying that a military
solution alone is not enough to maintain lasting peace
and stability. In that regard, a successful outcome for
the Malian peace process remains the cornerstone of
stabilization efforts in the region. Moreover, scaling up
access to basic services andjob opportunities in Mali, as
well as in other countries in the region, is necessary for
reducing the dependence on humanitarian assistance,
as outlined in the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and its Support Plan.

In conclusion, we must strengthen the nexus
between security, development and human rights actions
to ensure long-term stability in the Sahel. Doing so
would require unity of purpose and adequate resources.
The United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
(UNISS) and its Support Plan for the Sahel provide
a comprehensive framework to strengthen good
governance, security, development and respect for
human rights in the Sahel region.

Finally, let me express our full support for the
Special Representative for West Africa and the
Special Adviser for the Sahel for their efforts aimed
at spearheading the implementation of UNISS and its
Support Plan so as to ensure continued United Nations
support for the Sahel region.

