Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We are pleased to see
you, Madam Minister, presiding over this important
meeting. We commend the initiative of the South
African presidency to organize a thematic debate on
the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union,
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
In that respect, we are pleased to note that the
cooperation and interaction between the African Union
and the United Nations has recently intensified. It has
become a crucial element in addressing many security
threats and challenges on the African continent. We
welcome this opportunity to discuss ways to strengthen
and cultivate that important partnership for the benefit
of regional and global security and stability.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made later today by the representative of Germany
on behalf of the European Union. However, I wish to
make some additional comments on this matter, about
which we feel strongly.

Slovakia, as a member of several regional and
subregional organizations and groups, has always been
a strong advocate and promoter of regional cooperation
and ownership. Any global model or strategy needs to
be implemented locally and must also reflect the
specificities of a concrete case. In that respect, close
cooperation with regional organizations becomes
instrumental and often indispensable as a result of
several factors, including the comparative advantages
of regional organizations. First, they have the ability to
review and share lessons learned relevant to particular
circumstances and to understand local and regional
specificities. Secondly, the influence and trust that they
enjoy on the ground is often much stronger than that of
global institutions. Thirdly, they can embed national
efforts in a regional context.

I would not hesitate to say that the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the area of the maintenance of international peace and
security is one of the most productive and successful
endeavours of recent years. Several conflict situations
in African countries were contained, and tensions
reduced, thanks to the African Union's involvement,
mediation and cooperation with the United Nations.

At the same time, we believe that that partnership
has not yet reached its full potential. It should be
further cultivated and developed. We fully agree that
yet more attention, expertise and resources need to be
given to assisting Africa to build its own capacities and
to improve existing efforts in the areas of peace,
security and prosperity. That investment of the
international community will pay off.

As the situation of still too many African
countries in conflict demonstrates, there is an urgent
need for expanded and improved African Union
capacities, capabilities and mechanisms to deal with
crisis situations such as those in Darfur and Somalia. In
that regard, we regret that, despite intensified joint
efforts by the African Union and the United Nations,
there is a lack of significant progress in implementing
agreements reached in Addis Ababa and Abuja last
year. We have not thus far been able to deploy an
effective peacekeeping force that would ensure
effective protection of civilians. We therefore urge
President Al-Bashir to extend Sudan's full cooperation
to the United Nations and the African Union in our
joint efforts to bring lasting peace and genuine stability
to the whole of Sudan.

Slovakia is also gravely concerned about the
current security and humanitarian situation in Somalia.
We fully support the current efforts of the African
Union, and we agree that the international community
and the United Nations must provide all the necessary
support to promote peace, stability and reconciliation
in Somalia. In that regard, we commend the countries
that are providing troops and logistical and financial
support to the AU Mission in Somalia.

The global partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, including the
African Union, should also be cultivated in the areas of
global peace and security. There are a number of areas
where regional organizations can significantly
contribute to the success of national and international
efforts. Let me mention just several areas that have
been of particular importance to Slovakia during our
membership of the Council, and where we wish to see
stronger engagement by regional and subregional
organizations.

First, we believe that regional organizations,
including the African Union, should play a larger role
in mobilizing the efforts and attention of their members
to address common regional and global security threats
and challenges - including the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons, terrorism and illegal
activities by non-State actors in the area of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We
believe that it is only through regional cooperation and
interaction that those threats can be addressed
efficiently and effectively. All regional organizations
should contribute to combating those threats, as there
is no safe haven from, or region immune to, them.

At the same time, regional and subregional
organizations in Africa should be assisted and fully
supported in their endeavours to address challenges
and problems in building prevention and protection
systems against the threats that I have mentioned,
which are connected with a lack of human and
administrative capacities and financial resources. In
that respect, we call for greater cooperation and
interaction with regional and specialized international
organizations and donor countries in the
implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006). We would also like to underscore the
importance of direct cooperation and experience-
sharing between regional organizations in different
regions of the world as regards best practices in
dealing with global security threats and challenges.

Secondly, regional cooperation and support is
also essential in the field of security sector reform,
where local ownership is a sine qua non for its success
and sustainability. Regional organizations have
assumed increasingly important responsibilities in
shaping the security sector reform agenda. They have
played a central role in designing and delivering
programmes for reform in several countries, and a
number of them have developed, or are in the process
of developing, policy frameworks and implementation
strategies to guide their various activities in this area.
The contribution that regional and subregional
organizations can make in support of nationally led
security sector reform programmes was acknowledged
in the presidential statement of 20 February 2007. We
believe that the African Union can play a major role in
that field. We therefore look forward to co-organizing a
workshop on security sector reform with our South
African colleagues, which will be held later this year in
Pretoria.

Thirdly, we would like to commend some
positive examples in the area of confidence building,
where the African Union, together with its subregional
partners - including the Economic Community of
West African States, the Southern African
Development Community and others - has proven to
be increasingly effective. Just recently, we witnessed
strong African leadership in promoting dialogue
between the major stakeholders in the Ivorian conflict.
That led eventually to the signing of the Ouagadougou

agreement, which we hope will contribute to the
implementation of resolution 1721 (2006) and to
finally solving that long conflict.

The cooperation of African leaders with the
United Nations Office for West Africa in mediating the
Guinean crisis and helping to avert a major conflict
was another success story. Similarly successful was the
cooperation between the African Union and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region in supporting and promoting the Great
Lakes Conference process, which led eventually to the
adoption of the Pact on Stability, Security and
Development in the Great Lakes Region. In our View,
if it is ratified and implemented expeditiously, the Pact
can become the cornerstone of peace consolidation in
that subregion, whose stability is crucial for the
stability of the whole of Africa.

We think that the unique potential and
capabilities of the African Union in regional
confidence-building and preventive diplomacy should
be further, and more efficiently, utilized to establish
lasting peace and security on the entire African
continent.

