Ms. Power (United States of America): We
continue to believe that compliance with the September
Minsk agreements and the February implementation
package provides a road map to peace in Ukraine. For
the first time since the Minsk implementation package
was signed, on 12 February, we have seen a reduction
in violence. Of course, no one forgets that Russia and
the separatists they have trained, armed, directed and
fought alongside started violating their commitments
under the package from the first minutes and hours
after the deal was signed, by laying siege to Debaltseve,
a city dozens of kilometres beyond the contact line,
with their deadly and indiscriminate pummelling.
Violations started on day one, and violations of the
ceasefire continue in a number of places, particularly
outside Mariupol, where Russian-backed separatists
have engaged in intense fighting, attacking the village
of Shyrokyne in recent days.

Unfortunately, although the violence has decreased,
there has been only partial compliance with the Minsk
implementation package. As the members of the
Council know, the package calls for "an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire", not a gradual and partial
reduction of fire. It does not say that Russian-backed
separatists can continue to shell, engage in sniper
fire or use barrel and rocket artillery; yet they have
carried attacks using all such methods in recent days.
Since 20 February, Russian separatist attacks such as
those have killed 15 Ukrainian military personnel and
wounded nearly 100 more.

A second condition in the Minsk implementation
package is full, unfettered access to the entire conflict
zone for monitors from the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). While there have
been occasional instances when the OSCE's Special
Monitoring Mission has been stopped at Ukrainian
checkpoints, the restrictions placed on the Mission by
Russia and the separatists are documented as widespread.
Just as Russia and Russian-backed separatists prevented
the Mission from going to Debaltseve while those
forces carried out their vicious attack, recent Mission
reports chronicle repeated, persistent obstruction from
Russian-backed separatists - obstruction that includes
even threatening to kill OSCE monitors. To date, the
separatists have granted the monitors sporadic access,
limited to certain roads when and where it suits them.
As we have asked before, the question bears asking
again: who obstructs an objective observer other than
someone who has something to hide from an unbiased
eye?

The Minsk implementation package also calls for
a full pull-back of all heavy weapons. That, too, has
not happened. Shortly after the package was signed, the
OSCE's chief monitor sent a letter to all the signatories
requesting that they provide information on what heavy
weapons were present in eastern Ukraine, where they
were, which routes would be used to withdraw them
and where they would be located after being withdrawn.
Russia has not replied, as though if it pretends it has no
heavy weapons in Ukraine, we will forget all the tanks,
GRAD missiles and other heavy weapons we have
watched Russia send across the border. All signatories
to the Minsk agreements and the implementation
package - Ukraine, on the one side, and Russia and
the so-called Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk
People's Republic, on the other - are responsible for
pulling back heavy weapons. The OSCE must have
unfettered, unconditional access in order to verify the
withdrawal. Two days ago, Russia sent its seventeenth
so-called humanitarian convoy into Ukraine, once
again denying international observers and Ukrainian
border guards the right to conduct a full and complete
inspection of its contents. Russian convoys, which
should be coming out of Ukraine, are instead going in.
If those convoys are carrying humanitarian assistance,
why not allow a full inspection?

The ceasefire weapons pull-back and OSCE
verification, neither ofwhich is complete, are amongjust
the immediate steps to be taken in the implementation
package. In addition to that, all ofthe Minsk agreements
to date have called for the release of all hostages by all
sides. Nadiya Savchenko and other Ukrainians being
held in Russia are hostages, just as surely as are those
being kept in basements in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Again, we call on Russia to release Nadiya Savchenko,
who has been on hunger strike for more than 80 days, as
well as her Ukrainian counterparts. That is something
Russia can do today.

As we have seen before, the separatists have an
established track record of using a lull in the fighting
to regroup, re-arm and re-supply. Russia supports that
process by providing an unlimited supply of guns
and weaponry. The United States, and the rest of the
world, hopes that will not be the case this time. We are
carefully watching what happens in Shyrokyne, a town
just east of the strategic port city of Mariupol, which
many fear will be the next target of the separatists and
Russian military.

The devastating consequences of this conflict have
been brought into sharp relief by the most recent report
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. More than 1.7 million people have

been displaced and more than 5,800 killed - a casualty
count that does not include the hundreds of bodies
found after Russian-backed separatists finished their
deadly siege of Debaltseve. A report from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs at the end
of last month stated that 500 bodies had been found in
houses and basements at the end of the siege - 500
bodies. Homes and basements where people took shelter
from the endless barrage of Russian-made mortars and
rockets as they rained down on the city's residents, who
could not escape. Weeks into the siege, at the end of
January, the self-declared leader of the Russian-backed
separatists announced that anybody who left would
be in the interlocking field of fire of their artillery.
From that day, he said, the road would be under fire.
Those inside were therefore left with a choice between
risking their lives by staying or risking their lives by
leaving. Civilians were killed doing both, and, I repeat,
500 bodies were found in homes and basements where
people had taken shelter.

The casualties and the displaced are one of the
devastating consequences of this conflict. Another, and
one we rarely speak about in the Council any more, is the
ongoing illegal occupation and attempted annexation of
Crimea by a permanent member of the Council. Crimea
is important not only because it constitutes a continued
violation of the territorial integrity of a sovereign
nation - a violation orchestrated in Moscow and
dressed up in a sham referendum - but also because
it offers a preview of the kind of rule we can expect
in the other parts of Ukraine seized by those who see
themselves as part of Novorossiya.

Let me give just one example of what it is like
to live in that world, from a long list of repressive
practices documented in the aforementioned February
human-rights report of the United Nations, part of the
relentless persecution of the Crimean Muslim Tatar
minority. According to the report, on 29 January
2015, the de facto authorities arrested Ahtem Ciygoz,
the Deputy Chairman of the Tatar Mejlis, the Tatars'
representative council. He was charged, under the
Russian criminal code, with having participated in a
"mass disturbance" for protesting against what was
then the imminent Russian occupation, which ended in
a clash with pro-Russian demonstrators. On 7 February,
another Crimean Tatar was detained on the same
charges. Both men are charged with violating Russian
law, even though Russian law had not even taken effect
at the time that they participated in the protest.

Yesterday the OSCE Representative on Freedom
of the Media released a statement saying that media
freedom in Crimea was at an all time low. Among other
violations, she reported that,
"Journalists from at least 13 independent media
outlets, free lance journalists and bloggers have been
threatened, assaulted, physically attacked, banned from
entry, interrogated and kidnapped; their equipment
confiscated or damaged."

The Russian Federation occupies territory,
unilaterally attempts to annex it and then retroactively
and arbitrarily applies its laws to those who dared to
question its take-over as it was occurring. It does not
get much more Orwellian than that. As anyone who has
read the human rights report knows, that is just one
in a long list of repressive tactics, including torture,
enforced disappearances and targeted political killings
that have defined Russia's occupation.

It is to avoid an Orwellian world like that, where
we talk of peace while undermining it, that we must
ensure that the Minsk agreements are implemented.
The Council members around this table must confront
the situation on the ground as it exists, rather than as
we wish it were. Peace will not come from more words,
and there have been so many words in this Chamber.
It will come from the long-awaited and faithful
implementation of the many agreements that have been
entered into, and renewed respect for the territorial
integrity of a State Member of the United Nations.

