Mr. Roet (Israel): I congratulate you, Madam
President, on the Argentine presidency of the Security
Council this month and thank you for presiding over
today's important debate and for your country's almost
two years of service to the Security Council. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing,
which we highly appreciate.

Albert Einstein once said that the world was a
dangerous place to live not because of people who
were evil, but because of people who did nothing
about it. There is no question that the world is a
dangerous place to live. What many fail to realize is
that it will remain dangerous - and become even more
dangerous - unless we address the real root causes
of this violence and instability, namely, the poisonous
ideology of extremism.
As we speak, violent radical groups are waging
a brutal and aggressive war in order to challenge the
existing world order. It is no accident that the most
dangerous extremist groups operate in the Middle East,
a region plagued by intolerance and tyranny. They are
taking advantage of the area's instability to advance their
narrow interests and return the region to the Dark Ages.

While many nations struggle to combat terrorist
groups that are thousands of kilometres and oceans
away, Israel finds those threats on its doorstep. The
State of Israel is the only democracy between the Red
Sea and the Caspian Sea. We have built a society based
on democracy, freedom of speech, freedom of worship,
the rule of law and the equal rights of all people. Those
are the values that the United Nations was built upon
and they are the values that the Organization should
be upholding. And yet, as I listen to members of the
international community speak about the root causes
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is clear that those
values are not always the ones being championed.

Madam President, how many times have you
heard it said that the root cause of the conflict is the
"occupation"? And how many times have you heard that
Hamas fires rockets into Israel to oppose the occupation?
It simply is not true - because Israel does not occupy
Gaza. In 2005, Israel turned every inch of Gaza over
to the Palestinians. We uprooted thousands of families
from their homes and dismantled their businesses. We
opened border crossings and encouraged commerce
because we wanted Gaza to succeed - for our sake
and for the sake of the Palestinians. We hoped that it
would serve as a model for two societies living side by
side in peace. But it has not done that. Instead, Hamas
has sought to fulfil the mission stated in its Charter,
namely, that of destroying the State of Israel.

Some have also suggested that settlements are the
root cause of the conflict. There are many threats in our
region, but the presence of Jewish homes in the Jewish
homeland has never been one of them. From 1948 until
1967, the West Bank was part of Jordan and Gaza
was part of Egypt - and throughout that time, our
neighbours still sought our destruction. Nonetheless,
some in the international community continue to cling
to old myths. How many times have you heard, Madam
President, that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the
central conflict in the Middle East, that if you solve that
conflict, you solve all the other conflicts in the region?

Make no mistake, it is important for Israel and
the Palestinians to resolve our long-standing dispute.
It is important on its own merits so that Israelis and
Palestinians alike can lead peaceful, secure and
prosperous lives. But that can only be done through
direct negotiation. As much as I look forward to the day
when we will make peace, 1 can assure you, Madam
President, that when that day comes, the Middle
East will not magically transform into a stable and
peaceful place. Hizbullah will not surrender its tens of
thousands of rockets, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant will not join the Peace Corps and stop recruiting
new jihadists, and Hamas will not amend its charter to
recognize the existence of the State ofIsrael.

President John F. Kennedy said that the great
enemy of the truth was very often not the lie, but
the myth - persistent, persuasive and unrealistic.
Therefore, what are the real underlying causes of the
instability in our region?

The first root cause is Hamas, an organization
committed to the destruction of the State of Israel.
Hamas - an extremist terrorist organization - rejects
our very existence. It believes that Israel has no right
to exist within any borders. Some in the international
community are willing to admit this fundamental fact
behind closed doors, but rarely will they acknowledge
it in public meetings.

Millions of Israeli families spent the summer
months this year running for shelter from the thousands
of rockets fired intentionally and indiscriminately by
Hamas towards our cities and towns. Communities
near Gaza were horrified to learn that their homes and
schools were steps from Hamas' vast network of terror
tunnels. No nation, no Government could be expected
to stand by as its people are the target of rocket attacks,
kidnappings or terrorist plots. In the face of those
unrelenting threats, we were left with no choice but to
defend our citizens.

Israel did everything it could to safeguard innocent
lives, taking steps beyond those required under
international law. We accepted ceasefire after ceasefire,
we aborted missions to save lives and, before launching
attacks, we dropped leaflets, sent text messages and
made phone calls. What other country goes to those
lengths to protect civilians?

Hamas" modus operandi is to exploit its innocent
civilians and endanger its own people. There is no
site in Gaza that Hamas deemed off limits - not
ambulances which were used to transport terrorists,
not private homes where Israeli forces discovered
explosives beside a baby crib, not hospitals that were
used as terrorist command centres, and certainly not
schools administered by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which were turned into rocket storehouses and where,
from just steps away, terrorists fired rockets.

Despite all of that, Israel - and Israel alone - is
singled out, scrutinized and criticized. At the Cairo
Conference many nations had a great deal to say about
Israel's policies and actions, but they could not even
bring themselves to mention Hamas by name.

A second real root cause of the conflict is the
unilateral steps that distance us from peace. There are
no shortcuts when it comes to making peace. Making
peace requires courageous leaders - leaders who speak
about partnership and denounce prejudice; leaders who
embrace tolerance and reject terrorism; leaders who
believe in cooperation instead of conflict. When Israel
faced a leader willing to make peace, we made peace.
That was the case with President Sadat of Egypt and it
was the case with King Hussein of Jordan.

In his remarks to the General Assembly last month,
President Abbas delivered a hate-fuelled attack that
accused Israel of the worst crimes, including racism
and genocide (see A/69/PV.12). Just a few days ago, he
called on the Palestinians to prevent Jews from visiting
the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, through the use of
"all means necessary". Are those the words of a man
committed to making peace? Does that sound like a
leader willing to make painful compromises? Or is that
more incitement and intolerance?

Making peace requires compromise and hard
choices. The remarks made earlier by the Palestinian
observer offer another example of the tendency of
the Palestinians to point fingers instead of taking
responsibility. His remarks touched on many things, but
failed to address the important issues. And so I ask him,
"why do you not condemn Hamas for using your own
people as human shields? Why do you not denounce
Hamas for stealing from the Palestinian people to buy
rockets and build terror tunnels? Why do you pursue
destructive unilateral actions rather than constructive
bilateral efforts?"

The same message should be conveyed to the
international community. Supporting Palestinian
unilateral steps does not advance the cause ofpeace. By
prematurely recognizing a State of Palestine, European
Governments are sending a message that Palestinians
do not need to make hard choices and may thereby be
undermining efforts to bring about a real and lasting
change in our region.

The United Nations must also play its part.
The selection of William Schabas to chair the Gaza
commission of inquiry is just one more example of
the anti-Israel bias that pervades the Organization.
Mr. Schabas's agenda is clear. He has repeatedly
called for the prosecution of Israeli leaders, saying,
"My favourite would be Netanyahu within the dock of
the International Criminal Court". It is obvious that
Mr. Schabas is not impartial, and yet he refuses to recuse
himself. If Mr. Schabas does not have the integrity
to do what is right, then it is up to the international
community to step in.

Israel does not shy away from accepting
responsibility, but cannot be expected to abide by a
commission that has predetermined the outcome of
its inquiry. Israel understands that the examination
of its policies is a fundamental part of the democratic
process. For that reason, in the early days of Operation
Protective Edge, Israel established a fact-finding
mechanism in accordance with international law to
investigate exceptional incidents. Those incidents
include, among others, cases which resulted in harm to
civilians or damage to civil or United Nations facilities.

As a democracy, Israel upholds and abides by
the rule of law. We would hope that the international
community would support us in this effort. Premature
and unfounded accusations serve no purpose other than
to inflame tensions in the region.

Israel is committed to partnership with the
international community to advance peace and develop
the Palestinian economy. We have already approved a
three-phase plan to address the Palestinians' economic
and construction needs and improve the access and
movement of people and goods. Last week, 600 tons of
cement and 60 trucks of construction aggregates and
iron were transferred into Gaza to begin reconstruction
efforts. Furthermore, all projects submitted by the
international community and the Palestinian Authority
have already been approved.

Now that a ceasefire is holding, we must consider
how to bring about a lasting and sustained period of
quiet for the people of both Gaza and Israel. Only the
demilitarization of Gaza can guarantee a durable and
sustained ceasefire between Israel and the Palestinians.

Many in the international community are quick to
denounce Israel's actions but are blind to one simple
fact: if Hamas is allowed to acquire more weapons, it
will use them. We have been at this crossroads before.
Over the years, Hamas has stolen hundreds of millions
of aid dollars intended for development to build its
military capabilities and terror infrastructure.

This time must be different. This time there must be
proper oversight to ensure that all funds and materials
reach their intended destination. This time we must
ensure that Hamas does not stockpile more rockets
and build more terror tunnels. To that end, Israel
welcomes the tripartite mechanism for rehabilitating
the Gaza Strip. Working together, we can build a strong
Palestinian economy while building bridges towards
peace. That will be possible only through partnership,
cooperation and direct negotiation. Unilateral actions
are not a step forward; they are a step in the wrong
direction.

The third root cause is States sponsors ofterrorism.
As the international community comes together to
fight the threat posed by radical extremist groups, it
should not lose sight of the even greater threat looming
on the horizon: a nuclear Iran. The horrific death and
destruction we are seeing today in our area pales in
comparison to the devastation that would unfold if the
world's most dangerous regime were to get its hands on
the world's most dangerous weapons. The international
community has realized the need for a robust strategy
that will contain the threat posed by terrorist groups
such as Daesh. The same thinking is needed with State
sponsors of terror such as Iran.

The nuclear deal that is currently on the table allows
Iran's nuclear infrastructure, knowledge and ambitions
to remain intact. That is a dangerous mistake. The
international community must see Iran for what it is:
a ruthless and repressive regime that is determined to
acquire nuclear weapons.

It has been over a year since Hassan Rouhani
became President of Iran. He came to power promising
to tackle corruption, grant freedoms and defend
minorities. Now, one year later, what exactly has
changed? According to a United Nations report issued
in March, religious minorities in Iran still face rampant
discrimination. In particular, "Iranian authorities at
the highest levels have designated house churches and
evangelical Christians as threats to national security"
(A/HRC/25/6I, para. 40).

What does it say when a nation is desperate to
acquire weapons of mass destruction, but regards
churchgoers as weapons of "Sunday Mass" destruction?

In the year since Rouhani was elected President, has

Iran reformed its justice system? Not in the least. Every
month, dozens of Iranians are hanged from cranes in
public squares, and hundreds of political prisoners are
beaten and tortured. Are the Iranian people in any way
freer or happier? It turns out that even being happy is
a crime in Iran. Just days after Rouhani denounced
Internet censorship as "cowardly", six young Iranians
were arrested for creating a YouTube video in which
they sang and danced about being happy. Rouhani may
smile happily for the cameras, but Iran's own citizens
are denied that privilege.

For decades, Iran has funded hundreds of terror
campaigns that have taken thousands of innocent
lives in Africa, Europe, Latin America and the
Middle East. In Syria, Iran has sent its Revolutionary
Guards to fight alongside Al-Assad's forces and spent
billions sustaining the bloody civil war that has taken
almost 200,000 lives. In Lebanon, the Iranian-backed
Hizbullah terrorist group has built a militia larger and
stronger than many armies.

For years, we alerted the international community
to the fact that illegal arms continued to flow into
southern Lebanon. We warned that Hizbullah was
amassing tens of thousands of rockets and missiles. We
were met with silence. That is the same response we
received when we reported that Syria was arming itself
with chemical weapons and Hamas was smuggling
thousands of rockets into Gaza.

Will the Council continue to remain silent as
Hizbullah escalates its attacks on Israel? Two weeks
ago, three improvised explosive devices were detonated
on the Israeli side of the Blue Line. Shortly after the
attack, Hizbullah claimed responsibility for planting
the devices. This is not the first incident of this nature.
Earlier this year, Hizbullah leader Nasrallah admitted
his organization's responsibility for planting a roadside
bomb in the vicinity of Mount Dov.

Before the situation deteriorates any further, the
Security Council must demand that the Lebanese
Government fully abide by Security Council resolution
1701 (2006) and deploy its armed forces to prevent
any further attacks before it is too late. Israel will not
tolerate any attack on its sovereignty and will act to
protect its territory and its citizens. The citizens of
Israel want to live in peace. There is nothing we want
more. Israelis envision the day when we can live free
from divisions, hatred and violence. But making peace
requires courageous action.
The international community must lead by example
and confront the real root causes of the instability
plaguing the Middle East. It must stand firm against
the jihadist groups that are spreading the poison of
radical extremism throughout our region. In the coming
months, our values and our resolve will be tested time
and again. We must stand firm, because the safety of
our citizens and global security are at stake.

The global community has been clear about its
opposition to Daesh, Al-Qaida and Boko Haram, but
that same determination must be shown with respect
to Hamas and Hizbullah, which share the same
dangerous and radical views. It is time to speak out
clearly and unequivocally, to call on President Abbas
and the Palestinian Authority to denounce Hamas, stop
the anti-Israel incitement and take constructive steps
towards peace. That is the only way to ensure that all of
our children can inherit a more open, more tolerant and
more peaceful planet.

