Mr. Shehu: It is a great honour and privilege
for me to be invited to this meeting of the Security
Council specifically convened to discuss the issue of
peace and security in Africa and the challenges of the
fight against terrorism in the context of maintaining
international peace and security. I am delighted to
be given the opportunity to highlight the activities of
the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa (GIABA) in the context of
promoting regional integration within the framework
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the implementation of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) recommendations against
money laundering and the financing of terrorists
and proliferation, all within the Security Council's
integrated approach to conflict prevention and the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I would like to thank you in particular,
Mr. President, for extending an invitation to me and to
our regional body, GIABA, to contribute to this high-
level discussion. The Action Group is a specialized
institution of ECOWAS mandated to support member
States in the prevention and control of transnational
organized crime, in particular money laundering and the
financing of terrorists and proliferation. Before giving
a summary of the programmes and activities of GIABA
in the discharge of its mandate, which is consistent
with the Security Council's objective of promoting and
maintaining international peace and security, permit
me to briefly address the very pertinent theme of this
debate, which is the issue of peace and security in
Africa and the challenges of fighting terrorism.

Peace is not necessarily the absence of war; nor
can we say that it is the size of weapon arsenals that
determines security. Peace is the general condition
in which there is a sense of happiness or lack of fear
about the conditions that create insecurity, including
poverty, unemployment, economic development,
good governance and the rule of law. We cannot fully
understand the security situation in Africa without fully
understanding the vulnerabilities and risk factors that
engender conflict and instability. It has been estimated
that no fewer than 28 sub-Saharan African States
have been at war since 1980, with varying devastating
consequences for the peace and security of the region.
Many factors, including political corruption, a lack of
respect for the rule of law, and human rights violations,
account for most of the conflicts. The fragility of many
African countries makes them vulnerable to conflict,
mostly internally induced.

In West Africa, for example, about 60 per cent of
the population is in the age bracket of 25 to 50 years.
The population of about 380 million is estimated
to increase by 52 per cent by the year 2030. The
unemployment rate of the work-age population
ranges between 30 and 50 per cent. The region had
an average gross domestic product (GDP) of $17,519
as of 2009, excluding that of Nigeria, which is $6,699,
and three fourths of the GDP is dependent on external
trade, mostly primary commodities. The combined
GDP of the 15 ECOWAS member countries does not
equal the GDP of Saudi Arabia, Iran, Argentina or
South Africa, taken individually. The United Nations
Development Programme estimated that 12 out of the
15 ECOWAS countries, as of 2009, fell into the low
human development group, with one having the lowest
development index in the world. With an average growth
rate of only 4.5 per cent per annum since 2000, it is
difficult, if not impossible, to address the underlying
conditions that fuel criminality in the region, including
terrorism.

Added to that particular scenario, overall
in Africa, the arms trade - both legitimate and
illegitimate - has a significant impact on conflict and
on conflict resolution. The five permanent members of
the Security Council account for the largest official arms
sales worldwide. Where conflicts are of an insurgency
nature, multinational oil companies have been alleged
to have exacerbated such conflicts - for example,
in the Niger Delta of Nigeria - thereby creating a
vicious cycle of instability. With all that, the number
of refugees and people in refugee-like situations has
remained alarming. The strength of the individual
economies of nations in the developing world continues
to be a significant factor in the timing of many arms-
purchasing decisions. In some cases, increases in
the price of oil, while an advantage for major oil-
producing countries in funding their arms purchases,
has simultaneously caused economic difficulties for
many oil-consuming countries, contributing to their
decisions to curtail or to find new types of weapons
acquisitions.
On the side of capital, which is needed for
sustainable development, in 2006 alone developing
countries lost about $858.6 billion to $1.6 trillion in
illicit financial flows. Out of that, Africa is estimated
to have lost $854 billion from 1970 to 2008. Some
estimate that the real figure is about $1.8 trillion. That
is why the prevention of money laundering is crucial
in the context of protecting the international financial
system from abuse and of promoting international
peace and security.

Terrorist acts are manifested in various dimensions,
the patterns and locations of which depend on the
ideology, intents and capabilities of the perpetrators. But
the impact is widespread. While most terrorist activities
have been driven by extremist and political motivations,
we can only speculate what sort devastation might
result if terrorists groups were driven by feelings of
deprivation, hunger, poverty and unemployment. That
might be even more difficult to control in a developing
country. Despite that, most African countries are
incapable of dealing with the problems in isolation,
owing to the many challenges I shall discuss shortly.
The challenges of fighting terrorism in Africa, despite
the absence of a universally acceptable definition of
terrorism, constitute the major threat to international
peace and security. Many initiatives have been taken by
the United Nations, particularly within the framework
of maintaining international peace and security. Yet,
the challenges of dealing with the problem remain. In
Africa, as in other developing countries of the world,
those challenges are reflected in various ways. The
overall impact of the risk factors mentioned earlier,
including poverty, unemployment, a lack of respect for
the rule of law and human rights violations, collectively
contributes to the rising level of terrorist activities and
presents challenges to efforts to deal with the problem
in the context of national and international security.

In addition, political corruption has led to the
emergence of leaders who came to power through
illegal means, including fraudulent elections, thus
undermining their legitimacy to take practical and
decisive actions against perpetrators of terrorist acts.
The overall weaknesses in the legal framework and
institutional mechanisms for the prevention of terrorist
acts, the inadequate skill and manpower for effective law
enforcement, the insufficient resources and competing
priorities for them, and the inadequate inter-agency
cooperation within countries and internationally all
contribute to the rising spate of terrorism.

It is crucial that any strategic approach to the
prevention and control of terrorism also address the
financing of terrorism. The challenges in that regard
include the lack of a clear definition of the meaning of
"terrorist funds and assets" in the legislation of some
countries, notwithstanding the guidelines provided by
the United Nations; the absence of designated authority
for the enforcement of freezing measures, where they
exist at all; the inadequate understanding of Security
Council resolutions related to terrorism and terrorist
and proliferation financing; the absence of policies or
procedures for the effective dissemination ofthe lists of
terrorists circulated by the United Nations committees
among financial and non-financial institutions; the
inadequate capacity at the national level to designate
persons identified as terrorists and determine the
procedure for freezing their assets; the lack of
information on and/or proper understanding of the
delisting process; and the lack of diligent investigation
and prosecution, which hampers the speedy delivery
of justice on the one hand, and makes for a very slow
judicial process, on the other. These have led to a
relatively low number of convictions.

Furthermore, there is the prevalence of corruption
and the porosity of borders, which, as the Secretary-
General pointed out, provide an environment conducive
to international criminality; the backwash effects of
globalization and internationalization, which afford
criminals the economic space and technology to execute
their transactions on a massive scale and almost without
detection, against the limited capacity of competent
law-enforcement authorities.

Let me briefly address the regional response to the
threat of transnational organized crime, in particular
terrorism, within the framework of ECOWAS. As part
of their contribution to promoting peace and security
in Africa and in fulfillment of their obligations under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which requires mandatory enforcement of the decisions
of the Security Council by States Members, the
ECOWAS member States have adopted the following
legal mechanisms at the regional level: the ECOWAS
Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters; the ECOWAS Protocol Relating to the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security, which calls for
the control of cross-border crime, including terrorism,
the adoption of anti-corruption measures and the
coordination of national policies for the maintenance
of regional security; a cooperation agreement between
member States' police forces on investigation in
criminal matters; the adoption of the ECOWAS
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, their
Ammunition and Other Related Materials; the adoption
of a regional strategic framework for the prevention of
terrorism in West Africa, during the most recent Summit
of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS; and the establishment of GIABA.

The establishment of GIABA in 2000 by the
Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS was a practical demonstration of the strong
political commitment of ECOWAS member States
to dealing with transnational organized crime in
the context of maintaining international peace and
security. GIABA is mandated to develop strategies
and assist ECOWAS member States in preventing
and controlling money-laundering and terrorist and
proliferation financing. Over the past eight years of
its operation, GIABA has formulated a clear vision
for its action, an overall mission statement, and a set
of core values to guide its commitment. The mandate
of GIABA aims at promoting the rule of law, and one
of its priorities is to assist member States in enacting
legislation of acceptable international standards against
terrorism. Seven years ago, only one or two countries
had stand-alone legislation against money-laundering;
but by 2008, all ECOWAS member States had enacted
legislation criminalizing the laundering of the proceeds
of crime. Although some of that legislation requires
improvement to conform to acceptable standards, what
has been accomplished indicates significant progress in
the regional efforts to combat money-laundering.

On the financing of terrorism, GIABA designed,
with the assistance of development partners, a model
counter-financing of terrorism law, which was adopted
by member States in June 2007. Currently, all ECOWAS
member States except one have enacted legislation
against the financing of terrorism. GIABA has thus
been able to provide concrete assistance in a number of
critical domains, such as the preparation of appropriate
legislation and legal training; the establishment of a
financial intelligence unit as a central authority for
the receipt, analysis and dissemination of intelligence
on money-laundering, terrorist and proliferation
financing; the provision of threat assessments and
the determination of risk; the establishment of active
committees to oversee anti-money-laundering activities
and the counter-financing of terrorism; the conduct of
special typologist exercises to determine the methods
and means used in money-laundering and financing of
terrorism; the provision of information on advocacy
regarding the financing ofterrorism; the monitoring and
evaluation of terrorist financing-specific activities and
systems; and support for investigative and prosecutorial
capacity-building, as well as regional and international
coordination.
Permit me, Sir, to look at the way forward. Achieving
realistic peace and security in Africa within the context
of promoting and maintaining international peace and
security will require strategic partnerships. In the
spirit of promoting such partnerships, the following
fundamental principles for action will be crucial.

First, there is a need for stronger political
commitment and leadership. The issue of political
will in combating transnational organized crime has
become a sort of cliche, giving the impression that
one does not appreciate the commitment of another.
That is far from the point. Political commitment and
leadership, although very difficult to measure, are
crucial for motivating the right actions towards conflict
prevention and resolution as well as the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Secondly, there is a need to establish an effective
early warning mechanism for the prevention of conflict
and terrorism. ECOWAS has set the pace at the regional
level with its numerous initiatives, some of which have
early dimensions.

Thirdly, building the capacity of States and
supporting them in promoting the rule of law, democracy
and good governance is essential to the prevention
of conflict and the maintenance of international
peace and security. Furthermore, the international
community must ensure that legitimate structures are
in place to promote democracy, good governance and
accountability.

This brings me to the fourth issue - that of
resources. We cannot achieve the goals of the Security
Council without providing for technical assistance
to developing countries. Indeed, it has been argued
that addressing the specific conditions that give rise
to terrorist acts, including poverty, injustice and
inequality, can significantly ameliorate the problem.
I cannot conclude, therefore, without a clarion call to
donor agencies and countries to continue to provide the
technical assistance necessary for implementing the
Council's decisions and resolutions.

Fifthly, development assistance, although helpful,
cannot adequately address the challenges facing
developing countries in dealing with transnational
security issues. We must therefore ensure that
developing countries have equal trading opportunities
with others in order to mitigate some of their economic
difficulties.

Finally, there is the need to improve and sustain
cooperation and coordination at the national, regional
and international levels, including the involvement of
civil society organizations and the private sector. No
nation can effectively tackle the problem of terrorism
in isolation. Collective security therefore lies in
meaningful international cooperation.

