Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Like
other speakers, I welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him for his
statement. I also thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for introducing the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/169), and Mr. Skender Hyseni for his briefing.

My country notes the adjustment of the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to circumstances on the ground.
We welcome the fact that UNMIK's coordination with
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) has been undertaken in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). That resolution is the legal
basis for achieving a solution to the situation in
Kosovo and contributing to stability in the Balkans.

The report of the Secretary-General indicates that
the security situation in Kosovo is calm but fragile. It
warns of a potential exacerbation of tensions in the
northern part of the territory. UNMIK will therefore
have to continue to ensure five key areas on the
ground: security, stability, human rights, mediation
among communities, and humanitarian assistance and
development. Its mandate must also continue to enjoy
the support of the parties, the Security Council and the
international community.

The United Nations provides a forum for
promoting a peaceful solution to the situation in
Kosovo that is acceptable to the parties. It must,
however, work in cooperation with such regional
organizations as the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In the past, Mexico has indicated that the United
Nations must strengthen its strategic relations with
regional organizations pursuant to Chapter VIII of its
Charter in order to cooperate in the prevention and
timely mitigation of regional conflicts and the
consolidation of human rights and the rule of law. That
is why we again encourage the strengthening of
cooperation among UNMIK, EULEX and other
regional organizations in order to support minority
communities, resolve inter-community conflicts,
promote reconciliation, dialogue and regional
coordination, and encourage development in Kosovo.

With respect to security, we note that since the
most recent debate of the Security Council (see S/PV.6264) on this topic, the situation in Kosovo has
not improved, particularly in the North. Although the
report notes a decline in the number of incidents,
Mexico is concerned that the situation remains a factor
for instability and an obstacle to the return of refugees
from minority communities. We reaffirm our support
for UNMIK's work to promote confidence-building
measures, assist communities seeking reconciliation,
facilitate dialogue on problems of common interest,
and support development.

With regard to the specific situation in northern
Kosovo, my delegation considers it necessary that, in
the elaboration and implementation of programmes for
the integration of minorities, the parties should give
priority to the protection of human rights and maintain
open dialogue and cooperation with UNMIK. All such
measures would contribute to transparency and to the
inclusion of parties interested in ensuring the
effectiveness of such programmes to the benefit of the
population and the prevention of Violence.
Regarding the situation of displaced persons,
although some Kosovo municipalities have
implemented return strategies for 2010, the conditions
necessary to the safe conduct of such returns -
including security, access to public services, the right
to housing and property, and socio-economic and
development opportunities - have yet to be

established. One positive contribution of UNMIK in
this regard has been its support for the establishment of
community working groups to help create such
conditions. It is appropriate to recall, however, that
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999) - and in
particular with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law - the parties are obliged to
create an environment conducive to the safe voluntary
return without discrimination of all those who so
desire. We again encourage UNMIK to enhance its
coordination with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, local institutions
and other humanitarian agencies in the field to that
end.

With respect to the rule of law and human rights,
my delegation commends the cooperation between
UNMIK and EULEX in promoting the strengthening of
judicial and human rights institutions in Kosovo and to
ensure that the civilian population, including minority
communities, has full access to justice and that victims
receive due attention.

We acknowledge the importance of promoting the
rule of law to fight impunity, ensure accountability,
reconcile divergent interests, encourage the
reconciliation process among communities, and
provide compensation for damages caused by human
rights violations. We therefore encourage UNMIK to
continue providing mediation and support to the
Serbian authorities and the International Committee of
the Red Cross in carrying out forensic investigations
and investigations into disappeared persons. We also
recognize the essential role played by UNMIK,
together with EULEX, in the protection of the cultural
and religious heritage of Kosovo, and welcome the
appointment of a European Union facilitator.

With regard to the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo, I wish to reaffirm my
country's position that this matter is seized by the
International Court of Justice. Until the Court rules, the
principle of respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, which all Member States are bound to uphold
under the United Nations Charter, remains fully in
force. Mexico has been a staunch and unwavering
promoter of the principles of justice and international
law enshrined in the United Nations Charter and the
work of the International Court of Justice. In this
respect, we eagerly await the Court's decision.

