Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, like my colleagues before
me, I would like to express my condolences to the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in connection with the railway disaster
in Kasai province, as well as to the African States
affected by Cyclone Idai. We also mourn the victims of
the horrifying natural disasters in our brother country
of Indonesia. We wish the wounded and injured a
speedy recovery.

We thank Special Representative Zerrougui for
her thorough briefing on the overall situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the work of the
United Nations presence there. We listened carefully to
Ms. Anny Tenga Modi's report.

We view the presidential elections that took place
after repeated postponements as a milestone event in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo's political life.
For the first time in their country's history, its citizens
were able to achieve a democratic transfer of power
to an unarmed, legally operating opposition. It is
notable that the long-awaited vote was held in a calm
atmosphere unclouded by any serious violations of
public order. We welcome the fact that in the difficult
post-electoral period all the country's political forces
have competed through exclusively political methods,
and we call on the Congolese people to continue to act
in the interests ofpeace and to take steps to prevent any
form of violence.

We are worried about the fact that the difficult
military and political situation in the country's
eastern provinces continues, as have the attacks by
illegal armed groups, including the so-called Allied
Democratic Forces. The situation has also been
exacerbated by escalating intercommunal clashes and
the ongoing Ebola epidemic in the Beni area. We hope
that the fight against the armed groups will produce
the necessary results. There should also be qualitative
progress in the disarmament, demobilization and social
reintegration of former combatants. In that regard,
we note the fact that armed groups in Kasai province
have expressed the desire to lay down their arms and
the advances in the disarmament process in Ituri and
Tanganyika provinces. We join the Secretary-General
in urging that the window of opportunity opening there
not be missed. We also expect the Congolese authorities
to work to curb the illegal exploitation and export of the
country's mineral resources.

We believe that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should continue to support the efforts
of the authorities to normalize the situation in the
country during the post-electoral period. We note the
constructive approach that the new President, Mr. Felix
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, has expressed about cooperating
with the Blue Helmets. However, we want to emphasize
that any interference by anyone, whoever they may
be, in the internal affairs of Kinshasa is unacceptable.
For our part, we are ready to work constructively on
the draft resolution extending the Mission's mandate.
Russia, including as a member of the Friends of the
Great Lakes Region, intends to continue to actively
promote the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the stabilization of the situation in the
Great Lakes region as a whole.

