Mr. Ramos-Horta: This being the first time I am
privileged to address the Security Council since my
appointment as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Guinea-Bissau, I extend warm greetings
to all the members of the Council. Because of time
constraints and the fact that the full text of my speech
has been distributed, I will deliver an abbreviated
version of it now.

From the very first day after my arrival in
Guinea-Bissau in the early part of February, I
undertook regular, sustained consultations with
national stakeholders across the board, ranging from
the Transitional President to the members of the
Transitional Government, the National Assembly, the
military leadership, party leaders, members of civil
society, women's organizations, youth movements and
religious and spiritual leaders. It is my humble view
that the problem of Guinea-Bissau should be squarely
placed at the feet of the political elite, who have failed
their people for almost four decades.

After the political elite, the military must also take
the blame. The intrusion by the armed forces into the
political arena is the result rather than the cause of bad
governance and underdevelopment in Guinea-Bissau.
Other consequences of the failure of the country's
leadership include human rights violations, impunity,
organized crime and drug trafficking. Concerning the
latter, the operation launched by the United States Drug
Enforcement Agency that led to the arrest of the Navy's
former Chief of Staff, Rear Admiral Bubo Na Tchuto,
and the announcement of the indictment of the Chief of
General Staff of Guinea-Bissau's armed forces, General
Antonio Indjai, constitute a turning point in the fight
against drug trafficking in Guinea-Bissau. They send
a strong signal to the elite of Guinea-Bissau and those
using the country as a transit route for drugs that the
international community will not accept Guinea-
Bissau's being turned into a drug-trafficking platform.

The use oquinea-Bissau as a transit point for drugs
is not in doubt. This is a regional and global social and
security problem with two clear poles - the regions of
production and the regions of consumption - feeding
that criminal activity. I would strongly advocate for a
strengthened international anti-narcotic presence in the
country. In order to address this challenge, therefore,
I urge that robust financial and human resources be
mobilized to support the deployment of adequate
expertise to assist the authorities in Guinea-Bissau and
the entire chain of drug-handling from source countries
through to consumption countries.

Against this background, the socioeconomic
situation in Guinea-Bissau remains precarious in a
context where the financial and budgetary support
the country's partners are providing barely covers the
Government's needs and commitments. Internal revenue
generation remains inadequate. As was predicted
during an International Monetary Fund monitoring
mission in February, economic and fiscal performance
for 2013 will improve only if the cashew harvest and
commercialization season, which started at the end of
March, pick up. Food security will be compromised
if local and rural cashew farmers continue to face
difficulties in exchanging or bartering cashews for rice.
Compounding the socioeconomic situation is the
continuing spate of salary-related strikes by workers in
the public sector. In addition to difficulties in paying
public-sector salaries, the Government is unable to
provide basic water and electricity services. Public
health and sanitation challenges are also becoming
acute. The six-month rainy season will start in a week,
and help is needed to avert cholera and other related
epidemics.

Not everything about Guinea-Bissau is negative. On
the positive side, the people of Guinea-Bissau, despite
their disenchantment, are peaceful and friendly people
who have never turned to crime or ethnic violence, as
has been the case in many comparable situations. The
country has one of the lowest crime rates in Africa, if
not the world. It is safe to walk around Bissau without
the standard fears one may have in many capitals of
the world. If appropriate support were given to more
productive, preventive diplomacy programmes,
Guinea-Bissau could become a shining example of a
success story.

I have sought to work actively towards realizing the
directives emanating from the Council in order to ensure
that all international stakeholders speak with one voice
on the critical issues in Guinea-Bissau. In that context,
I have continued to engage key States members of the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the European Union and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, with
meetings at the highest levels in Addis Ababa, Abuja,
Banjul, Dakar, Praia, Maputo, Lisbon and Brussels. I
am particularly satisfied with the frank tete-a-tetes I
have had with the Heads of State and Foreign Ministers
of Nigeria, Senegal, the Gambia, Cote d'Ivoire,
Guinea, Angola, Cape Verde, Mozambique, Brazil and
Portugal, as well as with the President of the European
Commission, the Commissioner for International
Development and members of the European Parliament.

I am also delighted to announce that all international
partners are united on two immediate key objectives
of the transition, namely, the formation of a new, more
inclusive transitional Government, and the adoption
of a consensus road map, with a firm commitment to
holding elections before the end of the year. In addition,
all agree that there is a need to restore constitutional
order no later than the end of this year, on the basis
of the decisions made by the ECOWAS Authority in
Yamoussoukro.

I am pleased to report that in the days leading up
to this meeting, some positive developments have taken
place. On 25 and 26 April, the ad hoc Parliamentary
Commission reviewing the transitional pact signed in
May 2012 held a two-day retreat with the support of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to finalize a draft
transitional regime pact. On 28 April, Transitional
President Serifo Nhamajo returned to Bissau following
an absence of more than a month, and announced that
an all-inclusive Government would be formed soon and
elections held before the end of the year. On 29 and
30 April, all political parties, along with military, civil
society and religious leaders, gathered in Parliament
for discussions on the draft transitional regime pact,
reaching agreement on three points.

The first of these was the confirmation of the
extension of the duration of the transition until
31 December 2013, with elections to be held in
November. The second was the formation of an all-
inclusive transitional Government; and the third was
the election of a President of the National Electoral
Commission upon reception of a proposal from the
Supreme Court's Council of Judges. On 30 April,
the political parties signed an agreement on the
aforementioned three points.

Guinea-Bissau's challenges must be addressed
through a two-phase transition. First, we must support
the return to constitutional order through elections.
Secondly, we must assist in the post-electoral
strengthening of State institutions through reforms
that are underpinned not only by financial support
but also the direct co-location of experts, as well as
mentoring efforts, to ensure sustainable stabilization
and development.

I have consistently advocated that all the people of
Guinea-Bissau absorb a new political culture in which
elections do not lead to the division of the country
or a winner-takes-all situation. Bearing in mind the
enormous challenges that the people of Guinea-Bissau
face, no single political group can alone manage the
transition out of the deep hole into which Guinea-Bissau
has sunk and towards lasting peace and prosperity. In
that regard, it will be important for all major political

parties to unite into a Government of national unity,
following the next legislative elections.

The support of the Security Council and States
Members of the United Nations for the elections that
will usher in a new, post-election phase is imperative.

In the post-election phase, a broad coalition would
provide power-sharing governmental efforts to rebuild
the State that currently exists in name only. In that
connection, additional material support will be crucial.
The international community will be called upon to do
its part. I intend to actively engage the new authorities
and help them rebuild the institutions of the State,
including by the co-location of international experts
in key Government sectors for a period of up to five
years, in order to completely reform and modernize
the defence forces, the judicial system and public
administration.

The defence forces will need to undergo major
rethinking on the basis of a sober analysis of the security
needs of the country and adjusted to the financial
resources available. ECOWAS is taking the lead in that
process, but there are other willing partners outside the
region that are ready to contribute towards a new army
for Guinea-Bissau that is more professional, imbued
with a democratic culture, smaller and less costly yet
more effective.

The United Nations inter-agency technical
assessment mission that was dispatched to Guinea-
Bissau in March suggested that the problems in the
country were not insurmountable. However, solving
them requires, first and foremost, strong political and
financial support from the international community. In
that regard, the call by the authorities of Guinea-Bissau
for the United Nations to take the leadership in the
electoral process so as to avoid any possible elections-
related disputes or Violence needs to be given serious
consideration.

In conclusion, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l3/262) before the Council includes the results
of the painstaking technical assessment mission that I
led to look into the mandate and resources needed to
realize the vision to which I referred earlier, to support
the efforts of the people of Guinea-Bissau and to
reconfigure UNIOGBIS to play a critical advisory role.
I would like to make a special plea to members of the
Council to positively consider the Secretary-General's
recommendations and adopt a resolution that will send
a strong message of support to the people of Guinea-

Bissau.

