Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October, and to express my
appreciation to you and the other members of the
Security Council for this opportunity to address the
Council on issue of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in East Timor (UNMIT). I would also like to
express our appreciation to Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste and head of UNMIT, for her useful and timely
briefing. Allow me also to extend my appreciation to
Ambassador Sofia Borges, Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste, for her presence here and for the
statement she delivered earlier.

As an active member of the core group on Timor-
Leste, the Philippines welcomes the recent positive
developments emanating from that country. At present,
the Philippines contingent in UNMIT and United
Nations police has a total of 137 personnel serving in
the country, 14 of them women. As the drawdown plan
is carried out in the coming months, many of them will
of course look forward to successfully finishing their
tour of duty and leaving Timor-Leste and its people on
the path to peace and stability.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/522), the general political and security
situation in the country has improved substantially.
There is now intensified focus on measures and
initiatives needed to sustain stability, deepen
democracy and the rule of law, reduce poverty and
strengthen civic and judicial institutions. The Timorese
Government, political parties, civil society,
non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders
have joined hands to address crucial development and
governance issues.

On the economic front, the news is upbeat.
Timor-Leste's economy is bullish and projected to
grow by an impressive 10.4 per cent this year. That
will no doubt strengthen the foundations of the
country's economic base.

There has been a slight decrease in the crime rate,
as compared to previous months. The Philippines is
pleased to note that the overall crime rate does not pose
a serious threat to the current law and order situation.
The situation in that regard has allowed UNMIT to
gradually reduce the number of its police officers,
thereby allowing the national police to take a more
active role and greater responsibility.

The Philippines welcomes the planned visit of the
Security Council to Timor-Leste, which is being
organized by Japan for November. The visit will no
doubt provide Security Council members with
first-hand information about the country. Their
presence there will further reinforce the commitment of
the United Nations to helping the country to achieve
peace, stability and progress.

While we are encouraged by the good and
encouraging news, the Philippines maintains guarded
optimism over the overall situation. Beneath the

current situation there still lie certain concerns that
must be addressed with greater vigour and
determination in the short term. Foremost among these
is the ability of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) to take over the role of UNMIT and the United
Nations police. Handing over primary policing
responsibilities to the PNTL will require sustained and
concentrated efforts to ensure that it will provide a
strong foundation for long-term institution- and
capacity-building. Strengthening civilian oversight and
management capacities over State security forces is
equally critical. In sum, there is still more work to do.

The latest positive developments have
emboldened UNMIT to implement a downsizing plan
throughout 2010, in close coordination with the
Government of Timor-Leste. As the situation continues
to improve and as we see the readiness of the Timorese
Government and people to take responsibility for their
own peace and security, what will remain for UNMIT
to do is to sketch an exit strategy that is realistic,
practical, transparent and cost-effective. As we clearly
saw in 2006, the premature disengagement of UNMIT
could produce catastrophic consequences for Timor-
Leste. Even closer coordination among UNMIT, the
Timorese Government and all stakeholders is needed as
the UNMIT mandate expires.

At this point, I wish to assure you, Mr. President,
and all of our partners in the United Nations, especially
the core group on Timor-Leste, that the Philippines
stands ready to do its part to contribute to the success
of UNMIT and to the ongoing and future peacebuilding
efforts in Timor-Leste.

