Mrs. Audouard (France) (spoke in French): May
I first thank Ambassadors Aboulatta, Umarov and
Llorenty Soliz for their briefings and for their leadership
at the helm of the three Committees.

Terrorism today is one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security, as evidenced by the
all-too-frequent attacks we hear about in the news. The
risk of terrorists acquiring and using weapons of mass
destruction is a disturbing reality that we have already
had to face.

As underlined by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities,
Da'esh continues to pose an increasingly complex
and multifaceted threat despite the military pressure
to which it is subject on the ground. In addition to
the attacks ordered directly by the group, the ones
carried out in Nice, Berlin and Stockholm make clear
that Da'esh's barbarous ideology continues to push
radicalized individuals to take action.

In this context, our collective response must be
robust and well thought out.

The 1267 Committee fulfils two essential missions
to which France attaches great importance. The first
is analysing the terrorist threat via the reports of the
Monitoring Team, which are very detailed and valuable
to Member States. The second is implementing andd
rigorously monitoring the sanctions list. In that regard,
we encourage all Member States to continue to submit
requests for listing. For that system to remain credible,
the procedures should also respect the fundamental
freedoms of those on the list. The establishment
of the Office of the Ombudsperson in 2009 was an
unprecedented action taken by the Council to improve
procedural safeguards. France welcomes that step, as
well as the considerable work carried out by Ms. Marchi-
Uhel in that post, and encourages all States to continue
to cooperate with the Office of the Ombudsperson.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism also fulfils two functions in a complementary
manner. The first is to make States aware of the new
trends that characterize the ever-changing threat of
terrorism. The special meetings of the Committee,
such as the one we will have on 21 June on international
legal and police cooperation, are an excellent means
of informing States and discussing together certain
specific issues.

The second function of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee is to examine how States implement
major Council resolutions: resolution 1373 (2001),
on combating terrorism in general and its financing;
resolution 1624 (2005), on combating incitement to
commit terrorist acts; and resolution 2178 (2014), on
foreign terrorist fighters, to name a few. It is therefore
essential that States accept visits from the Executive
Directorate so that it can assess their counter-terrorism
system and formulate the best recommendations. It is
also essential that the relevant United Nations entities,
including the Task Force, be able to implement technical
assistance programmes based on those evaluations
and recommendations.

In general, France encourages the continuation of
the joint meetings of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the 1267 Committee in order to compare the
analysis of the terrorist threat and the assessment of the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions.

Finally, I would like to say a few words about
the important work being carried out by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), chaired by Bolivia.

The risk of biological, chemical and nuclear
materials falling into the hands of terrorists is a real
danger. It is now known that Da'esh has chemical
capabilities in Syria and Iraq. The Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism has established
that Da'esh used mustard gas on at least one occasion in
Syria in 2015. Added to this are the remaining doubts
as to the Syrian declaration on its chemical programme
to the OPCW. Moreover, the potential existence of
residual capacity on Syrian territory only increases that
risk, which we take very seriously.

It is therefore more important than ever to adapt
our effort as the threat evolves. The review carried
out in 2016 confirmed that the progress achieved in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions was tangible, both nationally
and regionally. The great majority of Member States
have now adopted measures that transpose the
provisions of the resolution into national law. Whether
it concerns the securing of sensitive materials and
goods, the strengthening of border controls or even,
where appropriate, the establishment of export control
mechanisms, the international community is on standby
to ensure that such sensitive materials and goods cannot
fall into the hands of terrorists.

The adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) has made
it possible to adapt and strengthen our tools to combat
this threat. By bolstering the cooperation, assistance
and interaction that must guide our efforts, we will be
able to better prevent the risk of acquisition of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors. France will
remain fully involved in that regard.

