Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to express
our deep appreciation to the Spanish presidency for
having organized this timely open debate, coinciding
with the shocking developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories. I also thank Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson for his very candid briefing.

I wish to join the voice of Algeria to those of the
overwhelming majority of speakers who have so clearly
expressed themselves on what is happening at this very
moment in the Middle East and, in particular, in the
occupied land of Palestine. While it is unnecessary to
add to or go into the details that Minister Riad Malki
mentioned earlier, we share and live his feelings. Let
me add that in my country the outrage over the images
carried by all media is immense. Injustice, abuses and
arrogance continue to guide the behaviour of those who
think that there are no limits 4 not even concerning
the most sacred and dearest places, such as the Haram
Al-Sharif.

The recent and tragic developments and the
suffering of the Palestinian people demonstrate that
prospects for a peaceful settlement are becoming
increasingly unattainable. That is why my country
reiterates the following in the strongest possible terms.

First, the very core of the issue of Palestine and the
Middle East is the illegal occupation ofArab territories.
Whatever happens or by whatever angle one sees the
entire question of the situation in Palestine, there is
one fundamental issue that should never be forgotten
nor set aside: the illegal occupation of Arab land. As
long as we - the Security Council, the international
community and all stakeholders - ignore or belittle
that, there will be increased suffering, injustice and
violations of all kinds that will occur before our eyes. It
is appalling that settlers and other civilians have been
given no more and no less than a kind of licence to kill.

Secondly, as long as a solution to the illegal
occupation is not envisioned and the Palestinian
people's legitimate national rights, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the Palestinian State capital, are not
recognized, the international community must protect
Palestinian civilians, in accordance with all the relevant
international conventions. In that regard, I welcome
the document issued today by the Secretary-General
that provides historical examples, many of the utmost
importance and relevance, and could serve as a model
for the protection of civilians.

Thirdly, the international community, individual
States, the Quartet and the Security Council have
a specific responsibility. Debates like today's are
necessary, but they must be fruitful and lead to
operational measures to de-escalate the crisis and set
the conditions to break the current impasse. There is
no wall high enough to block the legitimate grievances
of young and old alike. Israeli practices are not simply
illegal, they are wrong. Just a month ago, the Palestinian
flag was raised on the United Nations premises. It is
our shared responsibility to make that flag again fly
high over its own land, with the establishment of the
Palestinian State and Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

