Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency in a challenging month. This is clearly a
very important event as part of an impressive
programme of work. I should also like to thank the
United Kingdom for its work during the month of
August.

I join others in welcoming Prime Minister Pierre-
Louis to the Council meeting today and thanking her
for what she has been able to tell us. We are also
grateful for the chance to listen to the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, President Clinton, and to
express our appreciation of his continued engagement.
We also appreciate the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. He'di
Annabi, and want to thank him for his work and his
commitment.

Austria aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered later on by the representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union. I want to make a
number of specific points that are based on my own
experience during the mission of the Security Council
to Haiti.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/439), which highlights the continued
assistance of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to national efforts for peace and
stability in Haiti. We have the feeling that
MINUSTAH, under very difficult circumstances, is a
success story. This is a case in which United Nations
peacekeeping has been able to make a difference,
assure the peace and security of the Haitian people and
protect them against violence and organized crime.
One of the reasons this has been successful, from our
point of view, is the strong Latin American and
Caribbean participation in and co-ownership of this
Mission. At the same time, it is important that ensuring
the protection of citizens in Haiti has been recognized
as a challenge by the entire international community,
with contributions from all over the world, such as the
Chinese police contingent that we were able to visit
during our mission.

Important improvements have been made with
regard to the rule of law. With MINUSTAH's valuable
support, the Haitian National Police has been gradually
strengthened, contributing substantially to security and
stability along land and maritime borders and
throughout the country. Austria believes that the
ongoing training and vetting of the Haitian National
Police constitutes an essential element in the
re-establishment of reliable and trustworthy security
institutions. We also welcome the envisaged
adjustment of MINUSTAH's force configuration to
Haiti's country-specific needs. The additional number
of police officers for the formed police units will
enhance the Mission's capacity to support the Haitian
security forces.

At the same time, we agree with the Haitian
authorities that substantial progress remains to be made
in the judicial as well as the correction systems in
order to fight impunity and secure greater stability in
Haiti. Efforts to strengthen the capacity of the judiciary
to address issues such as prolonged pretrial detention
are important, and we are concerned about the
continued problematic situation in Haiti's prisons due
to increased overcrowding. The launching of the
construction of a new prison in Croix-des-Bouquets is
a first concrete and important step which must be
followed up with further efforts.

We are encouraged by, and encourage, the
strengthening of the judicial inspection unit, as well as
the reorganization of the Ministry of Justice. We are
also very interested in the forthcoming review of
existing criminal legislation, including on juvenile
delinquency. This is an area on which my country has
been able to cooperate with Haiti in the past, and we
are prepared and happy to continue that cooperation.
We also welcome the collaboration of MINUSTAH, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and the Haitian Government in strengthening measures
against corruption, organized crime and illicit
trafficking, and we encourage the ongoing involvement
of UNODC's expertise.

The benchmarks and revised indicators of
progress contained in the Secretary-General's report
are an important tool for measuring the achievements
of MINUSTAH, in cooperation with the Haitian
Government. These benchmarks provide a
comprehensive framework for the activities undertaken
by the host authorities, the Mission itself, the United
Nations country team and the international community,
and therefore contribute to enhanced coherence and
coordination among all actors.

The socio-economic situation in Haiti remains
precarious and thus continues to pose a threat to
stability. We therefore welcome warmly the dedication
of Special Envoy President Clinton in mobilizing
public and private investment, while at the same time
fostering the commitment of all relevant actors to
improving living conditions in Haiti. The decision of
30 June on debt cancellation by the international
financial institutions and the Paris Club was an
important step towards sustainable economic
development in the country.

Subsequent to the Security Council's mission to
MINUSTAH in March, elections to the Senate in Haiti
were held in April. We are glad to see that these
elections were conducted in a generally peaceful
climate. We believe that it is vital for the Government
to continue its efforts in the field of political dialogue,
in the extension of State authority as well as
decentralization, and to engage all relevant actors in
these processes. In light of the challenges ahead, we
fully support the Secretary-General's recommendation
to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH for an additional
year.

