Mr. Griffiths: I would like to thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Council
on the latest developments in the Yemen peace process.

Since my most recent briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.8551), I have been privileged to meet with
ministers and senior officials engaged on Yemen in
many countries and many capitals. I have been reassured
in every case by their unanimous desire to see progress
towards a political solution, and to see it quickly. The
unanimity of the international community mirrors, of
course, the same unanimity we see and cherish in the
Council. In those visits and meetings, I was equally
impressed by a common appreciation of the primacy of
a political solution. All those with whom I spoke were
clear that progress in realizing the objectives of the
Stockholm Agreement, made in December, is crucial
to the chances of political negotiations to end the war.

Al-Hudaydah, of course, is at the epicentre of those
objectives. Our way forward, then, is clear and supported
by international consensus - to implement the
Al-Hudaydah agreement and, with that experience and
that record, engage the parties swiftly on a settlement,
the outlines of which, I think, are well known to all.
Before I turn to the facts on the ground, I would like to
add two elements of central and contextual importance.

The first and certainly the most important is the
dire and worsening humanitarian situation, about
which we will all hear from my colleagues, Mr. Mark
Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley. The second is the
frightening prospect of war in our region. In all of the
people I met, I found a strong desire to keep Yemen out
of any such conflict, should it transpire. This is a desire
I share deeply.

Last week, I had the privilege to meet President Hadi
Mansour, which was an opportunity for me to renew my
commitment to the cause we share - returning Yemen
to a peace defined by the resolutions of the Council,
including resolution 2216 (2015). In addition, just last
night, I returned from a visit to Sana'a, where I was
able to discuss my concerns with their leadership in
order to advance the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement and the political process.

We are facing a crucial moment for the destiny of
this war. We need to think now together of the realities
and opportunities that define our chances of making a
move towards peace.

First, with regard to the redeployment of some
coalition forces in parts of Yemen, as senior coalition
officials have themselves confirmed, that act is intended
to place peace first at the centre of their efforts to
restore peace and stability in Yemen. This is a reminder
of the view already expressed that peace will come on
the back of promises made in Stockholm now becoming
promises kept in Yemen.

Secondly, Al-Hudaydah is, as I have said, central
as the gateway to the political process. It gives me
enormous pleasure to congratulate both parties, whose
meeting this week on a United Nations vessel, under the
leadership of my colleague, Lieutenant General Michael
Lollesgaard, was a notable success. The meeting was
held in - as Michael referred to it - open waters in
the Red Sea. The parties, meeting in close quarters
over two days - the first meeting in joint format since
February - agreed together the operational details of
all redeployment envisaged in our talks in Stockholm.
This is an important breakthrough and an encouraging
sign of progress.

Nevertheless, a major hurdle remains - agreement
on local security forces, in particular, as well as attention
to the issue of revenue and governance. Those issues
will require hard work, flexibility and a conviction,
as in the Stockholm Agreement, that any solution is a
temporary one, since a more permanent solution lies in
the comprehensive agreements to be negotiated by the
parties later. I shall redouble my efforts with the parties
in the coming weeks to reach an agreement to satisfy
both and I am calling on all the parties to muster the
needed political will to make this happen with all speed.

IfI may, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard for
his collegiality, perseverance and wisdom. Under his
leadership, the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement has served as a credible,
effective and impartial arbiter that has contributed very
significantly to the peace process.

Progress in Al-Hudaydah would allow the parties
to work together, whether on tripartite monitoring, the
collection of revenues or on common assessments of
possible ceasefire violations. My hope is that progress
in Al-Hudaydah will finally allow us to focus on the
political process, and I hope that we will see this before
the end of the summer. Yemen, indeed, as we have
observed before, has no time to waste.

Thirdly, in Taiz, we have noticed limited progress,
but progress nonetheless, in opening up Taiz to
civilian and humanitarian access. The first sign of that
hope - we have heard some reference to this in recent
meetings - will be the prospect of the opening of one
humanitarian crossing. We will be exploring with the
Taiz Committee, which was established in Sweden,
those opportunities in the coming days and how we can
benefit from them in order to ensure security, peace
and stability for a city that has been yearning for that
more than anything else for many years. I hope also
that Taiz can benefit from the support of local-led and
community initiatives to bridge the divides of war.
Women's groups have a very distinguished history in
that activity in Taiz, and I hope we will all benefit from
their example.

There are, of course, remaining challenges. We were
all dismayed by last week's announcement in Sana'a
of the imposition of death sentences on 30 prisoners.
The Secretary-General, as we all know, objects to the
death penalty in all circumstances. Their sentences are
now on appeal, and I have urged both due process and,
ultimately, clemency in the spirit of humanity.

I am also concerned that the political and security
landscape in Yemen, whether on the front lines or in
other areas, is becoming increasingly fragmented. As
the war continues, there is a considerable risk that
there will be further tensions and that it will become
increasingly more difficult to reconcile those tensions
and to resolve them the longer this war continues.
There are also continuous acts of political and military
provocations that can hold back the peace process.
Although the Al-Hudaydah ceasefire broadly - and
remarkably -continues to hold, military operations,
as we have been frequently reminded, have continued
on several other front lines, as well as on Yemen's
border with Saudi Arabia to the north. I am particularly
alarmed by the continued attacks by Ansar Allah on
civilian infrastructure in Saudi Arabia.

Yemen is near the front lines ofa potential tragedy
arising from the tensions in the region. It is not in the
interest of Yemen to be dragged into a regional war. All
parties should desist from any actions that take Yemen
in that direction. We need to prevent this to reduce
regional tensions, to save lives and to give Yemen a
prospect for peace rather than an enlarged war. We have
to see de-escalation of violence now if those ambitions
are to be achieved.

Finally, I cannot help but hope that Yemen might be
nearing the end of its war. I realize I am often accused
of optimism, and I happily stand guilty of that charge.
However, it was not me but a very senior and very wise
official in the region who recently said that the war can
end this year. I take that as an instruction, and I hope
that today I have been able to share my views as to how
we can begin to meet that aspiration.

