Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): Mr. President, I
should like to join my colleagues who spoke this morning
in expressing my satisfaction at seeing you chair this
important meeting. In the second half of this year the
United Nations and its principal organs are favoured with
a generous portion of Namibian chairmanships. We also
wish to commend your country for having taken the
initiative to devote a public meeting of the Council to the
issue of children and armed conflict.

I am grateful to Special Representative Otunnu for his
statement on the subject. He has shown once again that
with him the advocacy of the cause of children and armed
conflict is in able hands.

The protection of children appears to be one of those
issues which unite all nations. This is borne out, for
instance, by the almost universal ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. It is also accepted
throughout the world that children require particular
protection in situations of armed conflict. Today it is the
Security Council that will take a step to bring us closer to
this goal.

It is important to realize that this is an item which will
not disappear from the agenda after today's work. In the
preparation of this meeting one could sense the
determination of all members of the Council to see to it
that the issue of children in armed conflict will be
addressed every time the Council takes action to maintain
or restore peace and security.

In various instances the Council has done so in the
recent past. This debate therefore comes at the right time:
we can build on concrete experience and plan further
action. That is the essence of the draft resolution before us,
and it has the full support of my delegation.

As we pointed out on an earlier occasion, it is of
particular importance that personnel involved in
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building activities be
familiarized with subjects such as the protection, rights and
welfare of children. They should be specifically trained to
deal with child soldiers.

By definition child soldiers are under age by
international or national standards and are therefore unfit
for participation in armed conflict. Tragically, these child
soldiers, often in their early teens, are not only the victims
of the armed conflict in which they are caught up, but, as
recent experience has shown, they can be the perpetrators
of atrocities as well. An integrated approach should lead
to their disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in
society.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child and other
instruments contain clear prohibitions with regard to the
use of child soldiers. These norms have to be respected.
In the field of standards-setting some further progress is
being made. The Netherlands has begun the process
leading to the ratification of International Labour
Organization Convention No. 182, which prohibits forced
or compulsory labour, including forced or compulsory
recruitment of children for use in armed conflict.
Obviously, States are free to go beyond the minimum
standards; in that case the norms that provide the highest
degree of protection to children will prevail.

This Council has had before it many reports on
individual situations where the rights of children were
violated on a massive scale. In such cases it is the
responsibility of all States and the international
community to ensure that the perpetrators are brought to
justice.

From the outset the Netherlands has been supportive,
including financially, of the work of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative for Children in Armed
Conflict, Under-Secretary-General Otunnu. By drawing
attention to the impact of armed conflict on children, both
in general and in concrete cases - such as in the
countries he visited - he is fulfilling his important
mandate, which was modelled on the recommendations
contained in the watershed report by Ms. Graga Machel.

My delegation also wishes to pay tribute to the
important work of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and of other agencies, such as the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees -
as well as the contribution of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and numerous other organizations - in
alleviating the impact of armed conflicts on children.
UNICEF has been instrumental in effectuating active
child protection for many years. It also applies its child-
rights perspective to the situation of children in conflict
situations. I am sure the recently launched Peace and
Security Agenda for Children will further guide UNICEF
in its worldwide activities aimed at the protection of
children. That the Netherlands is one of the major donors
to UNICEF's programme, we owe largely to the
remarkable support and trust the organization has
generated among individual Dutch contributors.

 

The Netherlands is prepared to increase its support for
projects benefiting children affected by armed conflicts. At
present, we lend support to several projects aimed at the
rehabilitation of child soldiers in Africa.

In all this, we let ourselves be guided by a complex of
considerations. First, it goes without saying that the fate of
individual children is the subject of our concern. But
beyond that, we are dealing with the fate of nations.
Children unsettled and traumatized by armed conflict risk
growing up to be a liability for their society, whereas
children saved from this scourge can help build a healthy
society and prevent the next conflict.

