We congratulate Indonesia on its successful presidency of the Security Council and thank the briefers for their insightful perspectives on the Secretary-General's eleventh strategic-level report (S/2020/774) on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh) to international peace and security and the various efforts of the United Nations to support Member States in countering that threat. Appropriately, this meeting takes place shortly after the United Nations marked the third International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism on 21 August in an event that provided a moving and timely reminder of the immense human costs that result from terrorism. As humankind continues to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, South Africa strongly supports the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire in all corners of the world. The Secretary-General's report illustrates that, much like the COVID-19 pandemic, which is proving to be a stubborn threat despite massive efforts to counter it, ISIL/Da'esh continues to be a stubborn threat to international peace and security. The report describes a new surge of ISIL activity in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, while the group continues to pursue its deadly agenda via new affiliations in different regions of the world. South Africa is encouraged by the progress made by the Organization's leadership in its development of a global multi-agency framework to assist Member States with the protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of third-country nationals returning from Syria and Iraq in order to meet the ongoing challenge of individuals with suspected links to ISIL - especially women and children - stranded in camps or being held in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. The report also describes the inherent risks of the greater online recruitment and radicalization of a much larger captive audience, and of making greater use of the Internet as a substitute for activities impeded by the COVID-19 pandemic. Equally important is the report's mention of the possibility that the widespread economic depression resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic could lead to the exacerbation of socioeconomic challenges linked to radicalization and terrorism. South Africa has consistently sought to highlight the importance of measures to address these root causes, which give rise to the resentment that ultimately fuels terrorism. On that point, we urge the United Nations and its Member States not to allow the COVID-19 pandemic to prevent us from reaching the Sustainable Development Goals by their target date, which would inevitably allow extremist movements throughout the world to take further root. We are of course particularly concerned about the situation in Africa. As the report details, the persistent instability in Libya continues to provide fertile ground for the spread of terrorism on the continent. At the same time, Islamic State affiliates in the form of the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, the Islamic State West Africa Province and Al-Shabaab in Somalia, and the Islamic State Central Africa Province (ISCAP) continue to carry out frequent attacks while attempting to entrench their operations and strengthen their ties with core and local strategic partners of ISIL. Naturally, a key concern for South Africa is the situation described in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where ISCAP has continued its attempts to establish a greater operational presence and has carried out attacks against the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the forces of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are also particularly concerned about the insurgency that is gripping northern parts of South Africa's neighbour, Mozambique, where some attacks have been claimed on behalf of ISCAP. Both of those situations are the focus of high-level regional attention by the Southern African Development Community (SADC). Indeed, only a few days ago, the leaders of SADC's 16 member States expressed their commitment to supporting Mozambique in addressing terrorism and violent attacks. It is important that these regional efforts continue to enjoy the full support of the international community and the United Nations. Allow me in this regard to express South Africa's appreciation to the United Nations for its continued support, including the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism's valuable contribution to a Southern Africa-wide counter- financing of terrorism operational plan, developed and implemented in collaboration with the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group. Allow me to conclude by reiterating South Africa's steadfast condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and our strong commitment to supporting United Nations-led efforts to fight this scourge. As always, we call for the further development and enhancement of regional strategic partnerships, including with the African Union, and we emphasize the critical importance of ensuring that all of our counter-terrorism measures across the board are conducted in accordance with international human rights and humanitarian law.
