Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Ambassador Osorio
for his outstanding work as President of the Council for
the month of April and to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
May. I will speak in French, in a tribute both to you
and to the French language.

I should like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for
his briefing and for the information that he provided on
developments in connection with his investigation in
Libya. We are aware of the heavy responsibility falling
to the Prosecutor, as an independent organ within the
International Criminal Court, with respect to the
carrying out of the investigation in Libya.

Germany strongly supports the work of the Court
in Libya. I should like to take this opportunity to thank
the Prosecutor and his team for having swiftly opened
an investigation. The perpetrators of crimes against
international law in Libya must be made to answer for
their actions as soon as possible, and justice must be
done for the victims.

In unanimously adopting resolution 1970 (2011)
and deciding to refer the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court, the Security Council was
far-sighted. The resolution focuses on the protection of
civilians; each State is responsible for protecting its
people against the most serious crimes. That is the
second message implicit in resolution 1970 (2011). Its
importance is not limited to Libya but goes beyond that
country.

Violence must end as soon as possible in Libya
and a solid ceasefire must be reached in order to allow
for a redoubling of efforts in the quest to achieve a
political solution. The Doha and Cairo meetings
contributed to a large extent to giving concrete
expression to the objectives that the international
community is pursuing beyond military action.

We deem it important to involve all interested
parties in a political process, in particular the
protagonists in the region. The Al-Qadhafi regime
gambled with its legitimacy and lost. It must yield to a
Government born of the will of the people, one that
will endeavour to bring democracy and openness to
Libya. That will also require a process of reconciliation
in the country as well as a systematic clarification of
the acts of injustice that have been committed. Hence
Germany welcomes the fact that the investigation of
the situation in Libya is being carried out not only with
determination but also with the requisite caution, in
particular with respect to the protection of witnesses.
The initial swift progress that has been made in the
investigation, which the Prosecutor has told us about,
is encouraging. We deem it of the highest importance
that justice be done as quickly as possible for the
victims of the conflict in Libya and that those who bear
specific and serious responsibility for any crimes
against humanity or other serious crimes under the
Rome Statute answer for their actions. Those who are
continuing to commit serious crimes in Libya must
know one thing: the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court, together if necessary or
separately, will ensure, within their respective spheres
of competence, that crimes against international law
shall not go unpunished.

Cooperation on the part of the international
community with the International Criminal Court is
essential in order to shed as much light as possible on
the serious crimes alleged to have been committed in
Libya. Germany welcomes the high level of
cooperation with the Prosecutor that many States and
organizations have already displayed. However, the
primary responsibility in that respect falls on the
Libyan authorities. We urge them to respect the
commitments incumbent upon them pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) and to cooperate swiftly and
fully with the International Criminal Court and the
Prosecutor. The Libyan authorities must allow the
Prosecutor to commence an investigation on Libyan
territory as soon as possible.

We are extremely concerned at the suffering that
is still being inflicted on the civilian population of
Libya. Serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law remain the order of the
day. We are deeply concerned at the instances of rape
and torture as well as the use of cluster weapons and
heavy weapons against the civilian population, as
described by the Prosecutor in his report. We condemn
in the strongest terms the continuation of the violence
and urge all the parties to the conflict to put an end to
those crimes and to respect human rights and
international humanitarian law.

The efforts deployed by the United Nations, in
particular by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, to relieve humanitarian suffering
and coordinate humanitarian aid are exemplary and
welcome. However, the situation in Misrata in
particular remains of concern. Germany recently made
available substantial funds for the delivery of
humanitarian aid to Misrata. My country has already
provided considerable humanitarian aid to the civilian
population affected by the crisis in Libya, and we stand
ready to continue to provide assistance.

