The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We are grateful to today's briefers, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-
General of the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism and Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes, for
their thorough analysis of the current state of affairs in
Afghanistan. Their assessments confirm that the main
barriers to stabilizing the situation in the country are
the threats represented by terrorism and drugs. The
conclusion to be drawn is that our fight against them
must be uncompromising, and we must do it together.

The security situation in Afghanistan continues
to be the most serious cause for concern. The Taliban
controls a significant part of the country's territory.
The insurgents' latest offensive raises serious questions
about their willingness to begin peace negotiations. All
of this once again convinces us of the damage that is
done by relying on force to resolve the problem and on
attempts to marginalize some regional stakeholders and
bring in others. These kinds of balancing acts worsen
regional tensions and antagonize the very stakeholders
who are capable of contributing to a settlement.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is a factor in this deteriorating situation. The group,
which has as many as 10,000 fighters in its ranks, is
already operating in at least nine of the 34 provinces,
and increasingly often is organizing barbaric terrorist
attacks with numerous terrorist casualties, including in
Kabul, and continually consolidating its positions in
northern Afghanistan, turning it into a springboard for
further expansioninto CentralAsia. ISIL's establishment
of camps for training militants, including fighters from
Central Asian States, is particularly worrying. We must
not keep silent about these facts.

Against this backdrop, we are again hearing
accusations that Russia is supporting the Taliban.
That is not new. This is something we have heard
about frequently in the past few years, with practically
identical wording every time and zero facts to back it
up. We get the distinct impression that their true goal
is to divert attention from the many real mistakes that
have been made in Afghanistan over the past 17 years.
One ofthe insurgents' sources of support is the military
assistance supplied to Afghanistan by a number of our
partners, which is provided without being properly
accounted for and is frequently simply being stolen.
We should point out that Western military experts have
mentioned this too.

We have had no clear explanations of the
unidentified helicopters transporting weapons and
fighters for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) through Afghan airspace, which is completely
controlled by our partners. The stubborn silence on this
subject continues. Our demand that the situation be
investigated without delay and this undisclosed practice
cease still stands. We expect a proper report, not a form
letter. And in general, we need to see more determined
efforts from the Afghan authorities and the foreign
contingents stationed there to clear the terrorists out of
northern Afghanistan.

As Mr. Fedotov rightly pointed out today, the
terrorist threat is inextricably tied to the drug problem.
Afghan narcotics support the terrorists financially.
In 2017, the acreage in the country under drug
crops increased by 63 per cent and drug production
doubled. All of this intensifies the drug threat both for
Afghanistan and internationally. The situation clearly
demands that we ramp up our collective efforts rapidly
or risk letting this get out of control for good. We want
to remind the Council that the Collective Security
Treaty Organization - which has extensive experience
in countering the drug threat, including through its
Operation Kanal - is always ready to put its shoulder
to the wheel in this area. At the same time, we believe
that the Afghans themselves must play the decisive role.
After all, it is the country's people who end up being
the main victims of illegal business.

We welcome President Ghani's statement on
the announcement and subsequent extension of
the temporary ceasefire. It is important that these
measures not be expanded to the international terrorist
groups operating in Afghanistan, especially ISIL.
We hope that the peace initiatives will give impetus
to ending the fratricidal war in Afghanistan and to
launching a peaceful dialogue and a process of national
reconciliation. We strongly urge the Taliban to respond
in kind.

We support the existing formats for national
reconciliation in Afghanistan. However, we believe
firmly that the principle of honest and equitable
partnership, taking the interests of all the regional
stakeholders into account, that forms the basis of the
Moscow format and mechanism of the revived Shanghai
Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group,
is ideally suited to the task of launching the negotiation
process. In that context, we note the Contact Group's
successful holding on 28 May in Beijing of its second
meeting, in which the participants unanimously
affirmed their readiness to promote interaction within
its framework based on the protocol defining the
priority tasks and modalities for the mechanism's work.

Parliamentary elections, followed by a presidential
election, are approaching in Afghanistan. We support
holding them on schedule and take note of the authorities'
statement regarding the successful completion of the
voter registration procedure. In the circumstances, it is
more important than ever to keep to a balanced internal
political policy.

We cannot allow Afghan society to become
ethnically polarized or permit any infringements on the
rights of minorities. The elections should be inclusive
and a powerful force for consolidation, bringing
Afghanistan one step closer to attaining full political
and economic independence and returning it to the
path of sustainable development. It is obvious to us that
ensuring broad regional and international cooperation
will help to achieve that goal. Russia is ready for
constructive work.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
