Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General; Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under
Secretary-General, United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism; and Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

On behalf of my delegation, I wish to express our
profound shock at the numerous deaths of civilians that
have occurred since the beginning of this year, caused
by the conflict in Afghanistan. Moreover, the complex
and violent situation that is afflicting the country is
occurring within the framework of preparations for
inclusive parliamentary and district council elections,
scheduled for 20 October. In that regard, Bolivia
expresses its concern over the security incidents related
to the elections, causing 86 deaths and 185 injuries, the
majority women and children. We condemn the fact
that around 75 per cent of those violent incidents have
taken place in schools or mosques that are being used
for electoral purposes.

We also categorically condemn the announcement
on 25 April by the Taliban of its annual spring offensive,
named the "Al-Khandaq", without having even
considered the ceasefire offer made by the Government
of Afghanistan within the framework of the second
meeting of the Kabul process for peace and security,
during which the President presented a proposal for
peace talks with the Taliban without preconditions.

It is worth mentioning that, as part of that offer,
the President promised that he would consider such
issues as political inclusion, a ceasefire, a revision of
the Constitution, the release of prisoners, the removal
of leaders from sanctions lists and the reintegration of
refugees and ex-combatants. However, ignoring the
presidential proposal, the Taliban increased its terrorist
activities against district administrative centres in
April, using improvised explosive devices in attacks of
a complex or suicidal nature. To date, such attacks have
led to 311 deaths and 707 injuries, the majority civilians.

We also highlight the unilateral ceasefire announced
by the Government on 7 June, and we regret that it was
not accepted by the Taliban. We firmly condemn all
violent actions by anti-Government elements against the
Afghan electoral process, such as attacks on electoral
facilities, the kidnapping of electoral personnel and
the intimidation and harassment of registered voters.
We categorically oppose the suicide attacks that were
carried out at a national registration centre in Kabul
on 22 April and at a voter registration centre in Khost
province on 6 May. It is imperative that the Security
Council urge all parties to respect the rights of the
Afghan people so as to ensure that it is their sovereign
decision that reshapes the history of the country.

As on other occasions, my delegation expresses
its resounding rejection of the recruitment and use of
children by anti-Government elements, as well as any
act that endangers the life, integrity and dignity of a
child. We are alarmed by the reference in the Secretary-
General's report to the fact that the task force verified
a case of sexual violence against a child. Such illegal
situations and violations of international human rights
law must be thoroughly investigated by national
jurisdictional bodies to find the perpetrators so that they
feel the full force of the law and are held accountable.

Bolivia expresses its support and reaffirms its
commitment to the work being carried out by UNAMA
in Afghanistan. We are optimistic about the results of the
second meeting of the Kabul process on cooperation for
peace and security, held on 28 February. The meeting
enjoyed the participation of 26 countries, regional
organizations and the United Nations, during which
they reiterated their full support for the offer of the
Government of Afghanistan to engage in direct talks
with the Taliban and decided to strengthen regional and
international cooperation for peace, reconciliation and
the fight against terrorism.

Similarly, with regard to the peace process in
Afghanistan, we welcome the fact that the process
was reaffirmed at the conference held in Tashkent
on 27 March, with the participation of high-level
representatives of 23 countries, the European Union
and the United Nations. The support of the international
community is essential to Afghans finalizing a peace
process. On the list of priorities, my delegation wishes
to express its full backing for the support provided
by UNAMA to the Afghan Government and donors
in the preparations for the Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan, organized by the United Nations and the
Afghan Government, to be held on 28 November in
Geneva. We believe that those issues remain key for
the conference programme, and the measures that the
Government must take in the light of the conference are
indispensable to the success of the event.

Furthermore, for my delegation, the fact that in
recent months many families have been displaced
and forced to move several times, without immediate
prospects of a safe and dignified return to their homes,
remains an situation that the Security Council must
continue to prioritize. In that regard, we call on the
countries of the region to reinforce their commitment
to the exchange of information and documentation,
which, conditions permitting, must guarantee displaced
persons a voluntary, informed, dignified, safe and
permanent return to their places of origin and avoid any
replication of conditions in which they must return to
a situation of insecurity or to areas where they do not
come from.

Finally, Bolivia stresses that there is no military
solution to the situation in Afghanistan. We endorse
any initiative for inclusive dialogue that respects the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Afghanistan, with the full participation of Afghan
women in socioeconomic, political, peace and security
processes, with their full protection from any act
of violence, in full accordance with the national
strategy and action plan on the elimination of violence
against women.

