The President: At the outset of the meeting I
should like to extend, on behalf of the Council, a warm
welcome to the new Permanent Representative of
Turkey to the United Nations, His Excellency
Mr. Ertugrul Apakan. We look forward to working
closely with him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East

Letter dated 6 August 2009 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2009/407)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium, Israel, Italy, Lebanon and
Spain, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salam
(Lebanon) and Ms. Shalev (Israel) took seats at
the Council table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2009/431, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Belgium, Croatia, France,
Italy, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America. I
wish to draw the attention of participants to documents
S/2009/330 and 8/2009/407, containing the tenth report
2

of the Secretary-General on Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) and a letter dated 6 August
2009 from the Secretary-General, respectively.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1884 (2009).

I now give the floor to the representative of
Israel.


