Mr. Solana: I should like to thank you, Sir, and
all the members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to speak here today.

It is very appropriate that we should devote time
and attention to the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina today. There are so many issues and
events competing for our attention in the Balkans that
sometimes we risk neglecting all but the most
immediate of crises. I welcome therefore the
Presidency's initiative in organizing today's debate.
Now is a crucial time for all of us - Bosnians and the
international community alike - to reflect on our
responsibilities and to commit ourselves to meeting
them.

The human and political tragedy of the war that
began 10 years ago is still a Vivid memory for me
personally and, I believe, for most Europeans. I have
closely followed the events in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in different capacities during that period of time.

Today I believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina is at
a crossroads. Fundamental choices have to be made,
and responsibilities assumed, by its people and by its
politicians. On the one hand, Bosnia and Herzegovina
could make a positive choice to make a determined
effort rapidly to implement reforms and join the path
that leads towards the European Union. Alternatively,
the country could choose the path that will, I believe,
lead to ever-greater isolation, to missed economic
opportunities, and to a political wilderness where it
will be left behind by more ambitious and more far-
sighted neighbours.

Progress has no doubt been made during recent
years. Indeed, a number of very important and
significant achievements can be recalled: the adoption
of important pieces of State-level legislation, an
increase in minority returns and the steady
strengthening of the country's institutions. All of these
are very important steps forward, and constitute proof
that real progress is possible given the political will.

That progress has been due in no small part to the
outgoing High Representative, my friend Wolfgang
Petritsch. I would like, on behalf of the European
Union, to pay tribute to him, his skills and tenacity, and
the encouraging progress he has made.

The European Union very much welcomes the
fact that, last week in Brussels, the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board designated
Lord Ashdown as successor to Wolfgang Petritsch. I
look forward to the confirmation of his appointment by
the Security Council. The new High Representative
will inherit a situation where, despite the enormous
progress to date, much more remains to be done. The
European Union expects the authorities at all levels to
cooperate fully with the new High Representative.

Let me add that, as has been mentioned before,
there also needs to be decisive progress as regards the
war crimes indictees. I am convinced that the painful
chapter in Bosnia's history that began a decade ago
will never be properly closed until justice is done, and
is seen to be done. That means that all indictees must
answer the charges made against them. State and entity
Governments must therefore cooperate fully, in deed as
well as in word, with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.

The International Community must also meet its
responsibilities. Here, the European Union is playing
an increasingly important role: first, in terms of
financial assistance; secondly, in terms of providing a
longer-term political perspective; and thirdly, in terms
of a concrete contribution to peace and stability.

The European Union has provided, and will
continue to provide, an important amount of financial
assistance. In total, the European Union has provided
more than 3 billion euros in financial assistance to
Bosnia and Herzegovina since 1991. This year alone
the European Union is likely to contribute a further 200
million euros.

The European Union has provided Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the wider region the prospect of
eventual integration with the European Union. A new
phase has begun, and a new perspective has been
opened. While the Dayton/Paris Accords were designed
to guide the country away from war, the prospect of an
eventual stabilization and association agreement offers
a clear route towards a European future. But the pace
of progress towards that European perspective is
entirely in the hands of Bosnia and Herzegovina itself.
One needs only to consider the relative progress of
other States in the region to understand what I have just
said. If a determined effort is not made soon by
Sarajevo and Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
be left behind.

The European Union is preparing to take on an
important new responsibility as part of the international
community. Let me take this opportunity to say a few
words about the new European Union police mission,
which will be ready to take over from the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) on 1 January 2003. This is
the first crisis-management operation undertaken by
the European Union in the civilian crisis management
field.

First, it will build on the remarkable
achievements of the IPTF under the leadership of
Jacques-Paul Klein and Mr. Coeurderoy. The mission
will follow, but not replace, the IPTF. It will be a
different mission, but it will draw extensively on
IPTF's experience - and not least on Jacques Klein's
help and advice - reflecting what the IPTF will have
achieved by the end of the year and what else needs to
be done in the coming year. It will also draw from the
very good and important cooperation established on the
ground with the Stabilization Force (SFOR).

The European Union police mission will seek to
establish sustainable policing arrangements under
Bosnia and Herzegovina ownership in accordance with
best European and international practice, thereby
raising current Bosnia and Herzegovina police
standards. The European Union police mission,
entrusted with the necessary authority to monitor,
mentor and inspect, should achieve its goal by the end
of 2005. Its strength would be around 480 police
officers and 70 civilians, as has already been
mentioned by Jacques Klein.

Our aim is a broad approach to the whole range
of rule of law needs, including police activities. The
European Union police mission, supported by the
European Community's institution-building
programmes, would therefore contribute to overall
peace implementation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as to the achievement of the European Union's
overall policy in the region, notably the stabilization
and association process.

The Secretary-General has stressed on many
occasions that a regional actor should assume the
follow-on to the IPTF, to preserve what has been
achieved and to continue monitoring and assistance.
The rapid development of the European security and
defence policy and the work done by European Union
member States on capabilities, including on police
capabilities, have made it possible for the European
Union to assume that follow-on.

I very much welcome the fact that this very first
mission of ours serves to emphasize at least two things:
first, the openness of the European security and
defence policy and, secondly, the willingness and
ability of the European Union to work closely with the
United Nations. We have decided to invite 20 countries
to make offers of contributions to the European Union
police mission. Moreover, the transition from the IPTF
to the European Union police mission appears to me to
be a concrete example of the kind of cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations
that is now feasible, desirable and in line with the
Brahimi recommendations. Both the European Union
and the United Nations are aware of the need to
establish practical arrangements to ensure a smooth and
seamless transition between the IPTF and the European
Union police mission.

The European security and defence policy
strengthens the Union's contribution to international
peace and security in accordance with the principles of
the United Nations Charter. It also increases the range
of instruments available to the international community
in response to crises. Given the many commitments
that the United Nations is facing, the follow-on to the
IPTF by the European Union will help the United
Nations to allocate resources elsewhere. It will thus
result not only in a demonstration of cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations in
this area but also - and this is our shared hope -
bring added value to the efforts of the United Nations
in general.

A little more than 10 years ago it seemed
inconceivable to many of us that a conflict as bitter and
as brutal as that in Bosnia and Herzegovina would ever
break out again in Europe. Many painful lessons have
been learnt in the intervening period. Ten years after
the war began, the European Union has proved its
commitment to the future stability and prosperity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the wider region. We
are absolutely determined to play our part in the
establishment of peace, security and stability. We have
offered the prospect of, and concrete assistance in, the
progressive integration into European structures. But
alone our commitment, our determination, our vision is
not enough. We need from the Bosnian people and
politicians a similar degree of commitment,
determination and vision. It is time for us all to fulfil
our responsibilities, and thus to allow Bosnia and
Herzegovina to focus on the decade that lies ahead.

