Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to express my condolences at
the great number of innocent people who have become
casualties as a result of the explosions in Istanbul and
to condemn the violent actions of terrorists. I also
extend our condolences to the representative of the
United Kingdom on its victims.

I wish to thank Secretary-General Annan for the
statement he has just made. We also welcome the
representative of the presidency of the African
Union - the Foreign Minister of Mozambique - as
well as the Deputy Foreign Minister of Tanzania, who
have travelled a long distance. Their participation in
today's meeting illustrates the support of African
countries for the holding of the international
conference on the Great Lakes region, as well as the
importance they attach to it.

The situation in the Great Lakes region of Africa
has been turbulent in recent years. That situation has
had a serious deleterious effect on peace, stability and
economic development in the region and in the African
continent as a whole. There are complicated historical
reasons for the problems in the Great Lakes region, but
those problems are also influenced by many
contemporary elements. Resolving them requires
coordinated efforts on the part of the countries of the
region, as well as tremendous assistance from the
international community.

China believes that the parties concerned should
proceed in the interest of peace and development on the
African continent, especially in the Great Lakes region,
as well as on the basis of respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned and
pursuant to the relevant United Nations resolutions and
the agreements reached by the parties through dialogue
and consultation to seek common ground, put aside
their differences and increase their initial confidence in
order to gradually resolve tensions and differences.

Thanks to the common efforts of African
countries and the forceful encouragement of the
international community, progress has recently been
made in the peace processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Burundi. On the
initiative of Secretary-General Annan, on 26
September 2003 the leaders of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda
issued in New York a declaration of principles for
good-neighbourly relations and cooperation. That
declaration expressed the good will of the parties and
their commitment to peace and cooperation, thereby
injecting new vitality into normalizing the situation in
the countries concerned and accelerating the peace
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi. We hope that the parties concerned will
continue to make efforts to maintain positive
momentum and resolve outstanding problems.

China, as a permanent member of the Security
Council and a friend of the countries of the Great
Lakes region, has always paid close attention to
developments in the situation in the region and has
actively participated in, and promoted, a resolution of
the hot-spot problems there. We have contributed
peacekeeping troops to the United Nations Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and have
provided logistical assistance to the peacekeeping
forces of the African Union in Burundi.

China supports the initiative to convene an
international conference on the Great Lakes region. We
are encouraged by the progress made thus far in the
preparatory work for the conference. We call on the
international community to provide political and
financial support for the success of that meeting. In
that regard, we support the issuance of a presidential
statement by the President of the Security Council at
the end of today's meeting. We sincerely hope that,
through common effort, the conference will be a good
opportunity for the countries of the region to enhance
dialogue, resolve differences, rebuild peace and discuss
development. As always, China will play an active role
in promoting the early realization of lasting peace in
that region.

