Judge Meron: It is a privilege to appear once again
before the Security Council to provide a briefing on
the progress of the work of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals over the past
six months, and a great pleasure to do so under the
presidency of the Russian Federation.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my appreciation for the considerable attention and
efforts devoted to the Mechanism by the members of
the Council's Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, in particular in the context of the recent
review of the Mechanism's progress in completing its
mandate. I am grateful to the members of the Working
Group for their sustained support. I Wish to express
my gratitude to the delegation of Peru for its adept
leadership of the Group.

The Office of Legal Affairs continued to provide
vital assistance to the Mechanism during the reporting
period. I would like to convey my deep appreciation
to the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and
United Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel de Serpa
Soares, and to the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias, and their colleagues for
their important contributions to our work.

The Mechanism has undergone a number of
key changes since I appeared before the Council in
December of last year (see S/PV.8120). Upon the
historic closure of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), at the end of 2017, for
the first time since its founding, the Mechanism has
begun to stand on its own without the support of its two
predecessor tribunals and has taken on the full ambit of
the residual functions entrusted to it. For the first time,
the Mechanism also assumed full responsibility for a
wide array of administrative services essential to the
conduct of its mandate. It also continued to carry out a
retrial and to conduct a Wide range of other proceedings,
both inside and outside the courtroom, during a period
of heightened judicial activity.

Significantly, the Mechanism has done all of that
while facing unprecedented and unexpected challenges
with regard to resource constraints and as a result of
the rapid implementation of expenditure reductions,
the deployment of staff-downsizing measures and the
deterioration in staff morale.

The reporting period was therefore an arduous one
for the Mechanism in many respects. Yet it also saw the
Mechanism and its remarkable staff show resilience and
creativity, including addressing new operational risks
with resourcefulness and ingenuity and continuing
to seek novel ways to enhance the conduct of the

Mechanism's mandate. In that context, I wish to express
my particular gratitude to Registrar of the Mechanism,
Mr. Olufemi Elias, and his team for their perseverance in
the handling of the Mechanism's unprecedented budget
situation and its myriad implications for the institution.

I would like to acknowledge my fellow judges
for their work leading to another significant
development - the adoption in April of a revision to
the Code of Professional Conduct for the Judges of
the Mechanism, which introduces a new procedure by
which judges made themselves accountable for adhering
to the principles set forth in the Code. That important
advancement once again demonstrates the Mechanism's
commitment to best practice and to serving as a model
for accountability in all areas. That is but one example
of an important milestone reached during the reporting
period. I will keep my remaining remarks brief and
touch upon only a few of the matters discussed more
extensively in my written report submitted on 17 May
(see S/2018/47l).

The Mechanism continued to make important
strides during the reporting period in the conduct and
completion of its judicial work. The appeal hearing in
the case Prosecutor v. Vojislav Seselj was conducted
on 13 December 2017, with the judgement delivered on
11 April 2018. An appeal hearing in the case Prosecutor
v, Radovan Karadeie was conducted on 23 and 24 April,
ahead of the projections made last November. The aim
is to complete the case in December, considerably
earlier that previously predicted.

In the meantime, the retrial of the case Prosecutor
v. Jovica Stanisic' and Franko Simatovic is proceeding
apace, with the prosecution's presentation of its
case ongoing. Appeal proceedings are under way in
the case Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladie, with both the
prosecution and Mr. Mladie having filed notices of
appeal and briefings in progress. Review proceedings
in the case Prosecutor v. Augustin Ngirabatware are
likewise continuing, following the Withdrawal and
replacement of his counsel. A hearing in that case,
originally scheduled for February, is now expected to
be conducted in the latter half of this year.

A host of additional ad hoc judicial matters are also
pending before the Mechanism, involving everything
from motions concerning allegations of contempt of
court to applications to vary the protective measures
granted to vulnerable witnesses. As indicated in my
written report, the filing of such ad hoc judicial requests
before the Mechanism can be expected to continue for
some time to come.

Good progress is being to made on a number of
other fronts as well. With regard to the enforcement
of sentences, for instance, during the reporting period
the Mechanism transferred eight convicted persons
from the United Nations detention facility in Arusha
to enforcement States, including four individuals
to Senegal and four to Benin. The Mechanism is
continuing in its efforts to address enforcement needs
for the remaining convicted persons at both branches.
It is our aim, subject to the cooperation of States, to
complete the transfer of all finally convicted persons
currently held at either the United Nations detention
facility in Arusha or the United Nations detention
unit in The Hague before the end of this year. If this
is achieved, it will represent a major step forward
towards the completion of our mandate in this area.
The Mechanism expresses its appreciation to Member
States currently enforcing sentences or considering
doing so for their vital support.

Important milestones were reached during the
current reporting period in the area of archives
management as well, with the handover of the final and
substantial tranche of physical and digital records from
the ICTY to the Mechanism and the relocation of the
physical records of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda into the custom-built archives facility in
Arusha. The Mechanism has continued its efforts
aimed at increasing and enhancing the accessibility of
records in its custody throughout the reporting period,
including by expanding the availability of judicial
records on publicly searchable databases and providing
technical support and advice to important external
projects, such as the new Sarajevo information centre
on the ICTY, launchedjust days ago.

Subject to resource constraints, the Mechanism
looks forward to providing support for initiatives to
further develop such information and documentation
centres in the former Yugoslavia in the months to come,
in keeping with the Security Council's guidance in
resolution 1966 (2010), and to the continued exploration
of ways in which the Mechanism's cooperation with the
Government of Rwanda can be enhanced, in line with
resolution 2256 (2015). In the meantime, the Mechanism
continues to carry out other key residual functions
entrusted to it, from the provision of assistance in support
of accountability efforts in national jurisdictions to the
ongoing monitoring of cases referred to national courts
to the delivery of essential witness-protection services.
In doing all of this, the Mechanism strives to adhere
to the highest standards and to seek out ever-greater
efficiencies by deploying innovation and creativity at
every turn.

In this context, I wish to underscore the Mechanism's
appreciation of the work of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS), which, in addition to its
regular audits of specific aspects of the Mechanism's
operations, completed a broader evaluation of the
Mechanism's implementation of its mandate during the
2016-2017 period. We welcome all confirmations by
OIOS of the Mechanism's achievements in everything
from ensuring trial readiness to increasing cost-
efficiency and streamlining workflows in key areas.
But we are also just as grateful for the feedback and
recommendations from OIOS on ways in which
the Mechanism can improve its methods and work,
such as by enhancing cross-branch coordination to
strengthen the Mechanism's one-institution approach,
restructuring the provision of administrative services to
better address the needs at both branches and deploying
human-resource tools to monitory gender parity.

If international justice and the fight to create
a global culture of accountability are to succeed in
the long run, it will be possible only if we remain
open to such improvement, innovation and creative
problem-solving, whether it is my colleagues and I at
the Mechanism or, as suggested by the valuable open
debate conducted recently in this Chamber under the
Polish presidency (see S/PV.8264), the members of
the Council themselves. It will be possible only if we
continue to work together, maintaining an unerring
focus on the core principles underlying not just the
Mechanism's establishment, but the work of the United
Nations more generally for this ongoing commitment
and for this sustained and sustaining support that the
members of the Security Council continue to provide
to the Mechanism, and to broader efforts aimed at
ensuring principled accountability for serious violations
of international law.

