The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of August, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Jean-Marc de La
Sabliere, Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of July 2006. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador De La Sabliere for
the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.
"The Security Council pays tribute to the
citizens of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who, on 30 July 2006, took part in great numbers,
freely and peacefully, in democratic elections of
historical importance for their nation. It appeals
to them to receive the results with the same spirit
of civic responsibility, and to display the same
commitment in the subsequent polls, with a View
to ensuring the success of the democratic process.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Independent Electoral
Commission for the untiring efforts they made to
ensure that the polls could take place in the best
possible conditions, and looks forward to the
official announcement of the results by the
Commission. It expresses its support to the
Committee of the Wise chaired by President
Joachim Chissano, whose role contributes greatly
to the serenity and fairness of the electoral
process.

"The Security Council expresses its
gratitude to the United Nations Mission,
MONUC, as well as to all the international
partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who provided support to the electoral process, in
particular its African partners, and especially
South Africa, as well as the European Union and
the force it has temporarily deployed during this
period.

"The Security Council notes that the
electoral campaign and the voting process took
place largely in a calm environment. It deplores
the incidents which occurred in recent days, in
particular in Kinshasa, Mbuji Mayi and Mweka.
It endorses the opinion of the International
Committee in Support to the Transition (CIAT),
who welcomed, in this context, the work of the
National Police forces.

"The Security Council urges all political
actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to continue to work to ensure that the electoral
process proceeds in a free, transparent and
peaceful manner, in accordance with the agreed
timetable. The Council calls on political leaders
to refrain from making inflammatory speeches.

"The Security Council underlines that those
elections will mark the completion of a long
period of rule by transitional institutions, and the
06-45429
start of democratic rule. The people who will be
destined to lead the country will bear the
important responsibility to provide long-term
foundations for the restoration of peace and
stability, national reconciliation and the
establishment of the rule of law in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo."
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2006/36.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.55 p.rn.

