Mr. Cabral (Portugal): At the outset, I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his very
thorough briefing, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
Over the past year, Palestinians have watched the
international community lend its full support to the
fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of their brethren
in several Arab countries, while daily life in the
occupied Palestinian territory has become increasingly
harsh under Israel's continued and reinforced
occupation 20 years on from Oslo. We cannot stress
enough the urgency of solving the Palestinian question,
the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, through the
establishment of a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State on the basis of the internationally endorsed
parameters.

In the light of that, Portugal welcomes the
initiative by President Abbas to send a letter to the
Prime Minister of Israel as a demonstration of his
goodwill and commitment to a just, peaceful and
negotiated settlement. We look forward to Prime
Minister Netanyahu's response and hope that that
exchange of letters will foster an environment
conducive to the swift resumption of direct talks
between the parties based on the 23 September Quartet
statement (see SG/2178). We welcome the Quartet's
11 April renewed call to the parties to meet those
objectives (see SG/2182).

Portugal has always stood firmly behind the
efforts of the Quartet. We also very much agree that all
core issues can only be finally settled through direct
negotiations. We continue to believe that the
23 September Quartet statement can provide an
adequate framework for discussions on all core issues
with a view to achieving a final settlement within a
strict time frame. We also very much appreciate
Jordan's efforts in that regard. For those efforts to
succeed, the parties must commit seriously to
negotiations, show good faith and refrain from
provocative actions that undermine confidence in each
other and in the negotiation process.

We regret that Israel continues blatantly to ignore
and defy all pleas that it fulfil its obligations. We once
again urge the Israeli authorities to immediately cease
all settlement activity, demolitions and evictions in the
West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. As they are
well aware, all those actions are illegal under
international law. Furthermore, they are quickly
rendering physically impossible any peaceful
agreement based on a two-State solution.

We strongly condemn the approval of the new
construction in a range of settlements, as well as the
recent evictions of Palestinian families, including
refugees, from their homes in Beit Hanina, for the
purpose of paving the way for the first Jewish
residential presence and a new settlement in the midst
of yet another traditional Palestinian neighbourhood in
East Jerusalem.

We welcome the decision by the Israeli Supreme
Court sustaining the dismantlement of the Migron
outpost by 1 August and the evacuation of the Ulpana
neighbourhood in the settlement of Beit El by 1 May.
We hope that the Israeli Government will abide fully
by the Supreme Court's rulings. We also expect it to
cease all plans and attempts to retroactively legalize
outposts. Under international law, all settlement
activity is illegal, including outposts, as is Israel's
appropriation of occupied territory, regardless of
whether it is private or public.

In Gaza the situation remains one of grave
concern and, despite some welcome progress, Israel
needs to do much more to enable the reconstruction of
destroyed and damaged infrastructure and promote the
economic recovery of Gaza's economy. The situation in
and around the Gaza Strip remains fragile and
unsustainable. All parties must refrain from actions that
exacerbate tensions and threaten calm and security. For
its part, Hamas, as the de facto authority in Gaza, must
end all rocket attacks against Israel, which we
vehemently condemn. As for Israel, it must be
understood that its unquestionable right to security
cannot come at the cost of unnecessary human
suffering in Gaza.

The Palestinian Authority has worked diligently
to prepare for statehood. Just last month, the United
Nations, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund reconfirmed for the third year in a row
the State-readiness of the Palestinian institutions and
stressed the need to sustain and build upon the
Palestinian Authority's important institution-building
efforts. To that end, urgent efforts, mainly by Israel, are
needed to reverse the economic and fiscal crisis of the
Palestinian Authority. Palestinians must have access to
their resources, including in Area C, and to export
markets. The clearance review mechanism must
become more efficient and transparent and must ensure
the reliable and predictable transfer of revenues to the
Palestinian Authority. We hope that such concrete
advances will soon materialize, and we recall that each
and every one of those requirements constitutes an
international obligation Israel has long subscribed to.
Another key aspect of a sustainable peaceful
settlement to the conflict is that of Israel's security,
which is a matter that Palestinians, Israel's neighbours
and the international community must seriously
commit to, including through international
mechanisms. One thing is certain - the only way to
ensure Israel's long-term security is to end the
occupation, settle all core issues and claims between
Palestinians and Israelis and fully normalize
diplomatic, political and economic relations between
Israel and the Arab and Muslim world.

We recall, in that regard, the Arab Peace
Initiative, which has just marked its tenth anniversary.
Its premises and elements remain as valid today as they
were a decade ago. We call upon Israel and the Arabs,
with the support of the Quartet's efforts on the Israeli-
Palestinian track, to seriously engage on the other
dimensions of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The full
implementation of the Arab Peace Initiative would
enable Israel's integration into its regional
environment, thus enabling a stable, peaceful and
prosperous future for all in the Middle East.

Last Saturday, the Security Council authorized
the establishment of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) to monitor a cessation of
armed violence in all its forms by all parties and to
monitor and support the full implementation of the
Joint Special Envoy's six-point proposal (see resolution 2043 (2012) and S/PV.6756). It did so,
notwithstanding its awareness of the many risks and
challenges entailed, and sent a strong and united
message of support to the Joint Special Envoy and his
six-point proposal, mindful of the fact that it presents a
last chance for a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis.

We once again urge the Syrian authorities to
immediately and visibly implement all their
commitments under the six-point proposal and ensure
the effective operation of UNSMIS. We also reiterate
our calls to all parties to cease all violence in all its
forms, cooperate fully with the Mission and the Joint
Special Envoy and engage in a Syrian-led political
transition that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people.

