Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
am very pleased to be able to thank His Excellency
Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the brotherly Arab Republic of Egypt, and
the Egyptian delegation for organizing today's open
debate on combating the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his briefing at the start of the meeting, welcome the
adoption today ofpresidential statement S/PRST/2016/6.

His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa of the
Kingdom of Bahrain is proud of the role and status of
the Al Azhar Islamic Research Academy in standing
up to and confronting alien ideological practices, and
of its moderate approach, serving as a beacon to the
Islamic world, a reflection of the tolerant spirit of Islam
and a vehicle for condemning all forms of extremism.
The rise of terrorism, the spread of terrorist groups
and the terrible threat that they pose to international
peace and security form a crucial issue that requires
the unflagging efforts of the international community.
The threat of terrorism is everywhere. It does not
differentiate between nations, regions or cultures, and
the scourge of terrorist groups is a universal concern.
Combating terrorism is therefore a collective and global
responsibility that demands international efforts, if we
are to save the lives of innocent people and maintain
international peace and security.

Terrorist groups do not represent the teachings
of religion and decent human instincts. Arab Islamic
culture has always been based on the values of
moderation, openness and respect for the rights of
non-Muslim minorities. Dealing with terrorist groups
will require persistent effort in many areas, including
on the security, military and ideological fronts. In the
ideological arena, we must combat those extremist
ideologies, which go against human instincts, distort
the teachings of Islam and abuse its spirit.

Besides cutting off the sources of financing for
terrorist groups and limiting their ability to recruit, the
Kingdom of Bahrain continues to confront terrorism
and its organizations in accordance with its laws
and regulations, working from the list of terrorist
organizations that includes Da'esh, Al-Qaida and
Hizbullah, and from international and regional lists
of terrorists. The Kingdom of Bahrain has also taken
a number of initiatives and enacted laws aimed at
deterring terrorism. We have participated in the Global
Coalition to Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and the Working Group on Countering the
Financing of Terrorism, and we are part of the liaison
group within the Global Coalition. In 2014, Bahrain
hosted the Conference on Combating the Financing of
Terrorism, which issued the Manama Declaration. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bahrain has organized
a joint workshop for the member States of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) and the United States of
America on countering Hizbullah's criminal activities
through legal means. We also organized a joint GCC
and European Union (EU) workshop on combating
the financing of terrorism, which recommended the
exchange of information on the issue among financial
intelligence units and judicial and law-enforcement
authorities, as well as promoting cooperation between
the EU and the GCC on cutting off sources of financing
and promoting cooperation in international forums.

Lastly, I would like to affirm Bahrain's established
position of principle rejecting terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, regardless of motive or the identity
of the parties supporting and financing it.

