Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I first
thank the Secretary-General for his very comprehensive
and useful report and for his succinct introduction of the
report this morning.

At last we are getting down to operational discussion
of the implementation of resolution 1284 (1999). A major
motivation for the United Kingdom in promoting that
resolution was the need to improve the humanitarian
situation in Iraq. This debate has to focus on practical
solutions. There is a great deal which can be done without
crossing the well-worn lines of political differences,
which do not have to inhibit us today.

The implementation of resolution 1284 (1999) is the
key, and I think we have Council consensus on this. The
"humanitarian" section of that resolution is being put into
action now, but the faster we can move on the whole
resolution, the sooner we shall reach the objective of
sanctions suspended and security, including control of
weapons of mass destruction, assured. Hans Blix has been
appointed, with all our support, to establish and lead the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC). We hope that Iraq will agree
to accept UNMOVIC so that the Commission can finish
the job of disarming Iraq and continue effective
monitoring so that we can all be confident that the region
is secure. We encourage Iraq to cooperate in this.

Let me be clear on a fundamental point. If Iraq
makes that choice, we in the United Kingdom are
committed to the reality of the suspension of sanctions,
and, when Iraq has fulfilled its obligations, their lifting.
Once Iraq takes that watershed decision, I firmly believe
that suspension could take place in a matter of months.

If Iraq does not take that opportunity, even so
resolution 1284 (1999) offers the potential to do a
significant amount for the people of Iraq in the meantime.
This is not just the United Kingdom's View; it is also the
Secretary-General's, as he makes clear in his report, and
that of others who have spoken today. Already the ceiling
on Iraq's oil sales has been lifted, allowing Iraq to export
a potential $17 billion this year, a huge increase on past
years, and the highest level since 1980. We have
approved the lists of educational, health, agricultural and
food goods for import into Iraq, rendering the whole
process of getting the goods into Iraq smoother and faster,
so that a vast array of civilian goods can be imported
without any delay. The sanctions Committee is looking at
other positive measures. We await the United Nations

 

recommendations on a local cash component, which will
make a real difference locally.

It is good to have the Council once again in
operational mode on Iraq. We must implement these
measures quickly, constructively and effectively. The
United Kingdom is ready to approve the Secretary-
General's recommendation for an additional $600 million
for oil spare parts. We look forward to a Council decision
on that and related issues.

Many members are concerned about the number of
holds on contracts for Iraq. It is time to put this problem in
perspective. The Council has to implement all its
resolutions. Only as a corpus do they ensure the security of
the region. Iraq must not import items it could use to
rebuild its military or weapons-of-mass-destruction
capability. This is our core collective responsibility. It
cannot be left to one side. Yet only a small minority of
Council members assume a full responsibility for doing
this. The rest of the Council, frankly, assumes that we will.
If we did not, Iraq would be able to obtain dangerous
items. Take three examples of contracts we have stopped in
the last few weeks alone. We have queried a contract for a
neutron generator which can be used in the development of
nuclear weapons. We have held a contract for the provision
of state-of-the-art military radio communication equipment,
of far greater capability than needed, say, by the health
ministry. We have held a contract for military respirators,
whose only use is for military chemical-weapons or
biological-weapons purposes.

The United Kingdom will process its examination
contracts quickly and objectively. But we will not be
diverted from carrying our share of responsibility to prevent
Iraq from rearming. Apart from this small number of dual-
use cases, the biggest cause of holds is simply a lack of
information on contracts. Sometimes multimillion-dollar
contracts are submitted with one sentence of information
describing the goods in that contract. In other words, we do
not even know what is being imported by Iraq. This is
clearly too low a standard for the Council to accept. We
encourage the work which the United Nations is doing with
Iraq and its contractors to improve the submission of
contracts.

Another cause of holds is the lack of information
about the end-use of oil-for-food products in Iraq. This
could be improved by more effective monitoring and
observation in Iraq. Every resolution concerning the
humanitarian programme, beginning with resolution 986
(1995), through 1153 (1998), and finally 1284 (1999), calls
for the United Nations to ensure that goods are used for
the purposes authorized in Iraq. Although the programme
has more than trebled in size since 1996 and now
involves complex infrastructure projects, the number of
United Nations observers in Iraq has not increased since
the programme's inception.

This does not make sense; nor does it give us the
confidence that all potential dual-use items are being
properly monitored. We should all work with the
Secretariat to increase the number and effectiveness of
observers. Perhaps this is something to be considered in
the context of the draft resolution approving extra
spending on oil spare parts.
But whatever the real deficiencies we have to face
in the contract system, the United Kingdom does all it can
to approve contracts and avoid unnecessary hold-ups. Our
procedures for the review of contracts have been
examined to minimize all delay. We welcome the
Secretary-General's proposal this morning that a
mechanism should be established to review holds. But let
us keep the matter in perspective; the United Kingdom
has approved 98.8 per cent of all contracts submitted to
the sanctions Committee under the oil-for-food
programme - 98.8 per cent. I welcome the statement
from the United States representative this morning that
Washington will now make a constructive effort to refine
its holds procedures.

What else can we do to maximize the revenues for
the humanitarian programme? Yesterday our sanctions
Committee heard a briefing from the Multinational
Interception Force on its operations in the Gulf and on the
enforcement of the Council's resolutions. The Committee
was presented with clear evidence that since mid-1999
smugglers have stepped up their activities to the point of
now exporting illegally over 400,000 tons per month of
gas oil from Iraq, using the protection of Iranian
territorial waters to transport oil to traders in the United
Arab Emirates.

The Committee has also heard convincing evidence
that smugglers are also exporting oil through other
neighbouring States, including Turkey. The potential
revenue from all these operations must now exceed $1
billion per year. Instead of being used to rebuild a
hospital in Baghdad or provide clean water for a Village,
this money is being spent by Saddam Hussein's regime
for the sustenance and comfort of the Iraqi elite and
military; perhaps even for the support of Iranian dissident
groups, an ironic point when you consider the Iranian

 

protection for smuggling through the Gulf. We urge Iraq's
neighbouring States to take steps to prevent this illegal
trade and clamp down on those who seek to profit at the
expense of the Iraqi people.

Ambassador Fowler, through his work on the Angola
sanctions Committee, has set us an excellent example of
how the Council should get to grips with sanctions
enforcement so that sanctions have the effect intended. We
know that would benefit the long-suffering Angolan people.
We should follow that example in the Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990) and our work in the
Council itself. We have been engaged much more
intensively on Iraq than on Angola, and the regional and
international security implications are even greater. It is
time to develop an operational response, focusing first on
monitoring holds and smuggling as a composite package to
support the improvement in procedures in the resolution
661 (1990) Committee. We should also consider including
the legislation of additional oil outlets and legalizing other
currently-illegal oil flows in order to transfer oil and
revenue into the oil-for-food programme, where they
belong. This illegal traffic insulates the Baghdad regime
from the effects of the Council's policy, which is to take
sanctions suspension and disarmament together. Even
worse, it denies the Iraqi people the full resources that
should be available to them.

In addition to the provisions I have already described,
resolution 1284 (1999) brings the Council's focus more
closely onto a humanitarian issue that should concern us all
here. Since the Gulf war, Iraqi obstruction has constantly
hampered efforts to account for the whereabouts of the 600
and more Kuwaitis and others who are missing. Iraq has
provided sufficient information to close only three files.
Since 1999 Iraq has refused to attend the meetings of the
Tripartite Commission, the body which aims to resolve
these cases. Further progress has therefore been deliberately
prevented. Meanwhile, the families of the missing are left
to suffer. Iraq has also failed to account for huge quantities
of stolen Kuwaiti property, including the national archives.
As a result, Kuwait is still a society and a country
traumatized by the 1990 invasion, a fact witnessed by those
of our spouses who recently Visited the Gulf. I very much
welcome the Secretary-General's appointment of
Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov, as provided for under
resolution 1284 (1999), as his high-level coordinator. The
United Kingdom looks forward to his report and will do
everything we can to assist his work.

One or two delegations referred earlier in this debate
to action in the no-fly zones. The no-fly zones were
established in support of Security Council resolution 688
(1991), which called on Iraq to end its repression of the
civilian population. That repression continues. These ends
are justified under international law, in response to a
situation of overwhelming humanitarian necessity. The
United Kingdom is not prepared to leave Kurds, Shiahs
or others exposed to renewed threat from the Iraqi air
force. Given its record, none of us can doubt that
Baghdad would resume this activity if it could. Our
aircraft target only aircraft and ground facilities which
target them. There is no bombing campaign. The tempo
of activity is actually determined by Iraq - not by the
coalition forces. If Iraq stopped attacking our aircraft, we
would stop responding to this aggression. Our action is
strictly limited to proportionate responses and carefully
targeted to avoid civilian casualties. Those that occur we
deeply regret, but we should beware of Iraqi statistics that
tend to inflate military and civilian casualties for
propaganda effect. There would be no risk if there were
no Iraqi threat.

Before finishing, I would like to pay tribute to the
efforts of all the United Nations personnel involved in the
implementation of the humanitarian programme, and in
particular to the Executive Director of the Office of the
Iraq Programme and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund. Theirs is arduous work in the
most difficult of circumstances, but they have worked
with courage and dedication, and they can be proud of
their efforts in implementing the largest and most
complicated humanitarian programme in the history of
this Organization. We should all offer them our continued
support and help.

As today's debate has made clear, there is much to
be done to improve the situation in Iraq. But the full
solution lies in implementation of this Council's
resolutions, and in particular the programme we have
devised in resolution 1284 (1999). We may want
sanctions to end, but the Council cannot just put a line
through its responsibility for the security of the region. As
the Secretary-General said this morning, the only
satisfactory outcome is for Iraq to return to full
compliance with the decisions of the Council, so that
sanctions can be ended and the Iraqi people restored to a
normal life. We welcome his suggestion that there should
be a constant review of progress under resolution 1284
(1999), and we strongly support his call for Iraq to
cooperate with that resolution, and with this Council, so
that we can work towards the suspension and the lifting
of sanctions. If Iraq refuses that opportunity, then it is the
Council's duty, with the Secretariat, to make the most of

 

the huge opportunity offered by resolution 1284 (1999) to
make a difference to the lives of ordinary Iraqis.

