Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): At the outset, let me
congratulate the delegation of Spain on its assumption
ofthe presidency ofthe Security Council for this month.
Let me also congratulate the delegation of Senegal for
the exceptional work done during its presidency in the
month of November.

I thank Judge Theodor Meron, President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; Judge Carmel Agius, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; and Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and Prosecutor ofthe International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I also thank all
previous speakers.

As we reflect on the activities of the Residual
Mechanism for International Tribunals, let me
reiterate our belief that, despite serious shortcomings,
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) produced a substantial body of jurisprudence,
including definitions of the crime of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and rape as a weapon
at war, as well as forms of responsibility, such as
superior responsibility.

The Court also went further to conclude, in its
judicial notice on 2 September 1998, that genocide
was indeed committed in Rwanda against the Tutsi as
a group, and, on 16 June 2006, the Appeals Chamber
issued a judicial notice that it was "a fact of common
knowledge" that "between 6 April and 17 July 1994,
there was a genocide in Rwanda against the Tutsi ethnic
group", and the Appeals Chamber also issued a judicial
notice that

"there is no reasonable basis for anyone to dispute
that, during 1994, there was a campaign of mass
killings intended to destroy, in whole or at least in
very large part, Rwanda's Tutsi population".

We believe that those were legal doctrines and tests
for assessing components of the crime of genocide,
including the prosecution of 93 individuals, mainly the
masterminds. That stood as an important contribution
to the pursuit ofjustice after genocide, to reconciliation
and to healing in my country, Rwanda.

Despite that, however, let me express our concern
about ongoing attempts by perpetrators of genocide
and their henchmen to deny the occurrence of the 1994
genocide committed against the Tutsi in the names
of scholars, the media and politicians, and to distort
facts and attempt to rewrite history. As such actions
continue to be an ugly shared reality, we call upon
States Members of the United Nations, individuals,
institutions and the broader international community to
denounce, in no uncertain terms, such attempts to deny
or trivialize acts of genocide, or to minimize its scale.
We not only call on Member States and all concerned to
denounce those actions, we also exhort them to call to
account all those who indulge or support the denial of
genocide or revisions of genocides.

It is also regrettable that none of the remaining
ICTR indicted fugitives have been arrested in the
past five years, in addition to other suspects against
whom there is ample and quite indisputable evidence.
We once again call on Member States, especially
those harbouring genocide fugitives, to honour their
obligations to the Charter of the United Nations and the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide to arrest, and place all suspects on
trial, in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, or extradite them to where they can be
tried, including in Rwanda. Anything short of that
raises serious questions as to the credibility of Member
States' stated commitment to international justice.
We are equally concerned by the worrying pattern of
early releases of convicted genocide masterminds. The
observed pattern of reducing the sentences of genocide
convicts on appeal is quite alarming.

We commend recent efforts by the Government
of Canada, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
United States Government for recent arrests and
extraditions to Rwanda, and hope that more countries
will do so in respect of genocide suspects residing in
their territories. We also welcome the prosecution and
subsequent convictions of Octavien Ngenzi and Tito
Barahira in the Cour d'assises in Paris, as well as the
recent confirmation through appeal of the sentence of
Pascal Simbikangwa.

We regret that the status of progress in monitoring
of cases referred to national courts outside Rwanda
remains quite disappointing, while the procedures in
two cases referred to Rwanda in 2012 and 2013 are well
advanced. Last year, we noted with concern the decision
by the French prosecution to drop charges against
Wenceslas Munyeshyaka, a decision that contradicts
the nature and scale of the crimes committed in the
light of available evidence.

The crime of genocide is imprescriptible - we will
not cease to repeat that point. Rwanda will continue
to legally pursue and seek answers from individuals,
institutions and Governments for the allegations
of acts of omission or commission, without which
the genocide could have either been prevented, or
deterred expeditiously, or, at the very least, we expect
the Member States to refuse to grant safe havens to
perpetrators of genocide.

Allow me to come back to an issue that is important
to my Government, that of the ICTR archives. While
we have, on many occasions and at different levels,
expressed our view on the issue of the archives and on
the urgent need for them to be relocated to Rwanda,
while remaining the property of the United Nations,
we are concerned by the lack of engagement by
stakeholders, as well as the unilateral decision to store
the genocide archives in a specific location without
involving Rwanda. In that regard, I wish to state that
the fate of those important pieces of our history cannot
be decided merely on the basis of budgetary, logistical
or administrative considerations.

Rwanda also wishes to clarify to the Security
Council, and put on record, that a significant part
of those documents, which comprise today's ICTR
archives, were obtained from Rwanda and were released
only to provide evidence in court, not for possession.
They are yet to be returned to Rwanda.

The ICTR archives are the most comprehensive
account of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsis, a piece
of history that my country will not stop demanding
to have restored to it - for the genocide happened in
Rwanda, not on the moon, and that is where that part of
our history belongs. Should any party have problems
with our request, which is legitimate, we are open to
engaging in a candid conversation. That is what we are
asking for in order to address our outstanding demand.

In conclusion, let me assure everyone here of my
country's unwavering commitment to work with all
Member States and with the United Nations to bring
to justice all perpetrators, deniers or revisionists of the
genocide against the Tutsi who are still at large.

