Mr. Martin: Thank you for those kind words,
Mr. President. This is indeed the tenth and last time
that I shall brief the Council on the assistance of the
United Nations in support of Nepal's peace process,
and in particular the work of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN). Although neither the
peace process nor the Government's desire for the
support of UNMIN has come to a conclusion, it is an
appropriate moment not only to consider developments
since the last briefing, in November, but also to reflect
on the achievements and remaining challenges in
sustaining peace in Nepal.

First, let me report on developments, positive and
negative, since the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/1) was written. Most important for the
mandate of UNMIN, political agreement has finally
been reached regarding the composition and terms of
reference of the special committee to supervise,
integrate and rehabilitate Maoist army personnel; its
first meeting was held today in Kathmandu. Each of
four major parties, including the Nepali Congress,
which remains outside the Government coalition, has
two representatives, and the Prime Minister is
presiding personally. This will be especially welcome
to the Council as the effective functioning of the
special committee is of critical importance not only to
the completion of UNMIN's mandate, but to the overall
success of the peace process.

There has been progress too regarding the work
of the Constituent Assembly and cooperation among
the political parties towards the drafting of a new
constitution. The chairpersons of the committees of the
Assembly have been chosen on the basis of agreement
among the larger political parties, although not to the
satisfaction of all smaller parties. The former General
Secretary of the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified 09-21130

Marxist-Leninist) (UML), Mr. Madhav Kumar Nepal,
agreed to the proposal of the Maoist leadership that he
should accept nomination to the Assembly and chair its
Constitutional Committee, which has a central
responsibility for reaching agreement on the overall
draft constitution and the challenge of enabling its
completion by May 2010.

There have been discussions among the major
parties, including between the Communist Party of
Nepal (Maoist) - which has now been renamed the
Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) following
its merger with a smaller communist party, although I
shall still refer to it as the CPN (M) - and the Nepali
Congress about establishing a greater degree of
cooperation in completing the peace process and
drafting the constitution.

The Nepali Congress ended its boycott of the
legislature-parliament after the Prime Minister reported
to parliament that fresh instructions had been given to
implement his undertakings in response to its demands,
including the return of property and ending the
paramilitary activities of the Young Communist
League, which will be monitored by a parliamentary
committee.

The Government's efforts through negotiations to
bring an end to the violence by armed groups operating
in the Tarai have now resulted in initial agreements
setting forth conditions for talks being signed with four
such groups, while other informal contacts have taken
place and continue.

However, there have been clashes between the
Maoist Young Communist League and the UML's
Youth Force, in one case leading to the amputation of
the leg of a Youth Force member. Maoist trade
unionists have used violence or threats of violence
against media critical of Maoist conduct. The horrific
murder last Sunday of a woman journalist in the Tarai
by a gang of perpetrators so far unidentified has further
exemplified the weak rule of law and the threats faced
by journalists, especially outside Kathmandu, from
various sources.

Public discontent is mounting with the inability
to maintain electricity supply - now reduced to eight
hours a day for many consumers - although the major
responsibility rests with previous Governments through
decades of underinvestment and neglect. This power
shortage is now combining with trade union action to
09-21130
seriously threaten the operation of factories and, thus,
employment opportunities.

A recent controversy of particular concern to
UNMIN and the peace process relates to recruitment
by the Nepal Army and its recognition of the authority
of the elected Government; this has a potential
seriousness which I think requires me to explain its
background. The code of conduct agreed at the outset
of the ceasefire in 2006 committed both parties not to
recruit new people. When the Agreement on
Monitoring the Management of Arms and Armies was
being negotiated in November 2006, with the United
Nations acting as secretariat to the negotiation, the
Nepal Army argued that it should nonetheless be
permitted to continue to fill vacancies. This was
initially supported by the Government side, but it was
resisted by the Maoist side and was not agreed. The
stipulation of the Agreement that recruiting additional
armed forces is prohibited unless mutually agreed by
the parties should thus be understood to apply to any
recruitment, including the filling of vacancies. The
Maoist army was the first to breach the Agreement by
bringing thousands of new recruits, many of them
minors, into their cantonments; they eventually either
left the cantonments or were disqualified by UNMIN's
verification, although as the report of the Secretary-
General emphasizes yet again, the discharge of those
disqualified who remain in the cantonments is long
overdue.

Meanwhile, in mid-2007 the Maoist side
complained to the Joint Monitoring Coordination
Committee (JMCC) that the Nepal Army was
undertaking recruitment. The Nepal Army then
confirmed that they were recruiting to fill vacancies;
regrettably, they had not informed the JMCC of this at
the outset. The JMCC, which operates by consensus,
could not resolve the issue and referred it to me. I
wrote to the then Prime Minister, who was also
Minister of Defence, setting out UNMIN's view that
this recruitment was a breach of the Agreement, and
met with the Chief of Army Staff to communicate this
to him. Eventually the Secretary of Defence responded,
maintaining that recruitment to fill vacancies, up to the
standing strength of 95,700 when the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement was signed, was not a breach of any
agreement.

In November 2008 the Nepal Army again placed
advertisements for further recruitment. The Army
states that they had written to the Ministry of Defence
3
to notify that they intended to recruit to fill vacancies
and went ahead after having received no reply. Again,
UNMIN and the Maoist army were not informed,
through the JMCC or otherwise. At a time when no
progress was being made regarding the future of
Maoist army personnel, this was the subject of strong
exception within the cantonments. The Deputy
Commander of the Maoist army stated publicly that the
Maoist army would itself recruit to fill vacancies. I
stated UNMIN's consistent position that any new
recruitment by either army is a breach of the
Agreement. Following a Cabinet discussion, the
Ministry of Defence wrote to instruct the Nepal Army
to suspend its recruitment; the Nepal Army is reported
to have replied that the process was almost complete
and suspension would be inappropriate. The Minister
of Defence, one of the CPN (M) members of the
Government, criticized a public statement by the Chief
of Army Staff and threatened action against him. Other
political actors publicly supported recruitment by the
Nepal Army to fill vacancies. The Minister of Defence
and the Chief of Army Staff have since met to discuss
the issue, but it is not clear that it is resolved. I have
expressed concern to the Chief of Army Staff that the
Nepal Army has not acted in this matter with good
faith towards the United Nations as the mandated
monitor of the Agreement.

This controversy, at a time when what is needed
is cooperation among the political actors and between
the armies to resolve issues through the special
committee, is symptomatic, and I fear may be
indicative of difficulties ahead. Before I address further
those difficulties, I want to reiterate recognition of the
great achievements of Nepal's peace process, to which
the Secretary-General and I have paid tribute on
numerous occasions, as indeed has the Council. When I
went to Nepal more than three and a half years ago, in
May 2005, to open the office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the armed conflict
was heading into its tenth year, with grave violations of
international humanitarian law being committed by the
Maoists and by the security forces, and the
Government headed by the then king was curtailing
democratic rights. It is the Nepalese political and civil
society leaders who brought the armed conflict to an
end, negotiated the holding of an election which has
produced an inclusive Constituent Assembly, and
peacefully introduced a republic.
Nepal's peace process was founded on mutual
commitments by the Maoist and non-Maoist political
parties, enshrined first in the l2-point understanding of
November 2005 and eventually in the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement of November 2006 and the interim
constitution. The CPN (M) committed itself to
democratic norms and values, including the
competitive multiparty system of government,
fundamental human rights, civil liberties, press
freedom and rule of law. The parties elected to the
1999 parliament committed themselves to the election
of a constituent assembly, the restructuring of the State
and progressive socio-economic change.

Regarding the armies which had fought the
10-year armed conflict without either being defeated,
Maoist combatants were to be "integrated and
rehabilitated", while the Nepal Army was to be
"democratized" through an action plan which would
determine its appropriate size, develop its national and
inclusive character and impart training in accordance
with the norms and values of democracy and human
rights. All parties agreed to act on the basis of political
consensus until a new constitution had been framed by
the Constituent Assembly.

For all the important achievements of the peace
process, I fear that there is now a danger that these
fundamentals are being challenged and eroded. Actions
of Maoist cadres which involve violence or threats of
violence and do not respect pluralism or the rule of
law, the failure of the party leadership to take firm
action against those who commit such acts, and
internal ideological debates which do not convey a
clear long-term adherence to multi-party democracy:
all these lead some to question the sincerity of the
strategic choice the CPN (M) committed itself to in the
l2-point understanding or the ability of its leadership
to ensure that the party as a whole respects it. It is
crucial, now that the CPN (M) leads the Government,
that it act consistently in a manner that allays these
doubts. The party which leads the Government has a
particular responsibility to strive for the political
consensus required for completion of the peace process
and the drafting of the new constitution.

But this responsibility rests, too, on other parties
that fought the election on a promise of continuing
cooperation in Government within the framework of an
Interim Constitution which promised socio-economic
change and inclusion. The distribution of votes in the
Constituent Assembly election of approximately 30 per
cent to the CPN (M) and a little over 20 per cent each
to the Nepali Congress and the UML can best be
interpreted as a mandate for change, but with an
expectation that the parties would cooperate as
promised on the basis of their respective support. The
emergence of Madhesi parties in the Tarai was a strong
reminder that the commitment to inclusion of all
groups in all aspects of the State must be carried out if
continuing disaffection is not to lead to further
violence and ethnic division - perhaps the greatest
threat that could lie ahead for Nepal.

Most immediately, however, I believe that the
spirit of the original agreements regarding the armies
must also be maintained if a critical post-conflict
challenge is to be successfully overcome and a stable
peace is to be achieved and sustained. As the
Secretary-General says in his report, the
"Comprehensive Peace Agreement did not fully
negotiate the future of the armies, but confined itself to
defining processes" (S/2009/1, para. 64) with regard to
the special committee to supervise, integrate and
rehabilitate Maoist army personnel and the action plan
for the democratization of the Nepal Army.

But there was an informal understanding among
the negotiators that integration meant the incorporation
of a significant number but by no means all of the
Maoist combatants into the Nepal Army. The action
plan for the democratization of the Nepal Army was a
significant parallel aspect of the agreements, including
a commitment to inclusion, the importance of which
has been reinforced by later undertakings in
agreements with Madhesi parties. Only if both armies
are respected by negotiators on all sides and if both
armies recognize their need for change and their
subordination to democratic multiparty governance is
the special committee likely to reach an outcome which
will stabilize the peace.

One need for change to which no political party
and neither army is yet truly committed is the need for
an end to impunity. I say this with particular regret, as I
went to Nepal as representative of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, yet in more than
three and a half years since then not a single
perpetrator of a major human rights violation, whether
committed during the armed conflict or since its end,
has been properly brought to justice.

In May 2006, I was responsible for the
publication by the Office of the High Commissioner
09-21130
for Human Rights (OHCHR) in Nepal of a report of
investigation into arbitrary detention, torture and
disappearances at the Maharajganj barracks in
Kathmandu of the then Royal Nepalese Army in 2003
and 2004. No action has resulted. Paragraph 39 of the
Secretary-General's report refers to the recent release
by OHCHR of its investigations into disappearances in
Bardiya district from 2001 to 2003, citing 156 cases of
disappearances linked to State authorities, mostly after
detention by the then Royal Nepalese Army, and
14 similar cases attributed to the CPN (M). The report
documents the systematic use of torture in the Royal
Nepalese Army's Chisapani barracks, and I urge
members of the Council to read its chilling details.

The promise to investigate disappearances was
first made by the parties in May 2006. It has been
reiterated time and time again in later agreements, but
only now is legislation to establish a commission to
investigate disappearances about to be considered by
the Legislature-Parliament. It remains to be seen
whether appointments made to this commission will
indicate a serious intent to uncover the truth and bring
those responsible to justice in the face of the denial and
obstruction which have so far characterized the
response of the Nepal Army, in particular. Efforts are
being made to provide compensation to victims of the
conflict, but victims who suffered at the hands of the
Maoists, as well as victims of the security forces, are
still in distress. The wounds of Nepal's conflict will not
be healed by denial or by compensation alone and
require the effective implementation of the promises
made to pursue truth and justice.

While impunity continues to prevail for
violations committed since the end of the conflict, the
CPN (M) and other political parties are quick to protect
their supporters from justice, rather than to support the
impartial application of the rule of law. Even in cases
where the perpetrators are known, such as the killings
of members of the Young Communist League in Dang
district two days before the Constituent Assembly
election and the killing of a businessman in a Maoist
cantonment site, highlighted in paragraph 44 of the
report of the Secretary-General, they are not brought to
justice.

The great strength of Nepal's peace process has
been the capacity of the Nepalese actors to pursue
dialogue to bridge their differences. Such dialogue
brought about the 12-point understanding which led to
the People's Movement and the end of the armed
conflict; it produced the peace agreements and the
Interim Constitution, and paved the way for the
Constituent Assembly election; it maintained the
framework of the Seven-Party Alliance and eventually
overcame substantial disagreements and delays.

Very recently, Prime Minister "Prachanda" has
spoken publicly of the need for a new 12-point
understanding. That is a matter for the political parties
to consider, but in my own view there is indeed a need
to re-establish the basis for cooperation among
political parties, some of which have emerged since the
original Seven-Party Alliance was formed, towards
successful completion of the peace process and the
drafting of the constitution. Competitive politics must
not be allowed to derail these overriding national
priorities.

The weakness of the peace process, however, has
been the failure to implement commitments made. In
my opinion, the need now is therefore not only for a
renewed basis of understanding and cooperation, but
also for a continuous mechanism for ensuring such
implementation. Past agreements have provided for a
high-level joint monitoring committee to monitor
whether all understandings and agreements are being
implemented, a high-level peace commission, and a
high-level monitoring committee to monitor
implementation of the agreement between the former
Interim Government and the United Democratic
Madhesi Front. None of these has ever been formed.
The Joint Monitoring Coordinating Committee
convened by UNMIN remains the only implementation
mechanism which has met regularly to fulfil its limited
mandate relating to the management of arms and armed
personnel. My strong parting advice to the parties,
whether they enter into a new understanding or
recommit themselves to those they are already bound
by, is that they now establish such a comprehensive
implementation mechanism.

If I have one particular regret, it is that the parties
did not take up our offer in late 2007 for the United
Nations to assist by supporting the implementation of
peace process commitments more generally than in the
case of arms monitoring alone. It could, for example,
have assisted the impartial monitoring and
implementation of the return of property, which has
been a constant impediment to political cooperation.
This would in no way have detracted from the fact that
the peace process has always been a Nepalese process
or infringed upon national sovereignty. The parties
have not made full use of what the United Nations has
to offer, notwithstanding their recognition that
UNMIN's presence has had a value well beyond its
specific electoral and arms monitoring functions.

I shall leave Nepal with some anxieties, but few
regrets. It has been a privilege to be responsible for the
role of the United Nations in supporting two of the
basic demands of the people of Nepal: respect for
human rights and lasting peace. The two most
remarkable moments have been those when the people
of Nepal took their future in their own hands: in the
19 days of the People's Movement oprril 2006 and in
the Constituent Assembly election of April 2008. Their
demand for peace, for change and for inclusion was
and is unmistakable. I hope that their political leaders
will not let them down. I hope, too, that the
international community understands that long-term
stability is far from having been achieved in Nepal and
that, despite the many demands upon it, it will remain
concerned for 27 million of the poorest people in Asia,
who deserve a better future.

