Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to welcome Mr. Petritsch back to the Council and
to thank him for his thorough briefing on the progress
his office has overseen to date in building a peaceful
multi-ethnic society in Bosnia. That is a very difficult
task, and we are encouraged by the positive
developments noted in his report. We congratulate him
in particular on the re-establishment of the Council of
Ministers and on the increased rates of return of those
displaced by the war. We also welcome steps to
establish an Independent Judicial Council and note
especially that a multi-ethnic court in Mostar has begun
to try those war crimes which the International
Criminal Court for the former Yugoslavia has approved
for prosecution under the so-called rules ofthe road.

However, we remain concerned that some
Government officials and other individuals continue to
block the return of refugees and displaced persons. The
message must be clear that we will not tolerate
continued obstruction. We will work only with those
political leaders who are committed to implementing
Dayton.

The United States strongly supports full and
active use in Bosnia by the High Representative and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe of the mandates provided by the international
community. Real progress is being made, and we need
to accelerate it. With two vitally important elections
coming up in the region - in Kosovo and in Bosnia -
it is time to go forward and not to look back at the past.

We should seek to remove or restrain all those
standing in the way of Dayton's full implementation:
there are war criminals remaining at large, organized
crime figures and nationalist extremists. In that regard,
we welcome the removal of 24 individuals who were
blatantly obstructing implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. But those 24 are not the only
obstructionists, and decisive action is necessary to
ensure that refugee returns continue and that a climate
based on the rule of law is established in Bosnia.

With specific regard to Mostar, we see some signs
of progress there. In the light of repeated difficulties
with funding for the local administration, we would
like to urge the Office of the High Representative to
issue a decision instructing the local electricity
company, Elektroprivreda, to pay a portion of its
revenues to fund the budget of Mostar under terms that
have been under discussion for several months now.

Finally, the democratic change in Belgrade is
particularly significant and auspicious. There will be
many problems ahead, but we hope the new leadership
of President Kostunica will have a positive influence
on events in Bosnia in the same way that Croatia's
change in regime has helped to normalize relations
between Croatia and Bosnia.

