Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Under-Secretaries-
General Rosemary DiCarlo and Jean-Pierre Lacroix
for their informative briefings on the situation in the
Syrian Golan. We believe it is essential to highlight the
following points.

In the summer of 2018, as a result of measures

taken by the Syrian Government with assistance
from Russia and in coordination with regional and
international partners, the situation in the Syrian Golan
underwent major changes and was stabilized. The
main obstacle to the full implementation by the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) of
its mandate, in the form of the presence in the area of
separation of various armed groups, including terrorist
groups, was removed. That also eliminated one of
the security challenges for Israel and United Nations
personnel. The success of this effort was made possible
only thanks to cooperation on the part of key players.
In our communications with the parties to the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement, we help to ensure
the necessary conditions for the full functioning of the
United Nations operation. Russian military police units
play an important role in that process. Thanks to efforts
on the Syrian side, work on the Quneitra crossing point
between the Alpha and Bravo sectors has been resumed.
That is another important element in normalizing
the situation and restoring it to its pre-crisis state.
Demining work is continuing in order to accelerate the
mission's full deployment in the Golan.

UNDOF has historically continued to be an effective
mechanism for reducing tension, preventing incidents
and escalation and resolving claims between Syria and
Israel. In the long term, this kind of mechanism has
the potential to restore trust between the parties. We
cannot allow the positive momentum I have outlined
to be undermined by unilateral steps that not only
complicate efforts to improve the situation in Syria
and establish a political process, but also create serious
obstacles to the normalization of relations between
Israel and Arab States.

Despite opinions and warnings that have been
expressed at the international and regional levels, the
United States has formalized its recognition of Israel's
sovereignty over part of the occupied Syrian Golan.
We assert that such steps not only Violate norms of
international law, they are a Violation of Security
Council resolutions, run counter to the principle of
land for peace, developed at the Madrid Conference
under the sponsorship of the Russian Federation and
the United States, and represent a total disregard for
the Arab Peace Initiative, which was approved at the
League of Arab States Summit in 2002 and has historic
significance for the work of opening the prospects for
achieving a comprehensive, fair and lasting settlement
in the Middle East.

Russia's position remains unchanged. The Golan
Heights are a territory of the Syrian Arab Republic,
occupied by Israel as a result of the 1967 war and then
illegally annexed. We adhere strictly to resolution
497 (1981), according to which unilateral decisions to
establish other laws, jurisdictions or administrations
in that part of Syria's territory are null and void and
have no legal effect. An overwhelming majority of the
international community supports a similar approach.
The General Assembly affirms that through its annual
adoption of a resolution entitled "The occupied Syrian
Golan". The question of ending the occupation should
be resolved in the framework of the Middle East
settlement process through direct negotiations, based
on the existing internationally recognized foundations.
It is hard to deny that politics is at work here.

We are concerned about the possibility that these
unilateral decisions could not only complicate the
prospects for finding a comprehensive settlement
in the Middle East, but could also lead to worsening
instability in the region. The negative reaction from the
Arab world confirms this kind of worrying prognosis. It
is alarming to have to conclude that the decision on the
Golan is the latest addition to the sad list of unilateral
steps that the United States has taken recently. They
include its withdrawal from the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action for Iran, in Violation of resolution 2231
(2015), which has inflamed the international situation;
the move of the United States Embassy to Jerusalem,
flying in the face of international legal resolutions on
the city's status, which has fundamental and sensitive
significance for representatives of the monotheistic
religions; and its assistance in establishing a Kosovo
army, circumventing resolution 1244 (1999), which
permits the presence there of multinational forces
alone. We urge the United States and anyone who might
be tempted to follow its poor example to refrain from
aggressive revisions of international law, which, like
the Charter of the United Nations, will always remain
the sole framework for States' civilized conduct within
the system of international relations.

The world's response to this series ofunilateral steps
and unlawful decisions confirms our conclusion that
the so-called rules-based order arbitrarily established
by certain States is doomed to failure and has no future.
We urge them to reject this immoral and artificial
concept, which is insulting to other States. Taking all of
this into account, we want to emphasize that whatever
the United States' reasons may be for its unilateral
decisions, they do not change the international legal
decisions on all the issues pertaining to a settlement
in the Middle East. We fully agree with the Secretary-
General that the status of the Syrian Golan may not be
changed, because it is enshrined in the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

A return to respect for international law would
also assume fundamental significance in affirming the
status of the United States as an objective and impartial
mediator, an honest broker and an even-handed
partner that through its cooperation with regional and
international players will be able to make a significant
contribution to achieving a Palestinian-Israeli and Arab-
Israeli settlement through direct negotiations between
the parties on a basis of the relevant international legal

resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

