Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, for his briefing
covering the period from March 2018 to the end of July
2018, and particularly for his visit in May to the region,
including Djibouti. I believe the visit gave the Committee
an excellent opportunity for direct interaction with the
authorities in the region and consultation with them on
how best to address some of the issues that continue to
plague the region and damage efforts to achieve peace,
development and prosperity.

Djibouti too regrets that Eritrea did not invite its
delegation or take this opportunity to provide its views
on the situation in the Horn of Africa, including the
implementation of sanctions. As its refusal to invite
the Chair or cooperate with the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea demonstrated, Eritrea continues to
display a pattern of behaviour characterized by denial,
obstruction and obfuscation.

As we stated in our letter to the Secretary-General,
which has been circulated to the members of the
Security Council, Djibouti welcomes the latest positive
developments regarding the protracted conflict between
Eritrea and Ethiopia and the Council's readiness to
support both countries in their implementation of their
Joint Declaration ofPeace and Friendship. That is indeed
a development we should all embrace and celebrate,
because the region has experienced various intra- and
inter-State conflicts with dire economic and social
consequences for far too long. They have depressed and
disrupted economic development and hampered efforts
towards regional integration. Apart from the physical
destruction of life and property, these conflicts have
diverted scarce resources from development to support
war. It might be worth assessing the region's cumulative
losses in gross domestic product as a result of conflicts,
since it stands to reason that any such study would
undoubtedly prove that the benefits of investing in
peace far outweigh the costs. Silencing the guns and
realizing a conflict-free Africa is a Challenging task,
but we should all work in earnest with full commitment
to that goal. The peoples of the Horn are incredibly
brave and talented and, given a chance, they can show a
phenomenal can-do spirit.

Djibouti concurs with the assessment by the Heads
of State of the African Union (AU), as underlined
in the AU Assembly decision adopted on 2 July in
Nouakchott regarding the unresolved border dispute
between Djibouti and Eritrea. It emphasizes that there
is an urgent

"need for all countries in the Horn of Africa to
engage towards maximizing possibilities for
achieving lasting peace in the entire region".

It requests the AU Commission to continue with its
efforts to assist Djibouti and Eritrea in reaching a
peaceful solution to their territorial dispute and urges
both countries to extend the necessary cooperation
to the Commission. Let me state unequivocally that
Djibouti stands ready to work with the Commission.
In the same vein, Djibouti welcomes the letter dated
17 July by the Secretary-General regarding the ongoing
border dispute between the Republic of Djibouti and the
State of Eritrea with a view to assisting the countries,
in collaboration with the Security Council, in finding a
way forward either through mutually agreed arbitration
or other means of peaceful dispute settlement for
both parties.

Djibouti has invested in peace. We have submitted
a legal memorandum and a comprehensive statement
of the pertinent facts and legal principles applicable
to this matter and other matters that form part of the
dispute and have promptly provided a list of prisoners
of war in our custody. As the Secretary-General begins
to undertake consultations, we need to approach the
resolution of this conflict in good faith and with an
open mind, while bearing in mind that the conflict
has been going on for the last 10 years, and we have
gone through six years of fruitless negotiations under
the auspices of Qatar. The Council should urge Eritrea,
in line with paragraph 40 of resolution 2385 (2017),
to meaningfully engage in the mediation efforts led
by the Secretary-General in collaboration with the
Security Council. We cannot afford to squander the
opportunity we have to build and own a future of peace
and development in the region. It is worth recalling that
the Qatar-led mediation effort broke down as soon as it
began because Eritrea refused to appoint a member to
the body that was established to mediate and has never
really shown any serious commitment of peace.

While noting the potential prospects for peace
in the region, there is no escaping the fact that the
international boundary remains disputed. Eritrea
continues to occupy Djiboutian territory, prisoners of
war remain unaccounted for, threats of force continue
to emanate from the Eritrean side and the risk of violent
confrontation remains high. As documented in the most
recent report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea (S/2017/925), there is ongoing activity on the
Eritrean side of the border at Ras Doumeira, and the
situation is vulnerable to manipulation by spoilers.
Furthermore, as documented in successive Monitoring
Group reports, Eritrea continues to recruit, train and
equip Djibouti rebels at the Anda'ali training camp,
from where they conduct violent raids on villages in
Djibouti and attacks on Djiboutian security forces. The
Monitoring Group's report goes on to provide a detailed
account, based on testimonies by former fighters, of
how they participated in violent cross-border abduction
raids, including the abduction of children. We call on
Eritrea to stop stealing the lives of these children, who
are often psychologically traumatized and are a loss to
their communities and nation.

When it does these things, Eritrea defiantly ignores
Security Council resolutions. If those resolutions are
to be regarded as more than empty and meaningless
gestures, the sanctions for non-compliance must remain
in place as long as Eritrea refuses to comply with them.
At the same time, Djibouti would support action by the
Council to facilitate Eritrea's compliance by laying out
a clear path within a reasonable timetable towards that
end. In that regard, Djibouti would like to make the
following observations.

First, with respect to ending Eritrea's support
to armed groups, the Council should resolve to send

a monitoring mission to Eritrea within a month, on
condition that Eritrea commits to full cooperation with
it, including granting full access to all information and
records deemed necessary and all personnel whom
the mission considers it necessary to interview. The
mission would report to the Council within 30 days of
its return from Eritrea.

Secondly, with regard to prisoners of war, the
Council should require that Eritrea account for them
to the same monitoring mission and permit access for
the mission and the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

Lastly, based on the good offices of the Secretary-
General and in close collaboration with the Security
Council, the Secretary-General should convene an
urgent meeting of the parties to facilitate an agreement
between them through mutually acceptable means for
peaceful dispute settlement, as set forth in Article 33
of the Charter of the United Nations. The Secretary-
General should issue his recommended solution within
120 days and require that Eritrea and Djibouti either
accept that solution or, in the event that one of them
does not, submit the dispute to the International Court of
Justice for a final and binding resolution. It is Djibouti's
view that this path and timetable would offer Eritrea a
fair, reasonable and prompt way to resolve outstanding
issues in a manner that vindicates the actions of the
Council and ensures compliance with international law.

On Somalia, Djibouti is heartened by the outcome
of the Somalia partnership forum and the progress
that Somalia is making in a number of critical areas.
We welcome the endorsement of the transition plan
by the African Union Peace and Security Council and
the commitment to its implementation as expressed
in its communique of 27 July. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) continues to play a
critical enabling role as Somalia strives to develop its
capabilities in order to gradually assume responsibility
for security. AMISOM. deserves the continued support
of the international community. In that regard,
Djibouti welcomed the renewal of AMISOM's mandate
through the adoption of resolution 2431 (2018) earlier
this morning.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, the emergence of a new Horn of
Africa is now possible and a goal that is within our reach.
Djibouti stands fully ready to deliver on its contribution
with the aim of achieving a comprehensive, lasting and
robust peace in the region for the benefit of our peoples.
Getting bogged down in the past is not an option. Let us
work together to build a better future for our children.

