Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement on this important agenda item. I would like
at the outset to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate. I would also like to express my appreciation
to Ambassador Momen, Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh and Chair ofthe Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), for his tireless efforts and for his statement.

The Non-Aligned Movement stresses once again
its principled positions concerning post-conflict
peacebuilding activities, as contained in the outcome
document of the sixteenth Summit of Heads of States
or Government of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in
Iran in August.

The 2009 report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) established an agenda for strengthening
the United Nations response to peacebuilding
challenges and for facilitating an earlier and more
coherent response by the international community.
Since then, several steps have been taken by the United
Nations and the broad range of relevant actors to
restore sustainable peace in countries emerging from
conflict, as reflected in the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2012/746). Nonetheless, we must recognize
that much remains to be done to address the overall
challenges of peacebuilding and to intensify the nexus
between peace and development. In that regard, the
Movement would like to stress several points.

First, peacebuilding is continuously evolving.
Much remains to be learned in order to devise the
right policies and to identify an appropriate sequence
of priorities that fully respond to the specifics of each
local context. It is also necessary to take into account
the multidimensionality of conflict situations and their
changing nature, which requires a keen eye for the
multifaceted root causes of conflicts.

It is also important to further leverage our collective
peacebuilding effort to guarantee more coordinated
and coherent actions on the ground. That also requires
the United Nations to maintain its central role in
identifying a common vision of peacebuilding and in
forging a closer partnership with all relevant actors, for
the well-being of people emerging from conflicts.

Second, the Movement would like to reiterate
that all peacebuilding initiatives and planning should
be based on the principles of national ownership
and benefit from timely, predictable and sustainable
financing. We also maintain our position that there
can be no lasting and sustainable peace without
development. The importance of economic recovery
and the development dimension in the peacebuilding
process therefore hardly needs reiteration.

Third,withregardtothePeacebuildingCommission,
the Movement believes that the Commission indeed
constitutes a platform for a coordinated, coherent
and integrated institutional mechanism to address the
special needs of countries emerging from conflict.
We also reiterate the central role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in providing the United Nations with
policy guidance and strategies in its post-conflict
peacebuilding activities. In that regard, the PBC should
give special attention to the need to develop national
capacities and further institution-building through
the appropriate mechanisms and with the requisite
financial and technical resources.

We endorse the recommendation of the Secretary-
General's report encouraging the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission to build on the
important elements that emerged from the debate and
interactive dialogue held in July 2012, and encouraging
the Council to continue to articulate the advice that
it requires from the Commission, including during
mandate discussions. Moreover, we would like to
emphasize that institutional relations between the PBC
and the General Assembly, as well as with the Economic
and Social Council, should also be further promoted.

We would like also to underline the need for the PBC
to develop multiple forms of engagement appropriate
to the specific circumstances of different countries on
a case-by-case basis and to their evolving needs, as
well as to fully exert its preventive role in avoiding a
relapse into conflict. Moreover, we had hoped that the
Secretary-General's report would further elaborate on
how the respective roles and responsibilities of the PBC
and United Nations actors in the field could be further
clarified in order to enable the PBC to fully exercise its
mandate.

Fourth, turning to the part of the report on women
and peacebuilding, the Movement underlines the need
to alleviate the challenges faced by women and girls
in post-conflict situations and to strengthen their
effective participation in the peacebuilding process.
The potential contribution that women can make to the
peace process hardly needs reiteration. In that regard,
the Movement appreciates the ongoing efforts of the
Secretary-General to ensure women's participation in
and the availability of gender expertise to the peace
process, and emphasizes that women are crucial
partners in shoring up the three pillars of lasting
peace: economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy.

Fifth, we believe that the priority areas contained
in the 2009 report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict should remain the same. In
that context, we stress the need to reinforce the
inclusiveness of the peacebuilding process and national
reconciliation in order for all national actors to be in a
position to meaningfully engage in the peacebuilding
process. The active participation of all national actors,
including marginalized groups, may ease the situation
and contribute significantly to ensuring national
ownership in achieving peacebuilding goals through a
common vision of national development. The full and
effective participation of women can further strengthen
the process.

Sixth, we reiterate that national ownership is a
fundamental principle for reviewing civilian capacities.
The Movement reaffirms the importance of existing
civilian capacity within the developing world, and
expresses its readiness to support national capacity-
development and institution-building in support of
peacebuilding activities in post-conflict situations, as
well as enhanced regional, South-South and triangular
cooperation. We would like also to underline the need
to involve the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Fifth Committee, which will
continue to play a key role in the consideration of the
review of civilian capacities, given its administrative
and budgetary implications.

Seventh, as underlined by the Secretary-General's
report, the rebuilding of national institutions requires
sustained international political and financial support.
Headquarters must ensure the ability to undertake these
tasks in the field. In this connection, while emphasizing
the necessity to ensure the sustainability of funding
for countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we express our concern regarding the lack
of coordination and coherence among financial donors
resulting in duplication and redundancy in particular
areas and the neglect of other catalytic projects. In this
regard, we call for the setup ofa mechanism within the
PBC to review, within each country configuration, ways
and means to ensure the unity of efforts by donors, in
close collaboration with host countries.

In conclusion, the Movement reiterates once
again its full commitment to share its inputs and
to constructively engage in future discussions on
peacebuilding.

