Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, let me
join others in expressing Indonesia's condolences to
the Government and the people of France and to the
families of the soldiers who lost their lives in Mali.

We once again thank Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad
Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), for his briefing today. My
appreciation also goes to Mr. Kachi for his briefing
and, most importantly, for his support to UNITAD's
work despite his difficult experiences on the ground. I
would like to make three brief points.

First, we are delighted to note that the Investigative
Team is now fully operational, and especially to hear that
progress has been made in the collection, preservation
and storage of evidentiary material in Iraq. Despite
all the challenges on the ground, we are pleased that
the Investigative Team has made significant progress
on its evidence-collecting activities in Sinjar, Mosul
and Tikrit.

Secondly, we underline the importance of
evidence- and witness-based investigations. Protecting
and supporting the survivors and the communities
affected should be at the centre of UNITAD's work.
We are encouraged to learn from UNITAD's third
report (S/2019/878) that through its investigative and
witness-protection strategy, the Investigative Team
has been able to ensure a victim-centred approach to
its interviews with survivors and is engaging with the
communities that have been affected.

Thirdly, Indonesia continues to believe that the
primary jurisdiction for holding accountable those
responsible for the atrocities committed within Iraqi
borders should lie with the Iraqi national authorities.
We are therefore absolutely delighted to hear that the
Investigative Team has been cooperating fully with the
relevant authorities and supporting Iraq in strengthening
its judicial system to bring perpetrators to justice. We
hope that this cooperation will be maintained. Indonesia
continues to support the work of the Investigative Team
and wishes Mr. Khan and his team much courage and
success in the challenging task entrusted to them.

