Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): May I extend to you, Sir,
my congratulations to Uganda for the successful
handling of the work of the Security Council this
month. We would also like to associate ourselves with
statements made by the representatives of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Alignment Movement and Tajikistan
on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. May I also associate myself with the
statements made by my colleagues, the representatives
of Saudi Arabia and Qatar, and with statement to be
made by the representative of Tunisia. I am sure we
speak with one voice.

The resumption of the Israel-Palestine direct
negotiations last month had rekindled hope for all of us
for sustainable peace in the Middle East and a
permanent political settlement of the Israel-Palestinian
question. But I fear that our hopes and optimism
appear to be short-lived, as the window of opportunity
for meaningful and sustained negotiation is once again
closing.

We need to extend our hands and grasp this
fleeting moment of history, because we believe that the
Security Council, the Middle East Quartet and the
international community must act together in tandem to
prevent the collapse of the talks. Today's open debate
can effectively communicate a collective message, if
we focus ourselves on three key areas so that the talks
will now move in the right direction. The first one is
the unconditional cessation of all settlement activity by
Israel.

The international community must play a role in
this. They must sensitize Israel to get it to announce its
unconditional cessation of all settlement activity.
Settlement activity violates international law, vitiates
the atmosphere of the talks and mutes the voice of
peace and compassion. It amounts to a colonization
procedure of the Palestinian territory.

Settlement activity in recent times has shown
numerous patterns. The more worrying trend is in and
around East Jerusalem, where the status of the
centuries-old prayer places, mosques, churches and
cemeteries of the Palestinian people are being altered
in the name of excavation and the creation of new
housing space. Violence by settlers against their
Palestinian neighbours has become a routine, albeit
regrettable corollary of that activity.

We note with particular concern the
announcement made this past Friday by the Israeli
authorities of their intent to build 238 housing units in
East Jerusalem's neighbourhoods of Ramot and Pisgat
Ze'ev. Israel must stop this illegal activity. It must also
end its calculated ambiguity on settlements in the West
Bank, with a categorical renunciation of any new
project. At the moment, we are allowing settlement
activity to derail the negotiations or cast its threatening
challenge as a shadow upon the peace process of the
world.

Secondly, improvement in the lives of the
Palestinian people is very important. This will indicate
whether we are proceeding towards peace. The
negotiation process must run in parallel with this. A
myriad of checkpoints, roadblocks, military siege and
separation walls cannot indicate peace and progress.
This has infested the land of the prophets and the holy
books and it must end. This must stop.

We acknowledge a set of measures taken by the
Israeli authorities - and this is important - to ease
restrictions on movement in the West Bank and to
improve Gaza access. Such measures must be sustained
by a deeper political commitment to improve
livelihoods in Palestine through respect of human
rights, freedom of movement and unrestricted flow of
commerce. It cannot simply be a tap that can be turned
on or off.

Thirdly, in order to believe that efforts are on the
right track, there must be upgraded assistance to the
Palestinian Authority. We must recognize this,
especially regarding the plans announced in August
2009 for building the institutions of a Palestine State
within two years. But we have continued to allow the
denigration of the Palestinian Administration and
economy. Many independent studies, including the
Economic Monitoring Report prepared by the World
Bank, have praised the performance of the Palestinian
Authority in institution-building and delivery of public
services. This has not found much voice in this
particular forum and it needs to be said.
The World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund have projected an 8 per cent growth rate in the
West Bank and Gaza. This is very creditable. This

economic boom and entrepreneurship can be a solid
edifice for the Palestinian statehood and for its people.
And in fact, it can rebut violence. This holds immense
promise for a lasting peace in the region and beyond.
The economic and political momentum behind this
significant change must not be lost. A strong and
confident Palestine can better deliver peace, both at the
negotiating table and in the streets of the region.

For lasting peace in the wider Middle East, we
would also urge parallel progress on the Israel-
Lebanon and Israel-Syria tracks, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions. We must
encourage those negotiations to systematically move
forward, along with all that we are doing here. Pakistan
has always been supportive of lasting peace for all
inhabitants of the Middle East - I repeat, for all of the
inhabitants of the Middle East - irrespective of
religion, ethnicity and nationality.

We continue to look forward to substantive and
objective investigations by the Secretary-General's
Panel of Inquiry on the freedom flotilla incident of
31 May 2010. We await a date for its publication. The
freedom flotilla had embarked on a noble mission, and
those killed aboard certainly deserve our attention. The
Panel must diligently pursue the matter and bring it
before this Chamber in a timely fashion, within the
year. Justice must prevail and those affected must be
compensated.

We share the common goal of the international
community to achieve an independent, sovereign and
viable State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, living side by side and in peace with its
neighbours. Our prayer today is that this open debate
of the Council will bring us nearer to this peaceful
objective.

