Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in extending our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on such
an important subject. We thank the Secretary-General
for his statement, and we are also grateful to the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for
their respective briefings.

My delegation also wishes to associate itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Every year, thousands of civilians fall victim to
armed conflict. Their plight should always be our
concern. It is our shared responsibility to alleviate their
suffering wherever it occurs. The United Nations
Charter unmistakably highlights this obligation.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Security Council's initial consideration of this issue
and the sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions. The nature of armed conflict has evolved
since then, as have its causes and consequences. The
wisdom that inspired the old Geneva Conventions
should be renewed as the path to be taken to address
the current circumstances. Likewise, it is a time to
reflect on the achievements and on improvements that
can bring about tangible results.

The past 10 years of the Council's consideration
of this issue has set out a robust international
normative framework and provided a wealth of
experience and best practices. In spite of that,
tremendous challenges still lie before us.

One of the most difficult tasks in the protection
of civilians is the increasingly blurred line between
armed groups, combatants and civilians. The lack of
clarity has cost civilian lives. There is also the
proliferation and fragmentation of non-State armed
groups. Another key issue is the increasingly
asymmetric nature of armed conflict, where the
principles of distinction and proportionality are being
violated. These challenges serve to highlight the need
for reinvigorated commitment and determined
comprehensive action.

In this connection, we wish to highlight two of
the three thematic areas in the President's concept
paper (S/2009/567, annex), related to the five core
challenges described in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/277).

On strengthening the rule of law, enhancing
compliance and ensuring accountability, Indonesia is
cognizant of the fact that the key cause of failure in the
protection of civilians in armed conflict stems from the
lack of compliance and accountability by parties to
conflict with respect to their moral and legal obligation
to protect civilians. Indonesia stresses that when it
comes to the protection of civilians, all parties to the
conflict have equal responsibility. There are no
distinctions in responsibility. There is one single
responsibility. Everyone must adhere to that
fundamental principle.

Indonesia values the constructive developments
we have seen towards strengthening compliance and
ensuring accountability through building national
capacity. Only through this avenue can we, the
international community, prevent the emergence of
atrocities committed against civilians. Should local
institutions fail to discharge their duty in the first
instance, no amount of international assistance and
effort can bring long-term results. Our focus and our
dedication should be on strengthening local
institutions.

The role of Member States in promoting
compliance and accountability through domestic
legislation and legal means is a vital building block in
the prevention of violations against civilians; it merits
increased support. We look forward to further
developing other means and tools to strengthen
national capacity. Due regard should continue to be
paid to the special needs of women and children.

On improving the implementation of protection
mandates by peacekeeping missions, Indonesia
recognizes the role of peacekeeping missions in
improving protection of civilians on the ground. We
note that much more needs to be done in responding to
situations where conflict may potentially re-emerge or
has already re-emerged. Thus, we note with interest the
detailed analysis conducted by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. That study's
key findings and recommendations should be
thoroughly discussed by the troop-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the Council working
together.

We also value the effort to ensure that the
protection of civilians is given high priority in
decisions concerning the use of available capacity and
resources in the implementation of mission mandates.
We believe that these are vital steps for bridging the
disconnect between mandates, intentions, expectations
and capacity challenges to real implementation, as
highlighted by the Secretary-General's report.

My delegation is fully convinced that a more
effective measure for the protection of civilians is the
prevention of conflict itself. This approach entails
addressing the root causes of conflict. Resolution 1265
(1999) explicitly expressed the need to address the
causes of armed conflict in order to enhance the
protection of civilians on a long-term basis.

Finally, let me reiterate that the protection of
civilians is a universal and timeless issue. Generation
after generation has sought to find effective measures
for protecting civilians from the looming danger of
armed conflict. Our current discussion is part of that
long and unbroken chain of efforts. Today's discussion
is a way to reinvigorate us and encourage the quest for
new solutions to address the issue and to strengthen
existing mechanisms.

