Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Even though time is short, I should like to say to you,
Sir, how pleased the Moroccan delegation is to see you
presiding over the Council. I had the opportunity to
admire your many skills long before you were
President, and I am also aware of your clear-
sightedness and your general willingness to listen to
others talk about issues that do not concern you
directly but are of importance to you as a person who
desires peace and understanding among all nations. I
should like to take this opportunity to thank you
personally for all of the efforts that you have made.

My country has addressed the Council numerous
times over the past few weeks, denouncing Israel's
invasion of Palestinian cities and condemning the
destruction of infrastructures and of all of the resources
available to the Palestinian Authority, which it had
built up with international assistance - inter alia
significant assistance from the European Union - in
order to serve its people.

Almost everything has now been destroyed. As
each of us knows, the destruction was not a military
necessity, but aimed simply at breaking apart what the
Palestinian Authority spent 10 years building up in
order to prepare for the advent of its Palestinian State.

Schools and hospitals have been destroyed. Social
centres and libraries have been destroyed. Archives have
been destroyed - and we saw this happening live -
including the archives of the Palestinian national
education system. Thus an entire people is increasingly
being pushed into a situation in which it can feel only
bitterness and despair.

We have spoken also about the Jenin massacre.
The whole world has now been traumatized by the
images we saw - images of a humanitarian disaster
that will leave an indelible imprint on the memory of
many generations of Palestinians to come. And,
regrettably, this will only fuel the infernal cycle of
hatred. Accounts by international civil servants and
human rights organizations have corroborated the
extent of the serious crimes committed in Jenin - a
town of refugees and of poor people.

We know also that the Israelis have denied
everything outright, denying the truth of the pictures
we all have seen and denying the evidence. They have
taken cover behind the statement that this is the way
war operations are normally conducted.

Let me recall briefly that it was in these
conditions that the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
after consulting Israel and other important countries,
decided to shoulder his responsibilities under the
Charter and - as has happened in many other such
controversial situations - decided to send an
independent fact-finding team so as to be able to
determine exactly what had happened. The persons
involved were only to report what had happened.

It was not a question of passing value judgements
or of assessing the situation - much less of accusing
anyone in advance or of taking legal steps. General
Assembly resolution 46/59 of 9 December 1991 -
which Israel itself quoted - defines the nature of a
fact-finding mission, and that is to simply report what
has happened, without any other considerations.

The Security Council welcomed, by its resolution
1405 (2002) of 19 April, the Secretary-General's
initiative to develop accurate information regarding
recent events in the Jenin refugee camp through a fact-
finding team. The Secretary-General had the support of
the entire international community in setting up a team
consisting of eminent personalities who, through the
work they had done, were known to be of
unquestionable moral authority and ability.

The Israeli authorities then raised one objection
after another to Mr. Kofi Annan, who then entered into
extensive discussions with many experts here in New
York. He provided them with all of the clarifications
and assurances they requested. It was after all of this
that he informed them of his decision to send the fact-
finding team, which was to leave on 29 April.

The Israeli Cabinet requested postponements,
which, frankly speaking, turned into one delaying
tactic after another - from Saturday to Sunday to
Monday, and so on - and finally it categorically
refused to cooperate with the United Nations team. Of
course, Mr. Kofi Annan had no option other than to
draw the conclusions that he did.

Morocco would like to extend its full support to
the Secretary-General. We pay tribute to him for the
very open approach he took while at the same time
standing firm by the principles and values that underlie
this Organization. There was obviously no question of
Israel's dictating its conditions or imposing the persons
it wanted on the fact-finding mission and the way it
wanted the mission to operate. The Secretary-General
was very clear on that point and he acted properly.

Moreover, contrary to what Israel said, the team
did not need Israel's prior authorization to go to Jenin,
because Jenin is in occupied territory. By refusing to
cooperate with the United Nations, Israel knew very
well that it was dooming the team to fail, and that is
what happened. Even more serious, the very credibility
of the United Nations is now in peril. The newspapers
even said today that such behaviour has made a
mockery of the United Nations. That is very worrisome
for the future of the maintenance of international peace
and security, because all of us - even Israel - have
an interest in preserving the United Nations.

The Secretary-General wrote to the President of
the Security Council on 1 May, 12 days after the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1405 (2002). He
decided to disband the fact-finding team, but in so
doing he also made Israel aware of its responsibilities.
Mr. Kofi Annan spoke in diplomatic terms of the long
shadow that would remain over events at Jenin if
nothing were done. That shadow, unfortunately, will
also darken Israel's institutions if no light is shed on
those events. The victims are mourning the dead and
are calling for justice.

That said, things cannot stop here. There has been
a challenge to you, Mr. President, and to the Council,
and the Council must respond to that challenge. The
world cannot be paralyzed because a Member State
refuses to cooperate with it. Work must continue on
clarifying what happened at Jenin, using all available
means. The Secretariat and all those of good will must
be mobilized. A report must be made one way or
another - if not through direct access, then through
indirect access. There is a Moroccan proverb - "You
cannot hide the sun with a sieve" - and our sun is the
United Nations.

Beyond these tragic developments, we ardently
hope that the current efforts to revive the peace process
will make swift progress. Therefore, we would like
Palestinians and Israelis to take another look at the
future. Peace in the region and throughout the world is
at stake. We know that our leaders - in particular His
Majesty Mohammed VI - have done their utmost in
the past few weeks to contribute to the efforts of all
actors. The Kingdom of Morocco actively participated
in the Beirut Arab summit's endorsement of the peace
initiative of Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia.
Today we are prepared to encourage the holding of an
international conference in the same spirit, based on
the principle of land for peace and on respect for
international law - a legal framework that is now well
known.

At the same time, the Council's resolutions -
from resolution 1397 (2002) to resolution 1405 (2002),
including resolution 1402 (2002) - must be
implemented. The Israeli troops must withdraw from
the Palestinian towns, because there is no other
alternative. Thus will negotiations begin and thus will
Israeli and Palestinian children finally be able to look
to the future with some hope.

