The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I would like to begin by joining previous speakers
in expressing France's condolences to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the wake of the horrific crash
that occurred in the Kasai region, and to Indonesia
following the natural disasters that have once again
plunged the country into mourning.

I want to warmly thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ms. Anny Modi for their very informative interventions.
At a time when the Security Council is preparing to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), it is important for us to
have a clear assessment of the situation in the country,
MONUSCO's implementation of its mandate and the
issues facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the coming months.

In January the Democratic Republic of the Congo
experienced a historic event, the first peaceful change of
a Head of State since the country gained independence.
The Security Council, which has followed the electoral
process very closely, congratulated the Congolese
people on their conduct and sense of civic duty on
the day of the election. Since taking office, President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi has undertaken a number of
important steps aimed at achieving peace and national
reconciliation, opening the political space and ensuring
respect for the law and for human rights in particular.
The release at the end of last week of 700 prisoners
imprisoned for political reasons is the latest example
of that. France welcomes those initial important
decisions and encourages the new authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to fulfil
the commitments made by the President.
The next steps in the institutional life of the
country must happen very soon and will also be an
opportunity to demonstrate the new directions that the
country is taking, including with the legislative and
provincial elections in the areas where people were
unable to vote in December, the formation of the new
Government and the organization early next year of the
first local elections in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As Ms. Modi emphasized,
women's participation in that process can and must still
be improved.

President Tshisekedi has also pledged to work to
end the conflicts afflicting the country, particularly
in the east, and the intercommunal clashes that have
recently affected various regions, with a view to
helping the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
various communities coexist peacefully. A number of
armed groups have expressed their willingness to lay
down their arms, and several hundred combatants have
already done so since January. This new development
will be hopeful if we work collectively to do what
must be done to ensure that those combatants can be
disarmed and properly reintegrated into civilian life
and their communities.

MONUSCO has an important role to play in all
those aspects, and I want to once again commend the
exemplary commitment of Ms. Zerrougui and her entire
staff and team. The Council has mandated MONUSCO
to protect civilians and support the Government in its
fight against armed groups. We need the determined
involvement of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the countries of the region as part of an approach
that combines military pressure, if necessary, and
dialogue so as to normalize the situation throughout
the country.

There are a number of important challenges that
must still be addressed. Several ofthe country's regions
continue to suffer from predatory activity by both
Congolese and foreign armed groups financed by the
illegal exploitation of natural resources. France urges
both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all of the
countries in the region to act concertedly and resolutely
to end such trafficking and cut off the resources that
enable such groups to continue their abuses.

Certain kinds of community tensions have
sometimes degenerated into extremely serious violence,
as was the case in Yumbi in December, where crimes
against humanity may have been committed. France
calls on the Congolese authorities to do everything to
ensure that the perpetrators of those heinous crimes
are held accountable for their actions. It will also be
crucial to ensure that the new authorities shed light
on the human rights violations committed during the
election period.

Sexual violence against women is still too often
used as a weapon ofwar, as Ms. Modi mentioned. France
encourages the Congolese authorities to prosecute the
people responsible and to provide the necessary support
to the victims.

The Ebola epidemic continues to rage in the
country's eastern regions and must be dealt with. I want
to once again commend the exemplary commitment
of the Congolese authorities and humanitarian actors,
coordinated by the World Health Organization, in
combating the epidemic, and the support provided by
MONUSCO. On behalf of France, I once again firmly
condemn attacks targeting humanitarian personnel who
are assisting the sick. They must continue to receive our
full support.

All the changes and challenges that I have
mentioned will require the United Nations to adapt its
engagement in the country and reconfigure its modes
of action in order to give the best possible support to
the restoration of peace and stability throughout the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
will mean reconfiguring MONUSCO as well. For that
reason, in the draft resolution that France will submit
early this week to Council members on the renewal
of the Mission's mandate, we propose conducting a
strategic review of MONUSCO. In the spirit of the
Secretary-General's initiative on peacekeeping, we
believe it is crucial to ensure that the Council can
rely on a thorough assessment of the situation and the
related needs in order to reconfigure MONUSCO by the
autumn and begin the transition to other forms of long-
term support. The reconfiguration should of course be
undertaken in close coordination with the Congolese
authorities, in accordance with President Tshisekedi's
commitments and priorities.

For the past 20 years the United Nations Observer
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and, subsequently, MONUSCO have supported the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on its path to
recovery and national reunification. January's peaceful
transfer of power shows that another stage has been
reached. We must now adapt MONUSCO to the
challenges of the years to come so that it can eventually
withdraw and so that the Congolese authorities are fully
capable of providing security and establishing the right
conditions for their people's development throughout
the country. In support of that transition, it will also be
the Security Council's job to consider the shape that the
United Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo might take.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, who sacrificed
their lives for peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and worked tirelessly to improve the lot of
the Congolese people. We encourage the Congolese
authorities to spare no effort in supporting the United
Nations monitoring mechanism to ensure that the
perpetrators of those crimes be tried and sentenced.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

