Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation thanks
you, Madam President, for organizing this important
debate. We also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom,
for his update on the situation in Afghanistan.
We acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, and thank him for his
statement. Our comments will focus on the security
situation, electoral reform, national reconciliation and
counter-narcotics efforts.

Concerning the security situation, we note the
ongoing challenges, including arbitrary killings,
violence and criminality linked to the activities of
the Taliban and other anti-Government elements.
The capture of Kunduz and 16 district centres by the
Taliban highlights the grave threat that the group poses
to the peace, security and stability of Afghanistan. We
commend the Afghan security forces for regaining
control of Kunduz and most of the captured district
centres.

According to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/942), the fall ofKunduz was preceded by strained
working relations between security institutions and
civilian authorities. Placing that in a context of lessons
learned, we encourage all concerned to make efforts
to improve their working relations. Situations that may
be exploited by the Taliban and other anti-Government
elements to destabilize the country must be identified
and ameliorated.

Regarding electoral reform, we applaud the decision
of President Ghani to approve the restoration of reserved
seats for women in provincial and district council
elections to 25 per cent. That is a clear demonstration
of the President's commitment to the empowerment of
women and the advancement of their rights. We urge
the Government to continue to work towards enhancing
the participation of women in politics and governance.
With respect to national reconciliation, we encourage
further efforts to resuscitate the peace process. We
consider it vital to national cohesion and stability;
reviving it would therefore be in the national interest.

We note the outcome of the fifth ministerial
conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
held in Islamabad on 9 December, reaffirming the
commitment of regional stakeholders to resolving the
conflict in Afghanistan through peaceful negotiations.
We are convinced that only Afghan-owned and Afghan-
led peace and reconciliation initiatives can bring
lasting peace, security and stability to the country. We
therefore urge the Taliban and other armed opposition
groups to lay down their arms and engage in dialogue
with the Government. It is crucial that the reconciliation
agenda be sustained in the interest of the people of
Afghanistan. Still with respect to reconciliation, we
applaud the agreement of the first-ever local ceasefire
with the official endorsement of the Government. The
agreement, which prohibits Afghan security forces
and the Taliban from conducting military operations
in the district of Baghlan province, was successful in
reducing violence during the reporting period. We urge
all concerned to abide by the terms of the agreement.

Concerning the issue of counter-narcotics, we note
the decrease in opium poppy production by 19 per cent
with respect to 2014. That is especially significant as
it marks the first time since 2009 that a reduction in
opium poppy cultivation has been achieved. We expect
counter-narcotics efforts in the country to continue
to yield positive results as the authorities implement
the national counter-narcotics plan for 2015-2019.
An important dimension of any counter-narcotics
effort is the fight against money-laundering and illicit
financial flows that may be used for terrorist financing.
International cooperation is essential if that effort is be
effective. In that regard, we welcome the signing of a
memorandum of understanding between the financial
intelligence units of Afghanistan and Tajikistan.

While significant progress has been made in
Afghanistan across various sectors, considerable
challenges remain. In addressing those challenges,
the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) remains important.
Sustained regional and international support is also
vital. We pay tribute to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haysom, the staff of UNAMA
and Afghanistan's development partners for their
commitment to placing Afghanistan on the path to
peace, security, reconciliation and development.

