Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
country endorses the statement to be made later by
Ireland on behalf of the European Union. Spain has
decided to co-sponsor this draft resolution because we
consider it essential to act urgently to fill a legal
vacuum in which international disarmament and non-
proliferation treaties and regimes do not sufficiently
address the question of how to prevent access by non-
State actors - particularly terrorists - to weapons of
mass destruction (WMD).

The draft resolution's context is none other than
the global fight against terrorism, and therefore Spain
considers this exercise to be part of what began with
resolution 1373 (2001). In that context, it is clear that
we are confronting a grave and imminent threat to
international peace and security: the possibility that
non-State actors might gain access to WMD and
sensitive materials. For that reason, my country
believes that the Council is competent to act. We
believe that, since the Council is legislating for the
entire international community, this draft resolution
should preferably, although not necessarily, be adopted
by consensus and after consultation with non-members
of the Council. Therefore, without prejudice to the - I
daresay - unprecedented and intensive negotiations of
the sponsors, Spain has always believed the holding of
this formal open debate to be appropriate.

The most debated issues related to the draft
resolution can be summarized in four points. The first
issue is non-proliferation. The draft's objective is clear
and limited. In no way does it attempt to modify
international disarmament or non-proliferation
objectives, which is clearly indicated in operative
paragraph 11. Therefore, we believe that the term "non-
proliferation", with the safeguard represented by that
paragraph, is the most appropriate way to refer to the
phenomenon we want to combat, since it clearly
encompasses both the State and the non-State aspects.
Therefore, proliferation cannot be qualified by limiting
it to non-State actors, because obviously States can
also proliferate WMD and supply them to non-State
actors.

The second issue is disarmament. It is a fact that
the various treaties alluded to in the draft resolution are
disarmament rather than non-proliferation treaties and
that disarmament and non-proliferation are closely
inter-related concepts in international norms and
practice. Clearly, disarmament can help to prevent non-
State actors from acquiring WMD, but this draft
resolution will in no way cause States possessing such
weapons to comply more swiftly with their
disarmament obligations under international treaties or
cause non-parties to such treaties to accede to them.
What is more, if we introduce too many paragraphs on
disarmament into the draft resolution, we run the risk
of diluting its objective. That does not mean we do not
agree on substance, but we do not deem it appropriate
to introduce too many disarmament references, because
they are not appropriate in the context of the draft
resolution. Therefore, my delegation is pleased that, for
the sake of balance, a reference to disarmament was
introduced into a preambular paragraph without
diverting the draft resolution from its specific
objective.

The third issue is Chapter VII of the Charter.
Spain believes that the draft resolution is not
intrusive - because it gives States leeway on how to
internally interpret its implementation - and that it
should be adopted within the framework of Chapter VII
for two reasons: to make it unequivocally legally
binding for all United Nations Members and to send a
strong political message. In that context, I want to
emphasize that Spain considers this exercise to be part
of the fight against terrorism and a continuation of
what began with resolution 1373 (2001), which was
adopted within the framework of Chapter VII. It would
therefore be hard to understand why one would not
apply Chapter VII on this occasion.

We also understand that the draft resolution in no
way explicitly or implicitly gives a blank check for the
use of coercive measures, including the use of force, in
cases of non-compliance.

Fourthly, as to the follow-up mechanism, Spain
supports the creation of a Security Council committee
entrusted with monitoring the implementation of the
draft resolution and is flexible with regard to the
duration of its mandate. The important thing is that it
have sufficient time to fulfil its functions. In any case,
six months would not appear to be enough. As has been
noted concerning other Council committees, the
committee should set its own terms of reference once it
has been established.

We believe that this would be a standard
committee of the Security Council, composed of all the
members and operating on the basis of consensus, and
whose functions would be very similar to that of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. In other words, it would
be a committee governed by the principles of
cooperation, equal treatment and transparency, and of
which providing technical assistance to States would be
an essential component. Furthermore and lastly, we
believe that it should have experts to assist its work.
For most Permanent Missions, it would be impossible
alone to process all the information to be provided by
States under the draft resolution.

