Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First and foremost, Mr. President, I welcome you to
New York in presiding over this important meeting. I
also wish to extend a welcome to other Foreign
Ministers of African countries and the representatives
of regional and subregional organizations. I wish to
thank them for their important speeches.

In recent years, the excessive accumulation of
and rampant illicit trafficking in small weapons in
Africa, especially in West Africa, have aggravated
armed conflicts and turmoil in these regions. Through
their prolonged presence in these regions, mercenaries
have not only been involved in armed conflicts but also
have been engaged in the trafficking of arms and the
plundering of resources, thus further exacerbating and
prolonging the conflicts.

In the absence of an effective resolution of this
issue, peace will remain illusive in Africa, especially in
West Africa. The international community should give
greater attention to this issue and support and assist
regional and subregional organizations in combating
the illicit trade in small weapons and the use of
mercenaries.

The Chinese delegation believes that only an
integrated approach, with a regional dimension, can
effectively solve the question of small arms and
mercenaries in West Africa. Therefore, better
coordination and cooperation among members of the
community, especially among the West African
countries, are of critical importance. As a matter of
priority, the countries concerned in this region should,
in accordance with the Programme of Action adopted
by the 2001 United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, as well as the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Moratorium on the
importation, exportation and manufacture of small
arms and light weapons, develop an update of their
domestic legislation on the manufacture, possession,
transfer and stockpiling of small arms in their
countries, in light of their specific circumstances, and
take effective and reliable measures to ensure their
scrupulous implementation.

The Security Council should continue to
strengthen its cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations; actively promote the West
African peace process; implement disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in areas
of conflict; and strengthen its monitoring of the
enforcement of arms embargoes. From a long-term

perspective, the international community - while
remaining committed to assisting West African
countries to eliminate tension and conflict - should

actively help the countries of the region to develop
their economies, pull themselves out of poverty and
achieve sustainable development. That is the only
approach capable of resolving the issue of small arms
and mercenaries in West Africa at the root level and of
restoring and safeguarding peace and security in the
subregion.

China has always opposed the illicit manufacture
of and trafficking in small arms, as well as the
recruitment and use of mercenaries. We have great
sympathy for the people of Africa, and especially for
those of West Africa, who have long suffered from the
proliferation of both small arms and mercenaries.
China supports regional and subregional efforts aimed
at resolving these issues. We also support strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
countries of the region. We are ready to work with the
international community to reach an early and
appropriate solution to the question of small arms and
mercenaries in West Africa.

