Ms. Del Ponte (spoke in French): Allow me first to
thank all the members of the Security Council for their
words of encouragement and congratulation addressed not
only to me, but also and foremost to all my colleagues,
who have been engaged in this often very difficult work
for many years. I would mention that my Deputy
Prosecutor, who is seated behind me, has been with the
Tribunal since its establishment and is an extremely
valuable colleague.
I wish to offer some brief explanations in connection
with the questions that have been asked.

First, I will speak to our material and personnel
needs. We are here to address the Fifth Committee. We
have made what I would describe as a modest request.
We have asked for 41 additional posts, 27 of which are
solely for investigations in Kosovo. In Kosovo, we have
opened 160 mass graves and more than 300 remain to be
opened. I believe that this must be done next year. I do
not want to leave these corpses in their graves for several
years simply because I cannot extract them. I want to do
everything I can to get them out next year so that we may
get a clear picture of the magnitude of this disaster. Thus,
of the 41 posts I have requested, 27 are solely for
Kosovo.

I will not trouble members with descriptions of the
other posts I have requested, but I will say that I have
requested two posts for a financial team. We are going to
establish a financial team because fugitives require
funding in order to remain at large. I have some
indication that their money may also be linked to acts of
corruption committed in order to finance their flight. I
feel that it is the responsibility of the Prosecutor to
confiscate the assets in the fugitives' bank accounts so
that, when these cases come to trial, the judges may
determine who is to receive the monies impounded by my
Office. In this respect, I am of course thinking especially
of the families of the victims.

 

I wish now to address the obstacles we have
encountered, especially the length of trials and preventive
detention. This is a matter that we are addressing and I
sincerely hope that we will be able to find solutions. The
biggest problem, in my opinion, is the length of preventive
detention. Once an arrest is made, the Office of the
Prosecutor is ready to go to trial in 30 to 60 days, but since
there are trials under way and the Trial Chambers are
occupied, it is not possible to open new trials. Thus,
preventive detention may be protracted. This is of growing
concern to me. I would point to the statistics. At the
moment, we have three trials under way, but eight
indictments ready to go to trial. We do not yet know when
a date can be set for these cases.

As to the nature of our investigative activities, I have
heard that we are suspected of carrying out one-sided
investigations. This is not true and I absolutely refute that
assertion. It is not true, but I can understand that the data
uncovered by our investigations are not considered official
by everyone, especially when an indictment has yet to be
issued. I can assure the members of the Security Council
that my Office is undertaking investigations in which the
accused are not only Serbs, but also Muslims and members
of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA). In this regard, I
wish to say that the difficulty in investigating KLA suspects
arises from the attitude of the former Yugoslavia and
Serbia. Many Serbian victims involved in our investigations
have taken refuge in Serbia. We have no access to Serbia;
we cannot go there; we have had to close our office in
Belgrade. If it is not possible to re-open that office and gain
access to the victims, those investigations will have trouble
producing results. We are trying to get there and hope that
indictments will be issued next year.

Regarding the problem with Croatia, the Croatian
Minister of Justice and Minister of Foreign Affairs perhaps
had the most dealings with us during our visit to Zagreb.
The key point is that the Croatian Minister of Justice
challenges the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. I have tried to
make the political authorities understand that challenging
jurisdiction is done during the trial. It cannot be done
before the trial has begun, as in general we cannot accept
that kind of exception. I am ready to find a solution to this
problem with the Government of Croatia, but the fact that
it denies my jurisdiction makes it very hard for me even to
engage in discussion.

During my visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina I went
to the Republika Srpska and met with the Prime Minister,
who stated the intention to cooperate more with us, in a
positive way. I alerted him to the fact that probably in
that Republic there are approximately 25 fugitives. I very
much hope that the verbal assurances we received from
the Prime Minister will soon be translated into arrests.

Regarding the sealed indictments, it is true that they
are indictments that are not made public. I would simply
like to say that in national systems no indictments are
published on the Internet or in the press before they are
executed. We are working along the same lines. I would
also like to say that my predecessor, Louise Arbour,
found that that investigative method was very important
and received the blessing of the Trial Chamber and the
Appeals Chamber, so juridically and judicially it is
provided for in the rules and our Statutes. I intend to
continue using sealed indictments, since I have more than
30 fugitives who have not yet been arrested, although the
arrest warrants date back three or four years. I say to the
States concerned in particular that I am ready to discuss
these sealed indictments, but after those States have
arrested all the individuals still at large.

I should like to say a final word on Rwanda. It is
true that I shall be visiting Rwanda. I shall be addressing
matters very closely. A problem has arisen, but the
Appeals Chamber, in its decision, ruled that the detained
person should be transferred to the State of Cameroon.
This does not mean that an African State cannot intervene
to open a criminal investigation of a suspect against
whom - I am assured, but I shall go and see - there is
very strong evidence. I will return to the Council with
further information on Rwanda.

