Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. This has indeed been a very productive month
for the Council, and the manner in which you have
been conducting the deliberations has been a key
factor. I would also like to commend your predecessor,
Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby of Norway, on his
outstanding performance during his mandate.

The signing of the Memorandum of
Understanding on the cessation of hostilities marked a
turning point in the history of the Republic of Angola.
The Security Council of the United Nations, in its
capacity as the body whose primary function is the
maintenance of international peace and security, played
a very pivotal role in the achievement of peace in
Angola. Time and again, through the relevant
resolutions and presidential statements, utilizing the
tools and policy instruments at its disposal, it expressed
the will of the international community regarding the
conflict in Angola by upholding principles of
democratic cohabitation in accordance with
international law. The combined efforts of our
institution, the cooperation of the Member States and
the efforts of the Government of Angola led to the
cessation of hostilities in Angola, as expressed in the
Memorandum of Understanding to complement the
Lusaka Protocol.

At this point, I wish to express my Government's
appreciation to the Secretary-General as well as to the
Governments of Portugal, the Russian Federation and
the United States, members of the troika, for having
witnessed and co-signed the Memorandum of
Understanding on 4 April. The fact that Under-
Secretary-General Gambari, just returning from his
three-week stay in Angola, is briefing the Council on
his findings today is indeed a very positive
development. My Government fully supports the
recommendations contained in his briefings and stands
ready to work with the Secretary-General on the way to
advance the peace process in Angola.

I am pleased to announce that, as of this moment,
there have been no violations of the ceasefire.

As the Council is aware, the implementation of
the Memorandum of Understanding is divided into two
phases. Phase one comprises the quartering,
disarmament, integration and demobilization of 55,000
UNITA combatants and accommodating approximately
350,000 members of their families. The parties agreed
that 5,000 military personnel will be integrated into the
Angolan armed forces and national police, while the
remainder will be demobilized and integrated into civil
society, accompanied by their families.

By the conclusion of phase one the military
obstacles to the implementation of the remaining
political items under the Lusaka Protocol will have
been removed. Therefore the parties have agreed that
upon conclusion of phase one, the Joint Commission to
oversee the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol will
be reinstated, enabling the process of national
reconciliation and leading to national elections.

Although the ceasefire is holding and the parties
are determined to achieve lasting peace in the Republic
of Angola, my Government is aware of the magnitude
of the challenges that it faces. Furthermore, my
Government recognizes that the prevalence of lasting
peace is predicated upon the successful implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol.

The United Nations and the international
community have a critical role to play in the success of
the peace process. During phase one, the United
Nations is called upon to provide military and non-
military observers, to participate in the Joint Military
Commission and to provide much-needed technical and
material assistance for the quartering, demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration of UNITA's members.
Additionally, the United Nations is called upon to
provide technical assistance and to mobilize resources
for soldiers and their families in and around quartering
areas, as well as in the preparation of the donors
conference for the emergency humanitarian situation.
Subsequently, during phase two, the United Nations is
called upon to resume its chairmanship of the Joint
Commission mandated by the Lusaka Protocol to
oversee the process of national reconciliation and
reconstruction leading up to the provision of technical
support for national elections.

With peace a reality, Angola will be ready finally
to embark on a sustainable programme to address
medium- and long-term reconstruction needs. We
expect the United Nations to play a central role in
assisting the Government in the organizing and
mobilizing of support for an international donors
conference.

The participation of the United Nations in the

peace process in Angola is, without doubt, a
fundamental factor for its success and for the
strengthening of democracy in Angola. My

Government welcomes resolution 1404 (2002), which
extends the mandate of the monitoring mechanism on

sanctions, as a manifestation of this body's
commitment to lasting peace in the Republic of
Angola. Sanctions remain an effective policy

instrument to ensure the full implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and to prevent any departure from the
spirit of peace growing in Angola. While sanctions will
continue to act as a catalyst for enduring peace, the
Government of the Republic of Angola stands ready to
cooperate with the Security Council on the

consideration of appropriate exemptions so as to
facilitate the process ofnational reconciliation.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
call upon the international community to continue its
immeasurable support in order to alleviate the suffering
of millions of internally displaced persons who are in
dire need ofhumanitarian assistance.

