Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Oshima for his very detailed and
informative briefing. We share his assessment of most
of the points he raised and, in particular, of the
importance of the topic that he addressed this morning,
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. He alluded
to some recent situations that highlight the importance
of this issue. There is Iraq, of course, where there is
occupation and where it is therefore essential that that
the occupying powers comply with the obligations to
protect civilians that are incumbent upon them.

As Mr. Oshima indicated, this relates also to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; several of us have
emphasized the magnitude of the problems occurring
there. Bunia provides a specific example of the role
played by the protection of civilians in conflicts, since
the principal objective of the multilateral mission that
was established is to ensure such protection in that
specific location. At the same time, the success of the
mission will probably cause a flow of civilians and
refugees, which in turn will increase the need for
protection.

Finally, I should perhaps mention briefly the
situation in Liberia, which Mr. Oshima described
perfectly. I believe that it already appears to be the next
crisis for which the Council will have to try to find
solutions with an essential protection-of-civilians
component. I also agree - as did Ambassador
Greenstock - with Mr. Oshima's suggestions
concerning the Security Council's forthcoming visit to
West Africa.

To that overall assessment, I should like to add
three observations. First, it seems to us that confusion
may arise between the role of peacekeeping missions in
the area of protecting civilians, on the one hand, and
that of assistance operations carried out by
humanitarian organizations, on the other. In both cases,
we are trying to attain the same results and objectives,
but, at the same time, confusion between the two types
of action would put the sought-for objectives at risk.
Therefore, it appears to us that we need to work within
a clear framework, defining the respective
responsibilities of the humanitarian and military actors
involved in this type of situation.

Secondly, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay particular tribute to humanitarian personnel, who,
as Mr. Oshima pointed out, have recently paid a heavy
price in carrying out their noble mission. To us, it is
particularly shocking that people who devote
themselves to looking after the most vulnerable are
themselves subjected to deliberate attacks and
violence. In that regard, it seems to us that a clear, firm
and unambiguous reminder from the Security Council
regarding the obligations of all parties to a conflict
would be particularly welcome.

Thirdly, I should like to say that we approve of
Mr. Oshima's suggestion concerning the usefulness of
an updated aide-memoire at the end of the year. It
seems to us that such an exercise would enable us, inter
alia, to take into account the lessons drawn from
peacekeeping missions, with particular regard to the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, I too should like to commend the work
accomplished by Mr. Kenzo Oshima at the head of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
We are all aware of the decisive role that he has played
to ensure, in particular, that we take better into account
the protection of civilian populations.

