Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
The draft resolution to be submitted to the vote contains
a compromise text which we believe fully responds to the
humanitarian concerns which inspired Security Council
resolution 986 (1995). The validity of that resolution is
rightly renewed, which demonstrates that the Council has
once again shouldered its responsibilities in the
humanitarian sphere.

My country believes that the programme established
in resolution 986 (1995) is complementary to the efforts
that must be carried out by the Government of Iraq to
attend to the needs of its population. The Government of
Iraq thus has serious obligations with respect to the
implementation of this programme, which are independent
from the responsibilities that fall to the various United
Nations organs. We believe that this key aspect must be
taken into account in making decisions on the basic
aspects of resolution 986 (1995), such as, for instance, the
amount indicated in paragraph 1 of that resolution.

The current programme could undoubtedly be
improved, as is indicated in the Secretary-General's
report, which identifies specific problems that have been
detected in its implementation. But in seeking solutions
we must also bear in mind that the Iraqi people is the
final recipient of this programme.

Among these problems, we are particularly
concerned by the situation of the vulnerable groups of
central and southern Iraq. We hail the Secretary-General's
efforts in that connection, as a result of which assurances
have been obtained from the Iraqi Government that it will
attend to their humanitarian needs. We hope that the Iraqi
Government will deepen this commitment and make it
concrete by furnishing complete information with respect
to the measures that Government adopts with regard to
those vulnerable groups. My delegation thus awaits with
great interest the recommendations to be made by the
Secretary-General in his supplementary report to the
Council at the end of January.

My delegation supports the contents of the draft
resolution submitted to this Council. We are pleased, in
particular, that the text contemplates mechanisms to
ensure that the oil-for-food programme will not be subject
to possible interruptions for purely administrative reasons.
Anything else would have been nothing less than a
betrayal of the spirit of resolution 986 (1995) and would
have exposed the Iraqi people to a humanitarian crisis of
considerable proportions.

 

We also believe it important that the draft resolution
appeals to the Government of Iraq to ensure the security
and protection of all persons appointed by the Secretary-
General in the context of the implementation of this
resolution. This is a timely reminder and a precondition for
the creation of a climate that will be conducive to the
unhampered application of this draft resolution.

In conclusion, we are convinced that the draft
resolution before the Council is in line with the
humanitarian goals of resolution 986 (1995), for which
reason my delegation will vote in favour of it.

