Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): As we have stated on previous
occasions, the political, economic and social situation
in Haiti remains fragile and requires multidimensional
support on the part of the international community
based on national priorities. The objective, as we
understand it, must be political and institutional
strengthening so as to ensure a stable, economically
prosperous and inclusive Haiti, one that is resilient in
the face of the continuing ravages of climate change
and natural disasters.

For months now, we have been taking part in the
process of the discussion and subsequent negotiation of
the terms ofthe mandate of the special political mission
that is slated to replace the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) in Haiti. We
had wished for more thoroughgoing and horizontal
talks so as to ensure a robust, multidimensional
mandate, especially now given the clear deterioration
of conditions in Haiti and the frustration of the
international community.

The security situation in Haiti is fragile, not
only because the institutional capacity to support the
security apparatus is itself fragile, but also because
social conditions do not allow for the momentum
needed to set in motion a virtuous circle leading to
development. We must also point out that the economic
situation is daily becoming more complicated, which
means that there is a deepening of the crisis and greater
social instability and violence.

At the regional level, the Organization of
American States just concluded a visit to Haiti, as
did the Economic and Social Council last month.
The preliminary conclusions from both visits are
dramatic and disheartening. A significant part of
the international community has been calling for a
comprehensive response to the situation in Haiti, and
we join in that call.

We believe that the political mission that is to
replace MINUJUSTH must be strong, broad-based and
adequately funded. The Secretary-General's proposal
was not specific enough in terms of the objectives, nor
was it sufficiently broad to preserve stability over time
and place Haiti back on the track to development. It
is our view that if we are to respond to the challenges
facing Haiti, an approach that is based exclusively
on public security will not suffice. The Dominican
Republic believes that the Haiti mission must focus also
on other key aspects to ensure peace and stability.

To be clear, it is our View that support for the
Government is required in order to strengthen the
political and electoral systems and the rule of law
and help to create the conditions necessary for the
Government to put in place policies aimed at tackling
social inequality, governance and the adverse effects of
climate change and natural disasters.

As to the electoral system, we agree with the
Secretary-General on the need to set up a permanent
electoral council to organize and manage electoral
processes. It must be independent and credible and be
provided with an appropriate legal framework that will
ensure, at the very least, reliable voter registration,
international election observation and timely results.
The proposed text of the draft resolution (S/2019/519)
does not capture this idea or give any specific mandate
concerning the institutional structure that should be
created in support thereof.

Turning to inequality and its link with public
security, the Dominican Republic suggested that the
special political mission should be directly involved
in helping to build the necessary capacities within the
Government so that it can coordinate economic and
social development initiatives. We also deem this key
to improving living standards in the most vulnerable
areas as well as to enhancing peaceful coexistence in
public spaces.

This is without a doubt the way to address the
root causes of the social problems that are leading
to violence and social instability. The strengthening
of national institutions, especially political ones,
remains one of the major challenges to the stability and
sustainable development of the Republic of Haiti. It
is our understanding that the special political mission
must play a key role in this area so as to promote
continuity in public policies.

Another key aspect for our delegation is Haiti's
vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters.
As all are aware, our country and the Republic of Haiti
share the same ecosystem, Hispaniola. This puts us in
a unique position to deal with this issue. Our island,
a fragile ecosystem with limited resources, is highly
vulnerable to climate change. There is no debating
the fact that Haitian ecological conditions are truly
precarious and represent a cause of displacement
and suffering and a threat to stability and peace in
the country.

We understand that based on the principle of
complementarity, this new mission, along with the
United Nations country team in Haiti, could have begun
its work by dealing with all of the aspects requiring
urgent action. Our position in this debate has always
been the same: promote a strong mission with broad
scope and capacities and with sufficient financing. The
mission should be able to truly bring peace and lasting
stability to Haiti and genuinely reflect the solidarity of
the international community with the people of Haiti.

Experience and the complexity of the current
situation leads us to conclude that this mandate will
not be enough to achieve these objectives. We cannot
but be disheartened at seeing that this opportunity to
contribute actively to improving the future of Haiti
and to show our genuine commitment to one of the
communities that is suffering the most on our continent
has been reduced to a mission with limited resources
and functions.

