Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his presentation and for the reports of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia
(S/2009/132) and on ensuring long-term security of
navigation off the Somali coast (S/2009/146), prepared
pursuant to resolution 1846 (2008), on piracy.

We too are grateful for the detailed briefing and
the assessments provided.

We listened carefully to the statement by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar. We welcome the recent positive
political developments in Somalia, the peaceful
transition of power, the election by the expanded
Transitional Federal Parliament or the new President of
the Republic, Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, the
appointment of the Prime Minister and the formation of
the Government. We expect that the new President will
be able to unite the forces from all sides in the Somali
conflict in order to provide for an operational
Government, move ahead with the consolidation of
society and establish the rule of law and a lasting peace
in the country.

We take note of and support the mediation efforts
in this direction, by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould Abdallah. We
take note of the findings of the technical assessment
mission, set out in the report of the Secretary-General,
which include, in particular, the proposal made with
respect to the logistical support package for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We assume that
these proposals worked out detail by the relevant
General Assembly bodies, taking into account
established budget procedures.

With respect to the prospects of deploying a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia, the
future decision of the Council in this area will depend
to a large extent on the commitment to peace of the
Somalis themselves, on a substantial improvement in
the security situation and on serious progress towards a
political settlement. These basic preconditions are not
yet in place. However, we believe that a possible
United Nations operation in Somalia should be further
planned, and that the modalities of the transformation
of AMISOM. - whose work we support - into such
an operation should be further defined.

We will be expecting the corresponding
conclusions and proposals of the Secretary-General in
his April report pursuant to resolution 1863 (2009).
That resolution provides for an increase in
international assistance to the Somali peace process.
Success in this area will contribute to the solution of
the whole complex of problems, including that of
eradicating piracy off the Somali coast. The report of
the Secretary-General on this issue (S/2009/146)
indeed reflects the efforts by the international
community to more effectively combat piracy and
armed robbery at sea in this region. We urge the
Secretary-General to continue his active work in this
area.

International commitments made in the Security
Council have already brought results. However, we are
still far from being able to see the reversal of the
negative trends with respect to the acts of piracy off the
shores of Somalia. We believe that a multidimensional
approach to the problem of piracy is required. We see
the road to a long-term solution in moving the Djibouti
peace process forward to ensure order and security in
the country and to overcome the socio-economic
factors that encourage the growth of piracy. Moreover,
we must do everything possible to strengthen the
capacities of the Somali Government itself, for in the
last analysis, the success of the fight against piracy
depends on the success of the Government.

A special role in establishing conditions for
effectively combating piracy should be played by the
Governments of the region. We therefore believe that
we should support such regional initiatives as the
adoption in Djibouti in January of a code of conduct to
combat piracy along the Horn of Africa. Solving the
problem includes the development of a single legal
basis for the arrest and prosecution of pirates, thus
facilitating the fight against piracy along the Somali
coast.

The Russian Federation is continuing to make
effective contributions to international anti-piracy
actions and is actively participating in the
implementation of appropriate initiatives, in particular
in the framework of the Contact Group on Piracy Off
the Coast of Somalia. Ships of the Russian naval fleet
are carrying out the task of ensuring the safety of
navigation and of other types of maritime economic
activities off the coast of Somalia. That task is carried
out in coordination with the naval fleets of China,
France, India and the United States, and with the naval
fleet of the European Union and NATO's Combined
Task Force-151. Since October 2008, more than
80 Russian and other vessels have been escorted, and
four attempts by pirates to capture merchant ships have
been averted. We are committed to working closely
with interested parties on all aspects of the problem.

In concluding, I wish the people and the
Government of Somalia progress in exiting this crisis,
which has lasted too long. Russia will assist them in
finding solutions.

