The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

The Chinese delegation has just voted in favour of
the Council's draft resolution on deferring International
Criminal Court (ICC) proceedings against the leaders
of Kenya. We regret that the Council was unable to
adopt the draft resolution.

Kenya is a country of major importance in Africa.
In recent years, Kenya has been making steady
efforts to reform its judicial system, promote national
reconciliation, peacefully resolve ethnic conflicts and
gradually restore stability and development. China
would like to express its appreciation for that.

Kenya has long been at the forefront of the fight
against terrorism and has been playing an important
role in maintaining peace and stability in the Horn of
Africa, Eastern Africa and the entire African continent.
Deferring the ICC proceedings against the leaders of
Kenya is not only a matter of concern to Kenya, but also
a matter of concern for the entire African continent. It
is in fact an urgent need in order to maintain regional
peace and stability. It is therefore a matter of common
sense that the international community should help the
Kenyan leaders to focus their attention on discharging
their mandate and to continue their role in maintaining
peace and stability in Kenya and the wider region. in
exercising their jurisdiction, international judicial
institutions should abide by the norms of international
relations, follow the principle of complementarity and
respect the judicial sovereignty, legal traditions and
current needs of the countries concerned.

For some time, members of the Security Council
have held a comprehensive and in-depth discussion with
the African Union and Kenya over deferring the ICC
proceedings against the Kenyan leaders. China believes
that the request of the African countries is reasonable
and well founded on the basis of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Their
objective is to maintain peace, stability and secuirty
in the region and to effectively fight terrorism. They
request that the democratically elected leaders of
Kenya be accorded basic respect in matters of African
peace, security and stability. African countries best
understand their needs.
The Council should therefore heed and positively
respond to the common call of the African Union and
the vast majority ofAfrican leaders. China will continue
to support the efforts of Kenya, the African Union and
most African countries to find a real solution to the
issue under consideration.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Kenya.

