Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by saying that we are very honoured that both
you, Deputy Minister, and Minister Solomon Passy
could come to the Council to preside over this
important meeting.

This adds to the prestige of the Council, and of
course, to that of the Bulgarian Presidency, and we are
very, very pleased to see this. We also thank Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his comprehensive
briefing on Kosovo, a subject which has in recent years
been at the centre of attention and concern in the
Security Council and in the international community.

My delegation commends the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
since his assignment as head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
and we reiterate our strong support to him in the
challenging tasks ahead aimed at achieving the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).
My delegation welcomes UNMIK's strategy,
"Standards for Kosovo", and sees it as a real key and a
prerequisite for achieving as quickly as possible the
full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and
defining the final status of the region. This set of eight
standards constitutes a coherent and comprehensive
package, and its implementation has to be equally
coherent to be satisfactory. We are confident that this
new instrument will lead to a successful outcome of the
efforts deployed by the United Nations and by the
international community for the final resolution of the
Kosovo issue.

We fully share the objectives outlined by the
"Standards for Kosovo" policy concerning the
functioning of democratic institutions, the rule of law,
freedom of movement, sustainable returns and the
rights of communities in the spheres of economic
development, property rights, dialogue and the Kosovo
Protection Corps. The objectives set by the policy
ensuring that the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government effectively represent the interests of all
Kosovo, including the ethnic minorities, must be
effectively enforced, as must their responsibilities,
including the promotion and application of just criteria
in the engagement of personnel for Kosovo's public
administration. In this regard, we support a
comprehensive and periodic review of the progress
achieved by Kosovo's Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government.

It is our hope that the resolve of the Security
Council and of UNMIK, outlined in the strategy, will
produce tangible results in guaranteeing full respect for
the rule of law and for human and minority rights,
including the full participation of the Serb minority at
the central and local levels of Government. The rule of
law is a paramount element of this strategy and should
be enforced by the effective operation of the police,
and the judicial and penal systems, based on the legal
framework. It is necessary that all of those aspects of
law enforcement be improved in order to promote
democratic freedoms and the return of refugees and
displaced persons, under conditions of real security and
freedom of movement for all citizens of Kosovo. We
would like to underline the crucial role played by
UNMIK'S police in building the capacity of Kosovo
police, enabling it to fight more effectively against the
plagues that affect the region: ethnic violence,
terrorism and organized crime.

My delegation strongly hopes that constructive
dialogue and confidence-building between Belgrade
and Pristina will be strengthened, leading to concrete
agreements on the various issues that Kosovo is facing.
The solution of these issues, which impact directly on
people's lives, represents an essential step towards the
attainment of stability, prosperity and truly functioning
multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and democratic institutions
in Kosovo.

