Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): My delegation avails
itself of this opportunity to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, and wishes you every success. We
thank your predecessor in this important work, His
Excellency Mr. Wang Yingfan, Ambassador of the
People's Republic of China, for his able guidance of
the affairs of the Security Council.

Turkey subscribed to the European Union
declaration yesterday on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. We would like
to further underline certain aspects of the situation,
which we feel deserve the attention of the parties and
the international community, and this is why I am
taking the floor now on behalf of Turkey.

To be sure, the increase in tension and the lack of
sufficient efforts and resolve to bring about the proper
reciprocal steps in order to break the vicious circle of
violence - hence the further deterioration of the
situation - are causes for worry. Thus, if the parties
continue to hold on to their known positions and fail to
control these worrisome developments, we fear the
whole region is threatened with being dragged into
undesirable consequences. Seen in this light, the
convening of the Security Council reflects the
discontent and anxiety of the international community.
Indeed, the current practices and the situation in the
occupied territories are alarming in many respects.

It is impossible to justify the acts of terrorism.
We firmly believe that acts of terrorism do not serve
the rightful cause of the Palestinian people, and we
expect the Palestinian administration to take more
effective measures against the perpetrators and
promoters of such acts and prevent them. On the other
hand, it is obvious that measures taken against such
acts should be proportionate. Evidently, any
encouragement of extremism solely serves the interests
of the adversaries of peace while hindering those
efforts expected from the Palestinian administration.

The closure of Orient House and other Palestinian
institutions in East Jerusalem by Israel does not
contribute to the efforts directed at easing the tensions.
Clearly, such acts will not change the known position
of the international community regarding the situation
in the occupied territories. We therefore expect that
that measure, which has been declared a temporary
one, will be lifted forthwith, and that conditions
permitting the continuation of the useful function of
Orient House in attaining peace and peaceful
coexistence will be created.

We cannot afford to lose still more precious time
and more human lives before we fully understand that
the alternative to peace would have unbearable costs
for everyone. At this juncture, such a misjudgement
would only increase the historic responsibility of the
leaders vis-a-vis their peoples. The only way to attain
peace is through the resumption of political
negotiations between the parties. The recipe for peace
is to be found in the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), in the Madrid and Oslo accords, and in the
principle of land for peace.

The proposals contained in the report of the
Mitchell Committee, accepted by both parties, lay bare
the method by which to return to the path of peace.
Those proposals need to be implemented speedily
instead of being countered with unrealistic
preconditions. It is high time for everyone to
understand that procrastination in this regard serves the
interests of the extremists and causes the continuation
of violence.

Given the present conditions, we think that the
deployment of an impartial observer force in the region
is needed more than ever before. We hope that the
parties will reach agreement on such a deployment,
which would benefit both of them. It is with that
understanding that we call upon both parties to resume
political dialogue.

