Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): The Iraqi
Government asked the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the multinational force for a period of 12
months, starting 31 December of this year; that request
of the Iraqi Government deserved, in our view, to be
met. Denmark was thus happy to sponsor the draft
resolution and warmly welcomes its unanimous
adoption. It demonstrates the support and the
commitment of the international community to the
Iraqi people's endeavour to create a democratic and
prosperous Iraq.

In the face of serious challenges, the Iraqi people
have reached significant milestones in achieving that
goal. The successful elections in January, as well as the
referendum on the draft constitution in October,
demonstrated the willingness of the Iraqi people to
participate in the democratic process. A process of
national reconciliation is beginning to take shape, and
an increasing number of Iraqis from all segments of
society are taking part in the political process. We hope
that the outcome of the December elections will further
consolidate this trend.

Many leaders of the former regime, including
Saddam Hussein himself, are now being held
accountable for their actions. The establishment of a
well-functioning legal system will go a very long way
towards re-establishing the trust of the people of Iraq
in their Government and their justice system.

Denmark will continue to do its share to
contribute to the establishment of a peaceful,
democratic and prosperous Iraq. Five hundred and
thirty Danish soldiers are currently serving on Iraqi
soil as part of the multinational force. We stand by our
commitment to contribute to the national security of
Iraq, as requested by the Iraqi Government.

At the same time, we look forward to the day in
the not-too-distant future when Iraqi forces will assume
full responsibility for the maintenance of stability and
security in their country. Strengthening the education
and training of Iraqi security and police forces is
central to building a sustainable Iraqi capability to
ensure a stable and secure Iraq. To this end, Denmark
is a major contributor to training and assistance in the
security field.

Like others around the table, Denmark stands
ready to do its share in creating a prosperous Iraq with
a competitive economy and a vibrant civil society.
Denmark will thus continue to provide assistance in the
areas of democratization, justice and the rule of law, as
well as in other areas. Moreover, humanitarian
assistance will be needed in some areas.

Finally, in spite of the impressive progress,
serious challenges remain before the goal of a stable,
prosperous and fully democratic Iraq is achieved. We
remain worried about the security situation, which is
slowing down progress in all other areas. In spite of the
volatile security environment, we urge the Iraqi
Government to do its utmost to ensure full respect for
human rights by all Iraqi authorities, including the
Iraqi security forces and the Iraqi police.

Times have changed, and Saddam Hussein and
his oppressive regime are things of the past. Much
progress has been made. We for our part stand ready to
help meet the challenges that remain.

