Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): First, I wish to say that what
I have prepared are talking points, more or less, because of
the impression we had when we were invited to this
meeting.

I wish to convey the appreciation of the Nigerian
delegation to you, Mr. President, for convening this first
interactive session of the Security Council on Africa.

Somehow it has become the tradition to treat Africa as
a disabled child deserving special attention and treatment on
all issues. It is in this context that I welcome the first step
of the Security Council to learn firsthand of Africa,
hopefully from Africans themselves. I also acknowledge
with enthusiasm, and indeed look forward to, the possibility
of a continuation of this initiative during the presidency of
the United States next month. I only hope that it will not
end there, as informal consultations to tackle the issues that
have been drawn up here today should continue.

Given the format of this meeting, I want to focus on
two broad areas.

The first is cooperation between the United Nations
and regional arrangements in conflict resolution and
management. In this regard, I shall be talking from my
point of experience, which is my own subregion.

The Council will recall that the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) emerged as a result of
initial lack of interest by members of the international
community in the Liberian conflict. ECOWAS leaders
rose to the challenge and successfully brokered peace in
Liberia, and they are now active in ensuring that peace
and stability return to Sierra Leone.

ECOMOG has thus become a veritable instrument
for peacekeeping in the West Africa subregion. It has
succeeded in preventing the chaos and horrendous human
tragedies that characterized the early stages of the
Liberian crisis. The recent United Nations decision to
authorize the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) was the type of response that ECOWAS
leaders requested in Liberia but was denied. UNAMSIL,
therefore, is a welcome initiative. It formalizes the type
of partnership that should be struck between the United
Nations and a sub-regional organization such as
ECOWAS. Making this partnership work for the
promotion of peace and security in this region will entail,
first, regular consultation between the United Nations
Secretary-General and ECOWAS leaders, and, secondly,
commitment of resources by donor countries to support
peace-making, peacekeeping and peace-building in the
subregion.

The second area is conflict prevention. Let us now
focus on how to prevent conflicts on the continent. The
important issue that needs to be addressed is what far-
reaching measures the United Nations and the
international community can take to prevent the States
that have just emerged from conflict situations from
relapsing into conflict. It is widely recognized that States
in transition from war to peace are always in a fragile
situation. While they face mammoth problems in all
sectors, they lack the resources and the capacity to
address these problems in a very profound manner. The
question being asked is why the United Nations and the
international community are not showing the same
enthusiasm to support the African States concerned so
that they, too, can replicate the success of countries in
Europe. The international community should, therefore,
demonstrate the same type of commitment to Africa,
which is so manifest in the efforts to rebuild European
countries, particularly in the Balkans.

The current situation in which African States are left
virtually on their own to tackle these problems is
unsatisfactory. A sure way of ensuring that they do not
slump into crisis and conflict is for the international

 

community to be actively involved in the rehabilitation,
reintegration and reconciliation efforts.

Another area on which the Security Council needs to
focus attention is the type of support it can put in place to
prevent fledgling democracies on our continent from sliding
into conflict. This decade has witnessed the transition of
many African States from single-party and military regimes
into multi-party democracies. Significant as this
development is, it has not brought about improvements in
the living standards of our people. The economic situation
of many African States is such that African leaders are not
in a position to initiate programmes and projects that will
bring "democratic dividends" in terms of tangible benefits
to their people.

My President, President Olusegun Obasanjo, put it
aptly in a statement he made some years ago, when he said
that democracy cannot be sustained on an empty stomach.
The international community, therefore, needs to initiate
far-reaching measures to assist these fledgling democracies
to sustain good governance and democratic institutions.

These measures should include, first, the cancellation
of the debts of African countries. If African States were
free from their debt burden, they would be able to use the
resources that would have been expended in servicing debts
to execute important programmes and projects that would
benefit their people.

Secondly, concerted international efforts should be
made urgently to move African peoples from the misery
and poverty that have come to characterize their societies
as a result of conflict.

