Ms. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I
also thank Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for the Sahel, for her briefing.
We welcome her following her recent appointment to a
post of such enormous responsibility. Argentina believes
that her responsibility is enormous, because that is how
we see it here in the Council and throughout the United
Nations. The Sahel is one of the areas with the lowest
human development indices in the world. The Sahel
continues to suffer from enormous shortcomings and
it must face longstanding injustices and new threats,
such as environmental degradation, to mention only
one among so many others. As we see with the conflicts
in the Sudan, Libya and Mali, we have not been able to
provide a response to the underlying causes of those
conflicts, nor to the numerous illegal networks, nor to
the threats represented by the various extremist and
terrorist groups operating in the region.

However, Argentina has expressed on other
occasions that religious beliefs in and of themselves are
not the cause of conflicts. There is no religious belief
or holy text that is based on hate and that promotes
the destruction of peace. That does not exist in any
religious belief. What we have in these cases is a
mediocre level of politicization on the part of some who
hold certain religious beliefs that they contrast with
others, creating contradictions and incompatibilities.
By the same token, poverty and inequality are not in
and of themselves a threat to security; rather, they are
a challenge for sustainable human development. But we
also know that vulnerable, impoverished people who
face discrimination and exclusion, in the absence of
jobs, education and social cohesion, are used as tools
by extremist and terrorist groups and by transnational
criminal networks in order to make them look less like
outcasts.

The Security Council should not be surprised to
learn that young men and women are used by terrorist
or extremist elements or by international organized
crime, when the world is under the sway of economic
models that encourage runaway consumerism, obscene
gains and profits, in which the principle of solidarity
is eroded the law of the jungle, and where financial
markets, without ethics or law, define the future of
peoples and States.
We cannot be surprised about such realities. That is
why we are having this debate. And in the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly, we have the
challenge of dealing with the post-2015 and sustainable
development goals. The Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/397) does not state this specifically, but it
clearly lays out those challenges.

When looking at specific conflicts in this region,
Argentina has repeatedly emphasized the importance
of keeping our eye firmly on the Sahel, underscoring
the importance of having an integrated United Nations
strategy that encompasses all the various aspects
mentioned by my colleagues - security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian issues.
Therefore, when Mr. Prodi introduced the integrated
strategy to us, we expressed our expectation that it
would constitute an important step towards imposing
greater coherence and effectiveness on the existing
multitude of parallel and simultaneous national,
regional and international programmes.

I do not wish to always be perceived as a voice of
doubt and suspicion, but it is really very difficult to
accept that if cooperation and coordination constitute
an ethical and political decision aimed at cooperating
with the Sahel region and enabling us to solve the
extreme suffering there, this clearly indicates that
failing to coordinate and to confront the obstacles is
also a political decision. I would therefore say to the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General that if there
can be a policy of coordinating action, there can also
be a policy that decides not to do so. We thus insist on
the need for greater cohesion and effectiveness in the
many regional, national and international programmes
that the report describes.

We must hear and understand the struggles over
who has real power in the Sahel and among external
actors. A naive attitude and cosmetic changes will
not help to improve security, democracy, the rule of
law, development or human rights. We have to know
what the dispute is about and who is disputing it. I
also believe that it is very important that, instead of
directing accusations at those who believe in whatever
god, we should be looking at the women and children
who are living in poverty. Let us listen to and welcome
the regional meetings where plans are being discussed
for the challenges in the Sahel, such as the meeting on
16 May of the ministerial coordination platform for the
Sahel, currently chaired by Mali, or the meeting on
16 February launching the Group of Five for the Sahel.
These demonstrate the national ownership of the issue
by the countries of the region, and we should listen to
them in order to understand and thus to learn.

Finally, and briefly, I would like to note three
issues that constitute a challenge for the region, as
my delegation sees it. The first is that while primary
responsibility for peace, security and development in
the Sahel lies with the countries ofthe region, Argentina
firmly believes in the importance of support from
the international community and the United Nations,
especially bearing in mind the other challenges that are
also affecting the Sahel, such as climate change and
the economic and financial crisis resulting from the
actions of the richest countries in the world. We should
also take into consideration the issues of financing for
humanitarian assistance and that for 2014 the Sahel's
humanitarian needs will reach $2 billion.

Secondly, many of the problems we are seeing are
the result of deep-rooted causes that require meaningful
solutions, not merely palliative ones. Saying that we are
ready to eradicate poverty is not the same thing as being
Willing to reduce extreme poverty. We must affirm that
we are willing to cooperate in recognizing and ensuring
that women have full enjoyment of their human rights
by helping them to become small business owners or
parliamentarians, when constitutions change.

Lastly, for the Sahel, too, we must initiate profound
change to tackle this crisis and modify the organization
and structures of the global economic system so that
its economic instruments can become tools that help
human development rather than the other way around.
We commend the progress that has been made in much
of the region and on the African continent and the work
of the regional and subregional organizations working
on preventing conflict and on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, as well as in the areas of development
and the protection and promotion of human rights.

I would like to point out that it would be helpful
for the next report to include detailed information on
the progress of th edisbursement of the $1.5 billion
for new regional investments promised by the World
Bank during the joint visit to the region in November
2013 by its President and the Secretary-General, which
we believe was very important. Regarding all the
programmes and funds mentioned in the report, we
would like to have objective data on the financial totals
dedicated to each of the strategic pillars in order to be
able follow them up in detail.

There are many challenges, but Argentina is
convinced that while the countries and peoples of the
Sahel have a difficult road ahead of them, no country
should have to despair. We take note of the comments
of Chad, and we believe that the proposal for putting
together a formal working group to include the
representatives of the countries of the region here in
New York is a very interesting idea.

