Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, let me brief
the members of the Security Council on the efforts that
the Committee has made during the past two years
towards full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
I am pleased to note today that considerable progress
has been made in this regard. But more effort is needed
in the next period to achieve full implementation of all
aspects of the resolution.
07-64646

As of today, 140 States have submitted their first
reports and about 90 have submitted additional
information. More reports are expected in the next few
days. The number of non-reporting States is coming
down from the low fifties, as more States in Africa, the
Caribbean and the Pacific Islands region respond to our
intensive outreach activities and to the most recent
round of correspondence.

As will be spelled out later, the efforts of the
Committee and its experts are now making a difference
in coping with the challenges often mentioned by a
number of those States to explain delays in their
reporting, especially the complexity of the provisions
of the resolution and the lack of capacity in many
States to respond to the multiplicity of reporting
requests by United Nations bodies.

The Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of the
Committee have, at regional group meetings in New
York, recently urged all Member States to respond
urgently to the Committee's request for more
information, and we are hopeful that there will be
positive results by mid-January at the latest, to
facilitate the preparation of the second biennial report
to the Security Council on the implementation of the
resolution, which is due by the end of April 2008.

The Committee has relied heavily on outreach
activities to encourage further reporting and promote
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Through seminars, workshops and tailored dialogue, it
has generated greater awareness about the process and
the necessity of reporting, has fostered the sharing of
relevant national experiences and has created more
understanding of the requirements for assistance. A
thematic discussion on outreach activities held last
October recognized the need for a phased approach and
recommended that future outreach activities focus less
on the issue of reporting and more on assisting States
with issues of implementation.

Based on observations from our outreach
activities and interaction with Member States, the
Committee concluded that for the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), it is important for many
States to receive relevant assistance. For the
Committee to perform its clearing house function
effectively, it is necessary for assistance requests to be
specific. For this purpose, the Committee has prepared
a template, which is currently being sent to all States.
Matching requests for and offers of assistance is
essential and the Committee will utilize its website as a
tool for that purpose.

Finally, I would like to say a few words about
cooperation with other entities. The importance of
cooperation with relevant international organizations
was given special attention when the Security Council
devoted an open meeting last February to the issue of
non-proliferation (see S/PV.5635), at which States, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World
Customs Organization explored modalities for
cooperation, which resulted in arrangements for
practical cooperation.

Under the common strategy arrangement, the
Committee and its experts are broadening their
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, and
their respective experts.

The Committee has also intensified its contacts
with other intergovernmental organizations, regional
organizations and multilateral arrangements with the
potential to contribute to implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) through their programmes and expertise,
in conformity with the mandate of the Committee.

Last but not least, the Committee, in cooperation
with the Office for Disarmament Affairs, organized a
meeting in July 2007, with the participation of several
non-governmental organizations engaged in activities
supporting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), in order to discuss issues of cooperation,
interaction and possible harmonization of outreach
activities and existing programmes. I believe that these
contacts and this dialogue should be further expanded,
reaching out to parliamentarians and the private sector
as well.

In conclusion, let me share with the Council some
personal observations and suggestions for the way
forward in the Committee's work.

First of all, it is important to underline that
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-
term process and requires sustained effort and an
imaginative approach. The positive momentum that has
now been created by the intensified work of the
Committee should be utilized for creating a truly
global and effective system of prevention of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.

The broadest degree of international cooperation
and interaction among States, intergovernmental
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
other entities, including the private sector, is needed to
achieve the goals of resolution 1540 (2004). There is a
need to strengthen the synergy and complementarity of
action of various international bodies in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The United
Nations, and the 1540 Committee, in particular, can
contribute to bringing various players together to
harmonize or coordinate, as appropriate, their activities
to this end.

The Council's open debate with intergovernmental
organizations in February to discuss cooperation in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) was the right
step in this direction. In my view, this practice should
continue regularly and the participation of
intergovernmental and international organizations or
multilateral arrangements relevant to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) could be further expanded.

We need to build on what has been achieved so
far and expand the practical cooperation with
intergovernmental organizations such as the IAEA,
OPCW, WCO and others. It will be important to
address some objective and subjective obstacles for
even greater interaction. The role of regional and
subregional organizations like the EU, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
OAS, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), the African Union, the League of Arab
States, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the
South American Common Market (MERCOSUR) and
others in raising awareness of the importance of and
supporting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in their respective regions should be further
strengthened.

Regional organizations can facilitate the sharing
of good national practices and lessons learned from
national implementation between the countries of the
regions and can develop frameworks of regional
cooperation between the regional experts and
institutions dealing with different aspects of resolution
1540 (2004).

The proactive engagement of the 1540 Committee
with those organizations should become one of its
outreach priorities in the near future. The Committee
could also explore the possibilities of furthering
cooperation with non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), using the positive momentum and interest of
NGOs in closer interaction with the Committee that
was expressed during the meeting in July. The NGOs
proved to have valuable expertise and potential in
supporting the work of the 1540 Committee in various
regions through organizing tailored workshops aimed
at facilitating national implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

Last but not least, engagement with
parliamentarians and the private sector should also be
intensified to help educate legislators and business
people on the importance of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) for national security and
international trade and to win their interest and support
for these issues.

In the practical work of the Committee, the main
focus should shift away from reporting to
implementation of all aspects of resolution 1540
(2004). In this regard, tailored outreach and assistance
that is responsive to regional and other specific
circumstances could help Member States cope with the
challenges of implementation. As the Committee stated
in its work programme, national plans or road maps for
implementation can serve States as useful planning
tools, and this idea should be promoted further.
Interested countries should receive more assistance in
developing their national action plans.

The Committee's clearing-house function should
be further developed using the assistance template as a
tool. In this regard, the Committee should finalize the
discussion on how its web site can be better used to
facilitate the initial contacts between assistance
providers and countries requesting assistance and how
it can help the flow of information when assistance is
requested and when assistance is offered. To enable
more active assistance of experts to individual
countries, the possibility of a trust fund for country
visits by experts should be considered.

I believe the mandate of the Committee should be
extended and the continuity of the Expert Group
preserved without preventing gradual rotation.

Finally, let me thank the members of the
Committee and the experts for their outstanding work.

Let me now turn to Slovakia's experience in
chairing the Security Council Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
over the past 12 months.

I took over the chairmanship of the Working Group
from Ambassador Kenzo Oshima of Japan at an important
period - after the Working Group was revitalized in
2006 and after, as part of the revitalization process, the
Council decided that the Working Group should be
chaired by a single Ambassador for a extended period
instead of the previous ineffective system of rotating
chairmanship to coincide with the monthly presidency
of the Council. In January 2007 the Council decided to
continue and standardize that new practice, which has
proven very useful and effective, with my appointment
as Chairman for the whole year.

Under the able Japanese chairmanship last year,
the Working Group's intensive efforts materialized in a
substantive outcome - that is, a note by the President
of the Security Council, in document S/2006/507. In
this context, our priorities for the year 2007 have been
promoting the full implementation of the note and
tackling a range of other practical issues pertaining to
documentation and procedures that have arisen from
everyday work of the Council or that have been
referred to the Working Group.

All members of the Security Council have been
actively engaged in those efforts and have repeatedly
committed themselves to implementing all agreed
measures contained in the note.

I would like to use this opportunity to express my
sincere gratitude to all members of the Security
Council for their active and constructive approach. As
a result, good progress has been achieved. However, I
see this as work in progress, and I believe that further
progress could and should be achieved in a number of
areas. The Security Council and the Working Group
need to continue exploring ways to facilitate even
better implementation of all agreed measures in the
area of documentation and procedures.

I would like to highlight five of the agreed
measures contained in the note that the Working Group
has been most engaged with in the earlier part of this
year: first, written reports of the Secretary-General
submitted to the Council; second, statements by
Council members and oral briefings provided by
members of the Secretariat; third, preparation of the
so-called areas of focus for informal consultations;
fourth, the planning of subsidiary bodies' meetings;
and fifth, Arria formula meetings.

As for practical documentation and procedural
questions, the Working Group has tackled seven in
particular: first, the participation of representatives of
the Secretariat and members of individual Council
delegations in formal closed consultations of the
whole; second, the circulation of documents and
information to Council members; third, the allocation
of conference and translation services needed for
everyday Council work; fourth, the formats of Security
Council meetings; fifth, the Security Council annual
report to the General Assembly; sixth, the Security
Council's interaction and dialogue with other United
Nations bodies, the Secretariat and other Member
States; and seventh, matters of which the Council is
seized and the so-called rolling agenda of the Council.

An important part of our work this year was close
cooperation and interaction with the Secretariat, whose
role is essential. That is why, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Working Group, I met several times
with the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General and
the Under-Secretaries-General for Political Affairs and
for Peacekeeping Operations. Those meetings were
extremely useful, and I believe they have contributed
positively to the clarification of some open issues and
to ensuring full implementation of all agreed measures
in the area of documentation and procedures on the
part of the Secretariat.

I would like to conclude by providing a few
recommendations for the future work of the Working
Group based on this year's experience. Slovakia
believes that in the future, primary focus could be on
the following four areas. First, efforts aimed at
enhancing transparency and openness of the work of
the Security Council, including the work of its
subsidiary bodies should continue. Second, interaction
and dialogue between the Security Council and other
Member States, in particular those directly concerned
and affected, should be enhanced and widened. Thirdly,
Security Council private meetings with troop-
contributing countries should be revitalized. Fourthly,
efforts aimed at ensuring maximum relevance of the
Security Council's annual report to the General
Assembly should be continued.

Finally, let me turn to the work of the Security
Council Ad Hoc Committee on Mandate Review. I
have served as one of its Co-Chairs since May 2006.
That year, my fellow Co-Chair was Ambassador
Bolton, former Permanent Representative of the United
States, and this year my Co-Chair has been

Ambassador Kumalo, Permanent Representative of
South Africa. I would like to take this opportunity to
express my most sincere gratitude to both Permanent
Representatives and to their delegations for their
effective cooperation in fulfilling this important task.

The Ad Hoc Committee on Mandate Review was
established in May 2006 with the aim of conducting
the review of Security Council mandates called for by
the heads of State and Government in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document (A/60/ 1) and to continue
consideration of the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report of March 2006 entitled
"Mandating and delivering: analysis and
recommendations to facilitate the review of mandates"
(A/60/733).

In its work, the Ad Hoc Committee has been
guided by the overall purpose of streamlining and
strengthening the Security Council's efforts in
promoting international peace and security, and thereby
contributing to the effectiveness of the United Nations
as a whole. The Committee has facilitated a practical,
real-world review of the Security Council's existing
mandates. It has been proceeding in close cooperation
and coordination with the United Nations Secretariat,
which has been providing invaluable assistance to the
Committee. In this regard, I would especially like to
express our appreciation to representatives of the
Department of Political Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

The main objective of the mandate review
exercise in the Security Council has been to assess and
streamline its work in the areas that have, for various
reasons, not been regularly on the Council's agenda or
at the centre of its attention. The mandate review
process has provided the Council with a truly unique
and worthwhile opportunity to look at its own work
and mandates from a different - meaning wider, more
systematic and more holistic - perspective as opposed
to the traditional approach of dealing with individual
situations or mandates with a fairly narrow or limited
View.

The mandate review process in the Security
Council has been complementary to the Council's
existing periodic review of activities and individual
mandates. It has been comprehensive, placing
mandates in their broader context, including, if
appropriate, on a regional or functional basis, so as to
better ascertain how individual mandates contribute to
the Council's overall objectives. The Committee's main
role has been to facilitate the decision-making
processes of the Security Council on individual
mandates and to provide recommendations and
guidance, but not to make any decisions on individual
mandates.

Initially, the process was shaped in two phases. In
the first phase, from May to December 2006, we
looked mostly at mandates older than five years that
were not periodically renewed and a few other issues.
In the second phase, that of this year, we have also
addressed issues that required longer, in-depth
consideration, such as reporting cycles for individual
situations and mandates, wider regional or subregional
approaches, thematic mandates and a mandate registry
prepared by the Secretariat in 2005.

In the course of its approximately 20 months of
work so far, the Committee has utilized a range of
useful tools and mechanisms, including informal
meetings of territorial expert groups, Committee
meetings held at the ambassadorial level, update
briefings provided to the Committee by members of the
Secretariat on mandates older than five years and not
periodically renewed and an open meeting of the
Committee on the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region of Africa. These tools and mechanisms
have facilitated meaningful and effective work of the
Committee.

In order to exchange views and compare notes
about the mandate review processes in the Security
Council and the General Assembly, the Co-Chairs of
the Committee met several times with the Co-Chairs of
the mandate review process in the General Assembly.
While agreeing that each organ should concentrate on
reviewing its own mandates, these meetings proved to
be very useful. Our latest such meeting was held on
10 December with the new Co-Chairs for mandate
review in the General Assembly, the representatives of
Namibia and New Zealand.

I believe the outcomes and conclusions of the
mandate review process of the Security Council could
be very briefly characterized as follows: first, the
Council, in an appropriate format, should continue
receiving update briefings from the Secretariat on
mandates older than five years and not periodically
renewed. Secondly, the Council should continue
considering, on a regular basis, appropriate reporting

cycles for individual situations on its agenda. Thirdly,
the mandate registry prepared by the Secretariat in
2005 is a very useful tool which should be updated and
maintained in a joint effort of all relevant branches of
the United Nations Secretariat. Fourthly, when
appropriate, the Council should continue examining
ways and means of streamlining and systematizing its
mandating work, including through taking wider
regional or subregional approaches to mandates. Lastly,
when appropriate, the Council should continue its
interaction and dialogue with other relevant United
Nations organs on the issue of mandate review,
including in addressing potential areas of overlap or
duplication.

I would like to conclude by saying that it is our
belief that the Security Council Ad Hoc Committee on
Mandate Review has reached the main goals for which
it was established. However, the issue of mandate
review remains very valid and relevant for the Council,
even though it reviews and renews most of its
mandates periodically. The added value of mandate
review and of the Council's recent positive experience
with it lies mainly in the area of streamlining and
systematizing the Council's work, taking wider
regional or subregional approaches and addressing
potential overlap or duplication. In this context, I
would like to recommend that the Council, in its new
composition next year, find an adequate mechanism to
make best use of the lessons learned so far and to keep
this important instrument in its tool box.

