Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank you,
Sir, for honouring the Security Council by presiding over
today's debate. Let me express my delegation's confidence
in the work of Costa Rica as the presiding member of the
Security Council for this month. We are most pleased to
have had such good, cordial and businesslike relations with
your delegation during this month, and on previous
occasions.
In the interests of transparency, I must also thank you,
Sir, for another allowance that you made for us, and must
admit to something. Frankly, my delegation was neglectful
and failed to give me a complete copy of my presentation
to the Council, so I had to ask for my presentation to be
delayed until this time. I took a look at the Permanent
Representative of Chile, who had a very strange look on his
face when he realized that he had to speak at a time when
he was expecting me to speak. I looked away, of course,
because I did not wish to respond to his look of
astonishment and, maybe, anger.

But this small difficulty on the part of my delegation
may actually have been a blessing in disguise, because it
gives me the opportunity to take note in my statement of
some of the points raised in the statements of some
members of the Council.

Let me take the opportunity to thank you, Mr.
President, and the other members of the Council for having
scheduled today's discussion on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It appears to some that, after having been the
subject of so many debates before this body, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has strangely fallen off the visible agenda of
the Security Council. Some believe this may be because the
United Nations has failed in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

This brings me to the second point: the United Nations
has not failed in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, neither
has it yet succeeded. The faults that exist lie with those
who could and should have done more themselves, but
who left the United Nations with a job that it could never
fully and gloriously complete. Under the circumstances,
the United Nations could be seen as having been partially
successful at best. It was left to be projected as
embarrassingly inadequate, with all its flaws revealed.

Still, we would be lacking intellectual and moral
perspective if we failed to note the lives that were saved
through the efforts of the United Nations and its various
agencies and people and, just as relevantly, if we did not
recognize the commitment of the individuals involved,
particularly the ones who sacrificed their lives in Bosnia.

On the other hand, the sheer fact that over 250,000
Bosnians - over 5 per cent of our population - lost
their lives and that 50 per cent of Bosnia's population
was displaced and made into refugees, mostly through the
campaign of ethnic cleansing, reveals why the efforts of
the United Nations cannot be termed a success.
Furthermore, the fact that the consequences of ethnic
cleansing remain intact and its perpetrators largely remain
free is an even greater blemish.
But is the United Nations to blame? Clearly not
alone, and certainly not as an institution. More relevantly,
however, we must now examine whether the United
Nations is part of a solution that is still forthcoming in
Bosnia and Herzegovina; the answer is, "Yes".
Increasingly, the United Nations is being asked to play an
ever-more-prominent role in securing and enhancing the
peace in Bosnia. Let me emphasize here that over the last
two years peace has borne positive fruit, and we are
confident of an improvement in dynamics.

We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
multilateral force led by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in Bosnia and Herzegovina beyond
the deadline of the summer of 1998. It will be the
linchpin of concerted efforts to secure a real and lasting
peace in our country, with all the beneficial consequences
for a better life for all the people of Bosnia. Nonetheless,
as the last two years have shown and as has been
recognized by many of the leaders today, the military
aspect of implementation will prove to be rather hollow
without a coordinated and revitalized effort on the so-
called civilian aspect of implementation.

The Office of the High Representative must receive
the necessary support to most assertively implement the
High Representative's mandate. Let me refer here to the

 

words of the Permanent Representative of Japan and take
note of his invitation to our athletes. In this context, I
would like to point out that at the moment Bosnia and
Herzegovina does have a flag and an anthem, but they are
not endorsed by all. We recognize that change is
forthcoming, and we recognize that we must have a flag
that is endorsed by all and an anthem and a passport that
are endorsed by all. We encourage the High Representative,
if in fact a flag cannot be agreed to, that one be imposed.
But we must demand one flag, one anthem, one passport
and one currency.

I would also like to take note of the fact that the word
"fratricidal" is used around this table. I wish to draw the
attention of the Security Council to such a small event as
a basketball game played recently in Sarajevo. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the national team, was playing the national
team of the Republic of Croatia. On the national basketball
team of Bosnia and Herzegovina the best player - the
highest scorer - happens to be a Bosnian Serb. We all
know it, but we do not talk about it, as a matter of
civilized, polite behaviour; we just cheer for him and for
the Bosnian team as a whole. When the Bosnian team took
the floor, this gentleman, this wonderful basketball player,
received the cheers of the entire Sarajevo crowd, regardless
of their ethnicity. By coincidence, on the team of the
Republic of Croatia there is a gentleman of Bosnian
Muslim background. As would be the case with many
opponents, he was booed. I apologize to the Republic of
Croatia for this incident involving over-zealous sports fans,
but it shows that we are not talking here about ethnic and
religious hatred. I would also like to make a happy note of
the fact that the team of Bosnia and Herzegovina did defeat
the team of the Republic of Croatia on that one occasion -
I must be a nationalist sometimes.

The various agencies and organs of the United Nations
in Bosnia will be decisive in the success of peace. The role
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in rolling back the consequences of
ethnic cleansing and facilitating the return of refugees from
abroad is essential. The International Police Task Force
(IPTF) will catalyse concerted efforts to enhance
democracy, human rights and respect for the law, as well
as freedom of movement and the return of refugees
throughout the country. The role of this United Nations
institution is determinative. We wholeheartedly support the
draft resolution before us.

I am certain that here I will not be able to specifically
refer to the whole range of efforts in which the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina is involved, but
I must finally mention what is, perhaps, the most critical:
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, established by the United Nations. At this
time, I must take the opportunity to most humbly thank
Governments, particularly those of the United Kingdom
and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, for the commitment
and the courage of their troops in recent efforts - one of
which actually took place this morning - to bring
indicted war criminals to justice. Those Governments
seem to be most sensitive to the crucial role that the
Tribunal has in securing not only justice, but also
reconciliation, implementation of the Dayton/Paris accords
and a lasting peace. As someone who was in Dayton, I
must also emphasize here that the Dayton/Paris accords,
as well as relevant Security Council resolutions and our
own Constitution, sanction these efforts.

However, we are concerned by recent reports, widely
publicized in the press, which seem to some to indicate a
lack of respect, or even disdain, for the Tribunal's
mandate. It is especially disquieting if this disregard
comes from some quarters - not from countries in the
region who have in the past refused cooperation, but from
some officials from those countries around this table who
were instrumental in bringing about the Tribunal as well
as the Dayton/Paris accords. To refer to the Tribunal as
a "show court" is unacceptable.
Let me make certain that we are understood. I have
no fear for Judge Louise Arbour. In fact, we may even
have some differences with her; I suppose that we
frequently do. I am certain that in a court of law this 1.5
metre Prosecutor is a match for any man around this
table; she can take care of herself.

We are concerned, however, about the lack of
dignity shown to the Tribunal, about the perception of the
Tribunal that this promotes and about the political
consequences thereof. First, under the accords signed in
Paris, the Tribunal is enshrined in the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as the court of highest authority
in our country - it is our court. A lack of respect for this
Tribunal has a direct bearing on us and on respect for our
country. Secondly, the Tribunal is not a colonial court. It
has not been established only to dictate justice and to
have access only to a group of subject people, mainly
Bosnians, Serbians and Croatians. By its mandate, it has
jurisdiction over all potential witnesses and suspects
related to war crimes and genocide that may have been
committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the former
Yugoslavia as a whole.

 

Here I must also emphasize our concern, expressed on
so many occasions by the President and Prosecutor of the
Tribunal, regarding the large number of States that still
have not adopted domestic legislation in line with full
cooperation with the Tribunal. Again, I must highlight, we
are speaking here of countries not only in our own region
but, most incomprehensibly, the democracies of the world.

This brings me to the third point. In view of the lack
of cooperation of some countries and parties in the region
with the Tribunal, and the excuses offered with respect
thereto, what kind of disquieting message -
encouragement - is being offered to these parties, to these
countries, if there is a lack of respect and commitment
shown to the Tribunal by some officials in some
democracies? I emphasize "some officials".

Let me again try to be clear. My statement is not
intended to be an indictment of any country. The quality of
leadership, courage and commitment is not determined by
the flag of the individual involved. While I had a rather low
opinion of one military commander who came from that
country and who served in Bosnia, it is also a personal
opinion that the most courageous and forthright commander
who served in Bosnia in the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) also came from the United Kingdom.
He does deserve to have his name mentioned here: General
Rupert Smith. He made peace possible in Bosnia. Frankly,
sometimes I am still troubled by how he has been forgotten
while other less distinguished past commanders paraded
before television cameras and promoted themselves. He
never did.

We are also aware of the tremendous courage and
commitment exhibited by so many French troops and, in
particular, the inordinate sacrifices. Their sacrifices deserve
to be recalled here again. We are also thankful for the
timely leadership and courage of French leaders at crucial
points during the critical stages of the peace process.

While political decisions, for good or bad, may have
been made in capitals, it is the individual that exhibited
courage or cowardice, morality or shame, legality or
illegality on the ground in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is the
individual soldier or officer that witnessed the good and the
bad, the acts of compassion as well as acts amounting to
crimes and genocide.

The only duty of States now, in this context, is to
ensure that full evidence is provided and that the Tribunal
has full access to witnesses and culpable individuals.

Finally, I ask United Nations Members to remember
that, despite the many contributions their nations have
made, in terms of lives and resources - and I repeat that
we are sincerely most grateful - it is the Bosnians that
paid the highest price, and it is Bosnians of all
backgrounds that seek from the Tribunal the greatest asset
that civilization can provide: justice.

So, as we approach a new and, hopefully, better turn
on the road to a lasting peace in Bosnia, yes, we must
underscore that the future is mostly the responsibility of
Bosnians, all Bosnians. However, we cannot sit around
this table and not take note of the responsibility of all our
countries, all members' countries to contribute. This is
especially critical in situations in which we all establish
multilateral institutions, organs of this United Nations. For
the sake of the victims, for the sake of this United
Nations, for our common future, we cannot say one thing
here around this table, but do something else at home.

Keeping in mind this primary criterion for both
integrity and mutual benefit, I am certain that with the
assistance of all, and particularly the United Nations,
Bosnians will secure lasting peace, with all its benefits.

