Cyprus will focus its comments on the working methods of the Council pertaining to three areas: how it interacts with the Member States that are on its agenda; how it interacts with Member States in which it has deployed peacekeeping operations; and how it relates to peace processes and agreements brokered under the auspices of the United Nations. As a general principle, the Council should be in dialogue with the Member States on its agenda, so as not to make decisions for them without them. Without prejudice to the fact that the Council alone makes its decisions, since such decisions deeply affect the countries they concern, they need to be made after taking into account all relevant information at the disposal of the Council, including from the perspective of the affected State. We would suggest that, when the Council discusses a Situation in closed consultations, it invite the affected State to offer its perspective then exit the room before the Council begins its deliberations. There should also be regular dialogue between Member States on the Council's agenda and the President of the Council, which should provide affected States with information regarding the work of the Council that directly affects them. In our view, affected States should not have to rely on the good will of members of the Council, or the penholder, to provide them with such information. Increased interaction and transparency are even more warranted in cases where the Council has deployed a peacekeeping operation in a Member State, not only because good cooperation between the host Government and the operation is crucial for the latter's success, but also because host-country consent and cooperation have been central to peacekeeping since its inception. All the suggestions in the preceding paragraph also apply in respect of peacekeeping operations, but dialogue could also be enhanced in more technical bodies, given the operational nature of the issues they consider. One example is meetings with troop-contributing countries, where it is not obvious to us why a host country cannot participate, at least in part of the meeting. Lastly, when considering peacekeeping operations, the Council should make decisions based on the situation on the ground and what is in the best interests of security and stability, and not on political grounds. As the organ entrusted with the maintenance of international peace and security, the Council must be kept informed about peace processes and agreements brokered by the United Nations so as to be able to endorse such agreements and to play a responsible role in their implementation. This requires better synergy between the Council and the Secretary-General. It also requires more consistent practice on the part of the Council so as to develop some clear benchmarks for its endorsement of a peace agreement, notably compatibility with the Charter and acquis, norms and principles of the United Nations, and the satisfaction of criteria such as provisions for the administration of justice, particularly where serious international crimes have been committed. A closer and more organic link between the work of the Council and peace processes and agreements would also enable the Council to better assume its responsibilities in terms of specific measures it could take to support a peace agreement it has endorsed, including through peacekeeping and peacebuilding tools. The Council must find a way to preserve and exercise its mandated responsibilities when other United Nations organs have a role or involvement in peacemaking.
