Mr. Corr (Ireland): My delegation joins others in
also thanking Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
his comprehensive briefing this morning on recent
developments in Kosovo.

Ireland, of course, fully supports the statement
that will be delivered shortly by the representative of
Spain on behalf of the European Union, so I will make
only a few points of particular emphasis to my
delegation at this stage of our discussion.

Ireland welcomes the increased progress on
ensuring participation by all communities in the
provisional institutions of self-government. The
acceptance by the coalition Povratak of their positions
in the Provisional Government is especially welcome.
It is essential that Kosovo have a truly multi-ethnic
Government with genuine cooperation between the
different communities represented.

Ireland warmly commends the work being done
by Special Representative Steiner, including the
priorities he has outlined and, of course, on the
benchmarking process. We also warmly commend, as
Ambassador Eldon just said, the policy of openness
and transparency the Special Representative has
brought to his work since his appointment.
The Security Council made clear last month that
the resolution adopted by the Kosovo Assembly
regarding the border agreement between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia was, as stated by the Special
Representative, null and void. The adoption of such
resolutions, which also called the Common Document
into question, does not enhance the credibility of the
Kosovo Assembly. It also creates real obstacles to the
development of regional dialogue.

Therefore, it is essential now that the Kosovo
Assembly focus on the critical tasks within its
competence. Clear progress is urgently needed in these
areas, including education and health, the creation of
jobs and the strengthening of the rule of law. As Mr.
Steiner has said, the Assembly must not allow itself to
be sidetracked from its very substantial responsibilities.

Kosovo's elected leaders must now work to
develop a genuine political dialogue - within as well
as between Kosovo's various communities - if the
Provisional Government is to be fully effective. Such a
dialogue will be central to the preparations for
municipal elections in October.

Under-Secretary-General Guehenno's update this
morning on the preparations for the municipal elections
was encouraging. The level of participation in the
preparatory process is heartening and a substantial
improvement on the situation in the municipal elections
held two years ago.

My delegation welcomes the most recent meeting
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia-UNMIK High-
ranking Working Group, held in Belgrade at the end of
May. This fourth meeting since the signature of the
Common Document last November is an important
signal of increased cooperation.

Mr. Steiner has articulated a comprehensive
vision for Kosovo's future development, based on
economic progress, the rule of law, and a fair and just
society for all the peoples of Kosovo. An emphasis on
economic reform and reconstruction, including
privatization, will be essential to ensuring real and
lasting stability in Kosovo.

As we have said before, progress on the creation
of a society based on the rule of law is fundamental if
Kosovo is to ensure its future development, and
particularly if it wishes to open up genuine European
perspectives. Democracy will not take root in an
environment in which crime, violence or terrorism
flourish. Ethnically motivated violence is a particular
scourge, and such incidents can only harm Kosovo's
European progress. We commend the Special
Representative's strengthening of the UNMIK police
and his introduction of special regulations to tackle
organized crime, as well as the policy of zero tolerance
which informs his approach.

Ireland welcomes the general calm that has
prevailed in Mitrovica since the attacks on UNMIK
police in early April. While there have clearly been
ongoing tensions given the continued detention of
those arrested at that time, the lack of further protests
of this nature is encouraging. But there remains a need
for further engagement on the part of local community
leaders who have condemned these and similar attacks,
to send the clear message that there is nothing
whatsoever to be gained from extremism. It is
imperative that in the northern part of Kosovo the
authority of UNMIK is respected.

Ireland strongly supports the emphasis given by
UNMIK to minority returns, which, like the prisoners
issue, remains deeply emotive. As Mr. Steiner has
said - and Under-Secretary-General Guehenno made
the point as well this morning - there is hope for a
real breakthrough on returns over the next number of
years, and we must encourage all efforts, locally and
regionally, to ensure that this opportunity is seized.

My delegation is also grateful for Mr. Guehenno's
update on the issue of the location of the missing. The
sensitivity of this issue and its central importance in
the wider promotion of justice cannot be
underestimated.

Kosovo's vocation lies in Europe. Peace and
stability in south-eastern Europe are clearly dependent
on Kosovo's successful development. Kosovo's leaders
must work to build a truly multi-ethnic, democratic
society to ensure Kosovo's progress along the road
towards European integration.

Ireland, together with our partners in the
European Union, will continue to support greater
integration and regional cooperation through the
Stability Pact and the stabilization and association
process.

