Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to convene this
meeting to consider the role of the Security Council in the
prevention of conflicts. The importance of this issue is
evident, particularly when we consider the need for the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, to start
making the transition from a culture of reaction to a culture
of prevention, as the Secretary-General stressed in his most
recent report on the work of the Organization.

Conflict prevention requires a combination of broadly
varying efforts, which range, for example, from early
warning and preventive diplomatic actions to reconciliation
between conflicting parties and rehabilitation of societies,
including the reintegration of demobilized ex-soldiers, and
to development and poverty eradication. To strengthen
governance in the countries concerned is often vitally
important for conflict prevention. So are the efforts to place
the sale of small arms under control. While causes of
conflict vary with the region, cooperation among the
countries in the same region to build confidence in each
other and to enhance a sense of mutual reassurance
among them is also important to the same end.

The international community must try to make
progress in these and other areas that have significant
implications for conflict prevention, in order to nurture
the culture of prevention. And it is the Security Council
that must act to prompt and promote such efforts on the
part of the members of the international community.

I want to stress here that the Council, although
working with what one might call a culture of reaction,
has already devised a number of measures that served the
purpose of preventing the occurrence and recurrence of
conflicts. The deployment of the United Nations Mission
to Macedonia, for example, was effective in preventing
the conflict in neighbouring Kosovo from spreading
across the Macedonian border. The post-conflict peace-
building activities in the Central African Republic and
Sierra Leone have been working, at least so far, to
prevent the recurrence of the conflicts in these countries.

Most recently, the Security Council mission to East
Timor last September was effective not only in ensuring
that the Security Council's debate was based on firsthand
information, but also in gaining the cooperation of the
Indonesian Government for the deployment of an
international force to East Timor.

Needless to say, the Security Council has recourse
to a number of means, such as the adoption of
resolutions, the issuing of presidential statements and the
holding of open debates, which, if used appropriately and
in a timely manner, would also be effective in preventing
the occurrence and recurrence of conflicts.

With all these factors in mind, I would like to
emphasize that it is timely action that is most required of
the Security Council when we consider its role with
regard to conflict prevention. And it is in this context, I
am sorry to say, that the record of the Council's recent
actions is not one of total success.

In the case of Iraq, for example, it has now been
almost a year since the United Nations Special
Commission inspectors left the country, but the Security
Council has so far not been able to reach a decision as to
how to deal with the situation there, only to let the
authority of the Council suffer. We earnestly hope that
the negotiations now under way in the Council will be
successful in resolving the issue as soon as possible.

 
On Kosovo, too, the Security Council failed initially
to function effectively, to the great consternation of the
international community.

Although the Security Council was able to act more
quickly on East Timor, we would have welcomed an even
quicker response.

Both Kosovo and East Timor need the accelerated and
increased support of the international community for their
rehabilitation and construction efforts in a wide range of
areas, from humanitarian assistance to administration and
the economy. In the context of the subject we are
discussing today, we all know that the success of such
efforts is essential in both cases in order to prevent the
recurrence of conflicts and disorder. The Security Council
can and must play a catalytic role in mustering international
support for both cases.

With regard to East Timor, Japan is planning to host
the first donors' conference in mid-December in Tokyo.
The conference will be co-chaired by the United Nations
and the World Bank, and will provide an opportunity for
members of the international community to demonstrate
their willingness to assist East Timor's nation-building
efforts. Efforts by the Security Council to ensure continued
international attention to the problems in East Timor would
be very helpful for the success of the conference.

As all of us know well, the recurrence of conflicts and
the prevalence of poverty are the two major issues that
have been hampering the development of Africa. Conflict
prevention is therefore a matter of special importance for
many countries on that continent.

We have to note in this context that there are some
encouraging examples of local initiatives to stop fighting.
In Sierra Leone, for example, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and its military
sub-organization, the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), as well as the countries in the region, have
played a significant role in restoring and maintaining peace.
The tireless leadership of the late President Nyerere must
be recalled as a driving force for peace in the process to
bring stability to Burundi. Furthermore, the efforts of the
countries concerned and of the Southern African
Development Community were conducive to a ceasefire
agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

But it is obvious that African countries need much
support and assistance from the developed countries in
order to cease the recurrence of conflicts and engage
themselves in efforts for development. And we have to
admit that such support and assistance have so far not
been sufficient.

Given all this, there is no doubt that stronger than
ever leadership by the Security Council in focusing
international attention on crises in Africa is now needed.
It would be advisable for the Security Council to use
African crises as test cases to develop a culture of
prevention.

The culture of prevention remains yet to be
developed. It is also true that the prevention of conflicts
cannot be achieved by the Security Council alone. It is a
task that involves other actors within the United Nations,
most importantly the Secretary- General, as well as
regional organizations and all the countries concerned.
Nevertheless, it is obvious that the Security Council must
play the central role in preventing conflicts. This is
particularly true since the culture of prevention will have
to be nurtured through the experiences of crisis
management which the Security Council will undergo in
the coming years. The Council's leadership in shifting the
focus from reaction to prevention is therefore most
wanted.

