Mr. Al-Khalifa (Qatar) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish also to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador
Fifty-second year " ........., 'E'ixiileifieg'i

 

Mahugu, on his excellent performance last month. Finally,
I should like to thank you for convening this important
meeting at the request of the Group of Arab States.

This is a critical time. The occupied Palestinian
territories once again face an extremely grave situation,
which is seriously endangering the Middle East peace
process. The Israeli Government's decision to build a new
settlement of 6,500 housing units in Jabal Abu Ghneim is
a deliberate attempt to cut off Arab East Jerusalem from the
remainder of the Palestinian West Bank. It is a move
calculated to alter the legal status and demographic
composition of J erusalem. This is a new development in a
disturbing pattern of decisions and actions aimed at
imposing afait accompli prior to the opening of final-status
negotiations this month.

Since coming to power, the present Israeli Government
has acted to strip the peace process of its content. It has
even exploited the process to serve its own political
objectives. First, it announced that it would not be bound
by agreements signed by the previous Government and the
Palestinian National Authority. Then it ruled out any
compromise on East Jerusalem or on a Palestinian state. It
has repeatedly delayed withdrawal from occupied areas, and
in September 1996 its decision to open the tunnel under the
Western Wall of the Al-Aqsa Mosque precipitated a well-
known crisis, which led to serious violence. The decision to
build this settlement is yet another step in a premeditated
policy of creeping annexation of Arab lands.

As Chairman of the Group of Arab States for this
month and on behalf of my own country, I should like to
express to the Security Council our outrage and dismay at
this arrogant move, which undermines the basic principle of
land for peace that was agreed to at the Madrid Conference.
We strongly condemn this decision by the Israeli
Government. It is a decision that constitutes a flagrant
violation of the fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (1949). It is
also a serious infringement of United Nations resolutions
and floats numerous relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. In this respect, we should like to recall resolution
242 (1967), which calls on Israel to withdraw from all Arab
territories occupied in 1967, and resolution 252 (1968),
which declares that all legislative and administrative
measures taken by Israel, including the expropriation of
land and properties, that alter the status of Jerusalem are
null and void, and calls upon Israel to rescind all such
measures taken and to desist from further actions affecting
the status of Jerusalem.

In the same context, we would recall Security
Council resolution 446 (1979), which determines that the
Israeli policy of establishing settlements in the territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, constitutes a
serious and illegal obstruction to achieving peace in the
Middle East. The resolution calls once more upon Israel
to desist from taking any action which would result in
changing the legal status and geographical nature and
materially affecting the demographic composition of the
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem.

We would like also to recall a series of resolutions
in which the Security Council deplored Israel's refusal to
comply with international law, as well as the Council's
repeated calls to Israel to abandon its intransigent and
expansionist policies. These resolutions include 267
(1969), 271 (1969), 298 (1971) and, in particular,
resolution 476 (1980). This resolution asserts that the
application by Israel of the so-called basic law on
Jerusalem is a violation of international law; it affirms the
applicability of the fourth Geneva Convention to all the
territories occupied by Israel since 1967; and it rejects
Israel's claim to Jerusalem, along with other actions by
Israel that alter the status of Jerusalem. Furthermore,
settlement activities violate the 1993 Oslo accords and the
1995 Interim Agreement between Israel and the
Palestinian National Authority on the territories occupied
since 1967.

For the past five years, there has been a genuine
movement forward towards the achievement of a lasting
peace in the region. We have witnessed progress, from
the Madrid Conference on to Oslo on to the peace
agreement with Jordan. Our hopes for the future were
raised by three economic conferences on the Middle East
and North Africa, held in Casablanca, Amman and Cairo,
respectively. A fourth conference is scheduled to be held
in Doha, the capital of Qatar, this year. The goodwill,
dedication and courage invested by those committed to
achieving peace must not be squandered. This reckless
move highlights the lack of Israeli commitment to the
peace process and threatens to reverse all our efforts.

It is the responsibility of the international community
and of the co-sponsors of the peace process to ensure that
Israel complies with all its conunitments. Furthermore, we
want this debate in the Security Council to send a clear-
cut message to the Israeli Government that its persistent
policy of building settlements and delaying the
implementation of existing agreements is categorically
unacceptable.
Eiiifilfcfly'll ' ...W...., "33,3313;
In conclusion, I would like, on behalf of the Arab
Group and my country, to express my appreciation to those
representatives who declared their Governments' rejection
of the Israeli decision, which violates international legality

and constitutes an obstacle to peace in the Middle East.

Proceeding from genuine concern for the future of
peace, we call on the Council to take the necessary actions
to ensure that no settlement activities will be implemented
in the occupied Arab territories, including in the Holy City
of Al-Quds/Jerusalem, and in particular to ensure that the
Israeli decision to establish this settlement at Jabal Abu
Ghneim will not be implemented, so that the resolutions of
the Security Council will be upheld and the peace process
preserved.

