Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like the welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to whom we
listened with great attention. I would also like to thank
the High Representative, Ambassador Lajcak, for his
briefing on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome his efforts and the effective actions he has
undertaken. We would like to assure him of our full
support, in particular for his approach with regard to
the future of the Office of the High Representative.

In a few moments the Permanent Representative
of Slovenia will make a statement on behalf of the
European Union with which France fully associates
itself. I should like to make a few comments in my
national capacity.

We believe that defining the goals and the
conditions for ending the activities of the Office of the
High Representative would ensure proper conditions
for the international presence. In the coming months,
we will carefully study progress in achieving the five
objectives and two conditions defined last February by
the Peace Implementation Council for the Peace
Agreement.

The efforts of the High Representative have made
it possible to remove the last obstacles to the final
adoption by the parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina
of the first two laws on police reform. That reform in
particular was a condition for the signing of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement between the
European Union and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Bosnian parliament's adoption, on 7 May, of an
amendment to the electoral law so as to allow the
former inhabitants of Srebrenica dispersed by war to
vote in the forthcoming municipal elections is another
step in the right direction.

Those are encouraging signs of the evolution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's institutions and political
parties towards greater maturity. That is especially true
since those steps were achieved at a time when the
western Balkans were going through a period of
uncertainty. That evolution remains to be confirmed,
and we must remain vigilant.

We hope that the various actors involved will
continue their efforts towards the reforms necessary for
the establishment of a stable and democratic Bosnia
and Herzegovina and, in particular, that they will show
responsibility as the October municipal elections
approach. Furthermore, as the High Representative
emphasized in his report, constitutional reform remains
more necessary than ever.

The future of Bosnia and Herzegovina can be
considered only within the framework of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country. In
the light of certain recent initiatives and statements, the
international community should vigorously recall, as
was done by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council in February, that any call for
the secession of an entity is contrary to the Dayton
Peace Agreement and is completely unacceptable.

As the Council knows, France is dedicated to
combating impunity and supports the work of the
international criminal tribunals. We hail the efforts of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the positive results it has achieved. It
remains intolerable that, more than 13 years after the
Srebrenica massacre, Mr. Karadzic and Mr. Mladic
have not yet been apprehended. We call upon all the
parties concerned, in particular the federal authorities
in Bosnia, but also the two entities and Serbia, to
continue to cooperate with the Tribunal to effect the
arrest and transfer to The Hague of all indictees at
large. That is necessary in order both to meet the
international obligations of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia and to successfully carry forward the
necessary reconciliation process. We welcome the
commitment reiterated by Mr. Spirie in that regard.

The international community's commitment to
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains necessary. The
European Union is aware of its responsibilities and
plays a major role in that regard. It has maintained its
presence throughout the country through the
deployment of its multinational stabilization force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Operation ALTHEA) and its Police Mission. It intends to play an
even greater role in the future.

With the adoption of the police reform laws, an
important stage has been completed on the path
towards the European integration of Bosnia and

Herzegovina. We welcome the forthcoming signing of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement, which,
Mr. Lajcak has advised us, will take place on 16 June.
That will respond to the common aspiration to peace
and the prospect for a common future in a European
context that is shared by the entire Bosnian population,
regardless of their political loyalties or community of
origin. Visa liberalization, which we hope will take
place as soon as possible, will also be a sign of
increasing integration into the European family.

The future of Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be
viewed outside the context of that of the western
Balkans as a whole. The region is at a crossroads. With
the final settlement on the status of Kosovo, the last
remaining dispute related to the collapse of the former
Yugoslavia, we have finally closed a painful chapter in
the history of the Balkans and Europe that was opened
in 1991. It is high time for the western Balkans to turn
towards the future, and that future lies in Europe. We
are indeed convinced that the common future of the
peoples of the western Balkans within the framework
of the European Union constitutes, after the tragedies
of the 19905, the best pledge of their reconciliation.

