Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
offering our heartfelt condolences to the Russian
delegation in connection with the shooting of the
Ambassador in Ankara.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/1049) and Special Representative Yamamoto
for his briefing. We appreciate the resolve of the
Afghan leaders to work together to address their
differences in a spirit of cooperation. We agree with the
Secretary-General that a united Afghan Government is
imperative if the country is to effectively address its
multiple challenges.

Afghanistan's continuing political volatility,
coupled with the uncertain security and economic
situation, remains a cause of concern for the
international community. In Brussels, we collectively
renewed our commitment to supporting Afghanistan
in its efforts to achieve security and economic
development over the next decade and a half. Pakistan
will continue to support regional and international
efforts in that regard. The $500 million commitment we
made in Brussels was an expression of our firm resolve
never to abandon Afghanistan. Our participation in
the Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference in Amritsar,
despite the problems of escalation on the line of control
and the working boundary, testified to our unflinching
commitment to lasting peace in Afghanistan and the
region. While external support is critical, it is no
substitute for internal political stability. The Afghan
Government's successful implementation of reforms
and active promotion of peace and reconciliation
depend upon it.

The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
have bravely tried to stand their ground, but the security
situation continues to deteriorate. The presence oflarge
numbers of terrorist, violent and extremist groups and
organizations in the ungoverned areas of the country
are a continued challenge to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan and its neighbours. The security situation
in Afghanistan is complex. The drivers of the recent
surge in violence lie within Afghanistan, not outside
it. We need to objectively evaluate the efforts to
address the deteriorating security situation. I reiterate
Pakistan's firm commitment to fighting terrorism
and eliminating every kind of terrorist network. We
reject the unsubstantiated assertion that the Taliban
reorganized in Pakistan during the winter. Terrorist
sanctuaries have in fact shifted to Afghanistan,
owing to our successful counter-terrorism operation
Zarb-e-Azb, the results of which have been widely
acknowledged by the international community.
Nevertheless, as Pakistan has always stressed, robust
border management is critical to countering cross-
border movement. We do not understand the logic
behind resistance to operationalizing that much-needed
mechanism. It is somewhat disingenuous to propose a
regional mechanism when Kabul is unwilling even to
work bilaterally with us on the issue.

The peace and reconciliation process has yet to
produce results, and we understand Afghan frustration
about that. But it is not due to lack ofeffort on our part. We
have continued to persist sincerely and wholeheartedly,
but we can only facilitate. The Afghan parties have to
conclude that military means cannot bring peace and
that reconciliation is the only way to achieve lasting
stability. All our efforts must be directed towards
achieving a politically negotiated settlement through
an Afghan-led and -owned peace process. We believe
that all the members of the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group must redouble their efforts to reach that goal.
Efforts that undermine peace and reconciliation must
be avoided. Implementing the agreed-on approaches
faithfully, and maintaining trust among the partners,
continue to be fundamental to furthering peace and
reconciliation. The Afghan Government has signed
a peace agreement with the Hizb-i Islami, and its
implementation could serve as a model for talks with
other groups.

Despite the negative rhetoric, Pakistan has
remained committed to facilitating the transit of
goods to landlocked Afghanistan through its territory.
We believe that the two sides must work together in
order to extend and improve the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Transit Trade Agreement. In that context, I would
like to re-emphasize that the peaceful resolution of
outstanding disputes will further enhance the prospects
for regional cooperation and connectivity.

For almost four decades, we have hosted millions
of Afghan refugees in Pakistan. We remain committed
to helping them return to their homeland with honour
and dignity. We are fully engaged in that regard with
Afghanistan and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. We are working on plans
to extend their stay in Pakistan until 31 December 2017,
and to ensure that their voluntary return is smooth and
orderly. International support and the creation of pull
factors in Afghanistan continue to be critical.

The people of Pakistan and the people of
Afghanistan enjoy age-old bonds not only of kinship,
faith and shared history but also of a shared destiny.
We rejoice in their accomplishments and are saddened
by their suffering. We are ready to support them in
every way, and we are with our Afghan brothers and
sisters in their struggle for a better future that can bring
prosperity, health, education and, above all, peace and
stability to the whole region.

