Mr. Al-Istrabadi (Iraq): Allow me at the outset,
Mr. President, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, and to commend your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of the United States, for his
tenure last month.

The past three months have been critical to Iraq's
transition from dictatorship to a united, federal,
pluralistic, constitutional democracy. The results of
Iraq's elections were certified in the middle of last
month. The elections were free, fair and transparent,
and, in distinction to those of a year ago, all of Iraq's
communities participated in them. Iraqis know that
democracy is not a destination but a process, and an
evolutionary process at that. We know that we are still
at the very beginning of the process. Still, the next time
a representative of Iraq sits in this Chamber to report
on events unfolding there, he will do so - for the first
time in five decades - as a representative of an
elected Government operating under a permanent
constitution.

Negotiations are now under way for the
formation of a new Government. The negotiations are
bound to take some more time, as the various parties
explore the formation of a national unity Government.
There is a sense among Iraq's political leadership that
such a Government will likely help to improve the
security climate in the country, as it will allow all of
Iraq's various groupings - political, ethnic and
confessional - to become enfranchised. My
Government understands that that sense of
enfranchisement is a vital necessity in further isolating
those whose agenda is merely to interrupt the
completion of the political transformation of the
country. As a first step towards achieving the formation
of the Government, it is expected that the parliament
will be convened for its first session tomorrow.

With respect to security, the Iraqi police and
security forces have assumed many of the functions
previously performed exclusively by the multinational
forces. Major checkpoints in the capital are controlled
by Iraqis, and it is Iraqi forces that patrol the streets.
Ministries and other Government offices are guarded
and controlled by Iraqi units. Iraqi forces are also
assuming an ever-increasing role in enforcement
operations throughout the country. It is a matter of
clear policy for us that effective Iraqi security and
police forces be trained as quickly as possible so that
Iraqis can assume all responsibility for Iraq's security
needs, thus eventually obviating the need for the
continued presence of the Multinational Force.

My Government believes that the economic
development of Iraq must be an integral part of the
political stabilization of the country. Iraq has too long
been isolated from the world economy. To the extent
that those who oppose Iraq's political development
succeed in keeping Iraq so isolated, they will have
accomplished a major strategic aim. We therefore call
upon the world community to continue to engage in
Iraq. We are grateful for the pledges made by many
donor nations, but we call on them to redeem those
pledges and transfer the pledged amounts.

Iraq will continue to need the active engagement
of the United Nations as an Organization. To that end,
we again ask for an increase in the number of staff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) operating throughout Iraq in the three offices
established for that purpose. We will need active
UNAMI participation as the political process continues
to unfold in the constitutional phase, as amendments
are considered, and as laws enforcing constitutional
provisions are drafted by the first parliament. In a very
real sense, the work of reconstructing our political
institutions is only now beginning, and the United
Nations has much to offer us in that respect.

I must turn my attention to the ugly and cowardly
turn which terrorism has taken in Iraq. Unfortunately,
attacks on and around houses of worship, bearing the
hallmarks of supporters of the previous regime, are not
a new phenomenon, as terrorists have been employing
the tactic since 2003. But while previous attacks
targeted worshippers or individuals, late last month a
new type of attack occurred: terrorists targeted the holy
shrine in Samarra itself, a shrine holy to and honoured
by all Muslims and, indeed, all Iraqis, regardless of
faith. The purpose was not merely to destroy the
building itself. The ultimate goal of the attack - and
of attacks on other mosques throughout the country -
was to foment a civil war along confessional lines, to
pit Shia against Sunni. Yet Iraqis from across
confessional, ethnic and political lines stand united in
their horror and condemnation of such attacks, as they
condemn attacks on all houses of worship. The people
of Iraq overwhelmingly reject attempts by terrorists to
incite sectarian conflict through such heinous tactics.

We are mindful of and grateful for the Security
Council's repeated support of our people as they
combat the scourge of terrorism. Not least among that
support was resolution 1618 (2005), in which the
Council unreservedly condemned terrorism in Iraq. My
Government believes that it is right and fitting for the
Security Council to continue to condemn that barbarity
without qualification or equivocation of any sort.
Doing so demonstrates the unity of the civilized world
and its determination to defeat the forces of terrorism,
whether they are in New York, London, Beslan or
Baghdad. In this respect, we are cognizant that
resolution 1618 (2005) reaffirmed the duty of Member
States in our region to undertake specific acts to
prevent terrorism from being planned, funded or
otherwise projected from their territories into Iraq. We
renew the call on our neighbours to abide by those
obligations.

The Secretary-General's report expends some
effort reporting on the status of human rights in Iraq.
Let me be clear: the Government of Iraq is committed
to respect for human rights and for the rule of law, as it
acknowledges that there is yet room for improvement
in that area. My Government is determined to make
those improvements, and it welcomes any constructive
criticisms in this respect. At the same time, we note
that the report does not take into account the extent to
which the current security situation has contributed to
the Government's inability fully to implement its
human rights agenda. Moreover, the report should have
made it plain that it regarded the terrorism extant in
Iraq as itself constituting an unacceptable attack on
fundamental human rights. The duties arising under
international human rights and humanitarian law, after
all, apply not only to Governments, but to all,
universally.

t is appropriate to take note of those steps
undertaken by the Government of Iraq to improve
human rights practices in the country, notwithstanding
the security situation.

First among them is the presence, for the first
time in 46 years, of a Vibrant and robust civil society
sector with unfettered access to a variety of
governmental agencies, including jails, prisons and
courthouses. When allegations of abuse do arise, they
are reported in the media, and, as the report itself
acknowledges, they are investigated by Government
authorities.

Second, there is now extensive training of police
and security forces, including jailers and prison guards,
in international human rights standards. The Ministry
of Human Rights has been tasked with conducting such
training, and it has created and publicized the existence

of mechanisms for reporting and investigating alleged
abuses.

Third, Iraq's new permanent constitution
enshrines the principles of international human rights
law, principles sacred to civilized peoples the world
over. While there is still work to be done for us to
reach the lofty standard to which we ourselves aspire,
we have also accomplished much in the brief span of
21 months since the transfer of authority to a sovereign
Government.

My Government warmly welcomes the Secretary-
General's statement that it is time to normalize Iraq's
relationship with the Security Council by lifting the
barriers to Iraq's full reintegration into the community
of nations. Those barriers and sanctions were first
introduced when Iraq was governed by a rogue and
lawless dictatorship that had attacked and occupied a
fellow Member State. Those days are now behind us.
My Government again asks the Security Council to
review and rescind prior mandates imposed upon Iraq's
previous regime, as they are no longer relevant.

Despite ongoing difficulties, for their genuine
accomplishments, particularly on the political track,
achieved under the most difficult circumstances
imaginable, the Iraqi people have justly earned the
admiration of freedom-loving peoples the world over.
Yet I would be remiss if I reached the end of my
remarks today without pausing to commend the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Ashraf Qazi, and the entire UNAMI staff for their
tireless efforts on behalf of Iraq. I must also express
the gratitude of my Government and that of the people
of Iraq to the Security Council, and to each of its
member States, since the liberation of my homeland
from tyranny for the unwavering support we have
received from this body in the difficult task we have
undertaken. We look forward to working closely with
the United Nations, as well as our friends in the region
and beyond, to continue the Vital work of rebuilding
our country.

