Ms. Bellamy: I, too, will be brief. I would like to
begin first by saying on behalf of UNICEF that we
really appreciate the opportunity to participate, and to
participate with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. I
think the partnership that we have developed over the
last several years is an increasingly strong one and one
that, from UNICEF's perspective, we appreciate very
much and we hope that we complement each other in
the work that we do.

I would just like to briefly express my
appreciation for the Council's strong commitment to
address child protection issues and to integrate the
child dimension into all its deliberations - whether on
thematic issues such as small arms and light weapons
and HIV/AIDS, or more country-specific issues such as
the collaboration between peacekeepers and the United
Nations country teams, the need for better information
on the situations of children or better monitoring and
reporting on violations.

I would also like to acknowledge the positive
response to Alhaji's participation. I hope this augurs
well for the potential of involving children and young
people themselves in the work of the Council. I also
wish, as an aside, to apologize for returning a bit late in
the afternoon. Anyone who had been with me would
have seen his good form on the football field as he
participated in the announcement today of the
partnership between the International Federation of
Association Football (FIFA) and UNICEF during the
2002 World Cup, which will be held in Japan and
Korea.

I also wish to state my appreciation for the
continued high-level importance that the Council
attaches to the special session on children, which will
indeed be held and be even more special than ever, we
hope. We also hope that the portion of the outcome
document devoted to the issue of children affected by
conflict will be strong and clear in its final
presentation.

We recognize the importance that the Council has
attributed to the adoption of the Optional Protocol,
education and the need for a special focus on girls.

Finally, I would just like to conclude by saying
we also recognize that this is not the first time that the
Security Council has considered these issues. This is
about the fourth time, at least, that there has been a
clear recognition that the well-being of the world's
children is indeed a matter of global security. But we
would urge that the broad consensus on children
affected by conflict, which is reflected in the strong
draft resolution, be applied in the Security Council's
response to specific country situations.

