Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation welcomes
the presence of Senator Joseph Biden in the Security
Council. His presence here today no doubt underscores
his support for the United Nations and for improved
relations between this invaluable Organization and the
United States Government, in particular the United
States Congress.

My delegation shares the views he expressed on
issues related to peacekeeping and the need to ensure
the credibility of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Jamaica fully supported the action taken by
the Security Council in adopting the recommendations
of the Brahimi report. We support the implementation
ofthese recommendations.

As stated by Ambassador Levitte, an increase in
the United Nations budget is a requirement for
successfully implementing the Brahimi
recommendations. At the same time, we must ensure
that there is no reduction in development aid as
additional resources are targeted to peace operations.
We must recognize that this issue is one of major
concern to the wider membership of the United
Nations.

The report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), which is before us, provides a clear
overview of developments since the report of 2 June.
My delegation supports the work of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and commends Mr.
Jacques Paul Klein for his work as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I thank him for his report and for his
advocacy for peace in the region.

My delegation recognizes that while progress has
been slow, much has been achieved in nation-building
and in seeking to create a society based on peaceful

S/PVAZAS

 

multi-ethnic coexistence and multi-ethnic institutions.
We continue to attach importance to the full
implementation of the New York Declaration, which
was adopted on 15 November 1999.

UNMIBH's comprehensive Mandate
Implementation Plan provides a clear focus for the
fulfilment of the Mission's mandate by the end of
2002. We hope that its implementation will be
successfully completed. The Plan focuses on what we
regard as the critical core areas of police reform, police
restructuring, police and criminal justice cooperation,
institution-building and inter-police-force cooperation,
public awareness and general support for the
participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the United
Nations system, in particular United Nations peace
operations.

Of fundamental importance is the fact that these
programmes focus on various areas of law
enforcement, particularly the individual police officer,
organizational structures of the police force, and the
required support for democratic policing. We commend
the efforts of UNMIBH in establishing a law
enforcement Registry and a police training programme
aimed at raising basic standards of competence.

Police restructuring is another area in which we
recognize that concerted efforts have been made to
rationalize the size, structure and resources of the
police force to bring it in line with international
standards. The UNMIBH police commissioner project
and the efforts made to change the ethnic composition
of the police force must continue to receive priority
attention. While we are cognizant of the challenges,
these efforts must continue.

The entrenchment of the rule of law is contingent
upon cooperation between the police and the criminal
justice system. The judicial system assessment which
was undertaken has been an invaluable avenue for
examining some of the deficiencies in the legal and
judicial system. These recommendations must be given
serious consideration in order to find a remedy for
some ofthe deficiencies in the system.

We are concerned about the absence of
mechanisms for the protection ofjudges and witnesses,
as this remains a major impediment to the full
establishment of the rule of law. The lack of funding
has served as a further impediment, and we hope that
this will addressed in an expeditious manner. The same
applies to the underfunded State Border Service, which
is also of great importance to the stability ofthe region.

UNMIBH's programme, with its strong
concentration on law and order and the justice system,
two important pillars for the building of a democratic
society, is important in the peace-building process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also attach importance to
the joint activities of the United Nations system in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. UNMIBH's collaboration
with the United Nations Development Programme in
mine action and with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in the area of
trafficking in human beings is of extreme importance.
This contributes to advances in a number of areas
which will ultimately benefit the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The role of UNMIBH in peace implementation
and in assisting the parties to establish the foundations
for peace is critical. Jamaica supports UNMIBH's work
in helping to create the foundations of effective and
sustainable democracy. We encourage UNMIBH to
continue to work, in collaboration with the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, to create a multi-ethnic
society based on peaceful coexistence. The authorities
and the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have a
major role to play in this regard, and we encourage
them to do so.

Finally, recent democratic developments,
particularly in Yugoslavia, have set the stage for
regional stability. The international community must
take advantage of these opportunities to advance the
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Security
Council must continue its role in this process. Jamaica
will continue to participate in any constructive effort in
the Council to support this endeavour, and we urge the
international community to respond to Mr. Klein's plea
for the necessary resources.

