Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Permanent Representative of Kuwait,
Mr. Mansour Alotaibi, for their briefings.

Today, we are witnessing important changes in the
largest State in Central Africa. We welcome the efforts
of the new leadership of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to promote political stabilization,
including through dialogue with the opposition and the
establishment of constructive relations with regional
neighbours and international partners. We call on the
Congolese to continue to work for peace and to take
measures to prevent all forms of violence.

We remain seriously concerned about the situation
in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where the political and military situation
remains complex and incursions by illegal armed
groups and intercommunal clashes continue unabated.
In addition to this is the outbreak of Ebola, which the
World Health Organization has classified as a public
health emergency of international concern.

We have carefully read the Secretary-General's
latest report on the work of United Nations
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2019/575). In general, we share the assessments and
recommendations contained in that document. We
believe that the Mission should continue to support
Kinshasa's efforts to normalize the situation in the
post-electoral period. We believe it important to
make the most of the constructive approach taken by
the new President of the country, Felix Tshisekedi.
At the same time, we would like to stress once again
that the United Nations interference in the internal
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo would
be unacceptable.

Russia, including as a member of the Group of
Friends of the Great Lakes Region, intends to continue
to support the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the stabilization of the region as
a whole.

With regard to the work of our sanctions
Committee, we believe that it is important to maintain
the practice of considering different aspects of the
Congolese sanctions regime in the meetings and to
invite the representatives of Kinshasa to participate in
the discussion. We welcome the visit of the Chair ofthe
Committee to the region in late April and early May. We
support the continuation of such contacts with regional
actors in the future. It is necessary in this work to base
ourselves on the recommendations of the final report of
the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/2019/469), as endorsed by the Committee.

In general, we call for a very careful approach to
the sanctions regime. We should not forget that the main
purpose of our work is to help the Congolese restore
order and security in their country.

