We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Olof Skoog and Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve for their briefings. We also would like to thank Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve and his team for their able leadership in facilitating the 2231 format. We also would like to welcome the participation of the Secretary-General, His Excellency Antonio Guterres; the United States Secretary of State, His Excellency Michael Pompeo; and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iran, His Excellency Mohammad Javad Zarif. Today we stand at a very critical moment. We cannot emphasize enough the importance of supporting the full and effective implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015) by all parties. In that regard, Indonesia would underline the following points. First, preserving the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) is crucially important. All parties must remain committed and perform fully and effectively their obligations under the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) in good faith. In that regard, we are deeply concerned at the decision of the United States to withdraw from the JCPOA and to reimpose sanctions. Efforts must be made to create a conducive environment for JCPOA implementation. All factors should be taken into account in a just manner in assessing that implementation. We also noted with concern the announcement by Iran that it would scale back its operational commitments under the JCPOA. We call on all parties to swiftly resolve those issues through constructive dialogue and appropriate dispute-resolution mechanisms under the agreement, so as to allow Iran to return to its commitments. We recognize and support the efforts made by our European partners to facilitate all legitimate trade with Iran. We should always remind ourselves that the JCPOA should also bring concrete economic benefit for Iran and its peoples. Secondly, stability must be maintained. All parties must exercise restraint. Extra caution needs to be taken before coming to a conclusion or taking any action, as rushed decisions can become counterproductive. Any new initiatives must add value and support resolution 2231 (2015). We need to remain focused. The aim must be to enable success in the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). Issues that are not directly related to the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) should be treated separately. In that vein, Indonesia emphasizes the upholding of the rule of law as well as the United Nations Charter in the spirit of multilateralism. Nor should we forget the importance of confidence-building and of continuing dialogue to find amicable solutions. That is what diplomacy is all about. Thirdly, cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is important. We welcome the continuation of cooperation between Iran and the IAEA in safeguarding its nuclear programme under the JCPOA. We would like to convey our appreciation for the professional work done by the Agency. We support the IAEA in discharging its mandate in an impartial and objective manner in verifying and monitoring Iran's implementation of its nuclear-related commitments under the JCPOA.* Fourthly, a world free of nuclear weapons must be achieved. We must remain focused and not be sidetracked by other rhetoric that hampers progress on the global nuclear-disarmament agenda. Indonesia's position on this issue, nationally as well as in its capacity as the Coordinator of the Non-Aligned Movement Working Group on Disarmament, is very clear. Furthermore, Indonesia is a party to the major treaties in that area, including the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. We are also a passionate advocate of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and urge its early entry into force and universalization. Indonesia believes that the JCPOA remains an essential element of the global non-proliferation architecture. The obligation to support the JCPOA fully does not apply only to its signatories but also to all in the international community. Everyone should play their role in supporting its sustainability and original objectives. Before I conclude, my delegation would like to express its concern with regard to the fact that the Facilitator's report cannot be agreed on by all Council members. In that regard, we urge all members of the Council to maintain communication and close cooperation to allow us to exercise our mandate properly. We thank the Facilitator of the format for his endeavours on this process and stand ready to work with all Council members in finding agreement on the way forward. Let me conclude by once again reiterating Indonesia's support for the full and effective implementation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). *
