Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for his very comprehensive briefing on the situation in
the Middle East. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.

Our debate falls on International Holocaust
Remembrance Day. We pay homage to the memory of
the victims of the Holocaust and reiterate our
commitment to continuing to prevent and fight anti-
semitism and all forms of racism, xenophobia and
discrimination wherever they may occur.

Recent weeks have seen the one-year anniversary
of the adoption of resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009), which are directly linked to the situation in the
Middle East. Those two resolutions remain fully
relevant today, the first because it reiterates the
fundamental principles of negotiations between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority, and the second because it
sets the parameters for the ceasefire and unrestricted
access for humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population affected by the Israeli military offensive in
Gaza in late December 2008.

Today, a year after their adoption and the end of
Operation Cast Lead, we regret the non-compliance
with the provisions of those resolutions and that the
situation in the Middle East continues to deteriorate,
endangering the peace process as a whole. The picture
that the Assistant Secretary-General painted in his
briefing is not encouraging, but it should prompt us to
redouble our efforts to persuade Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to return to peace negotiations as
soon as possible. That is the Security Council's
responsibility.

The objective is known to all and crystal clear.
We must achieve a comprehensive and definitive
solution to the conflict in the Middle East that
reaffirms the recognition of Israel's right to exist and
allows the establishment of a politically and
economically viable Palestinian State living in peace
with Israel within secure and internationally
recognized borders, pursuant to the resolutions of the
Security Council, the Road Map, the Madrid principles
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The responsibility for resuming the peace process
falls squarely and exclusively to the will and
commitment of Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
The international community, for its part, has the task
and responsibility of facilitating that process in order
to ensure a just and lasting peace in the region. We
therefore appreciate the efforts of United States Special
Envoy Mitchell and his tenacity in laying the
groundwork for dialogue between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. We also reiterate our support for
the Quartet and call on it to pursue its efforts to
establish conditions conducive to a resumption of
negotiations as soon as possible.

To that end, it is crucial that both parties comply
with the principles of the Road Map, which are the
bases for the resolution of all outstanding matters in
the conflict. We praise the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to meet its commitments in the areas of
security and economic development in the West Bank.
As we have heard from the Assistant Secretary-
General, those efforts have begun to bear fruit. We take
further note of the positive economic and humanitarian
impact of the Israeli initiative to partially lift the
restrictions imposed on the movement of people and
goods in the West Bank. We hope that these actions are
definitive and lead to the complete and irreversible
dismantling of all checkpoints, which is essential to the
establishment of a viable and independent Palestinian
State.

We are convinced that improved living conditions
for the Palestinian people and the Palestinian

Authority's effective control over security in the West
Bank are critical to achieving a lasting peace in the
Middle East. Nevertheless, that will not be possible if
Israeli settlement activity continues. Therefore we once
again call on Israel to stop that practice as soon as
possible, including the so-called natural growth, and to
refrain from taking actions that may incite violence in
East Jerusalem and that undermine hope of any
negotiated solution. The demolition of houses, the
evictions and the expansion of settlements in the
occupied territories, including in East Jerusalem,
violate international law and represent a serious
obstacle to the peace process.

We take note of the initiative of Prime Minister
Netanyahu to partially restrict the building of new
settlements in the West Bank in order to promote the
resumption of peace talks. That initiative is novel and
cannot be ignored. However, that moratorium does not
include East Jerusalem, public buildings or
construction that is already underway, and so
contravenes the Road Map principles.

In the current context we think that it is
particularly important that Israel and the Palestinian
Authority refrain from any type of action or statement
that might erode the trust necessary to renew the
process of negotiations based on the agreements and
commitments that have previously been made between
the parties. The definitive solution to the conflict also
requires a concretization of the inter-Palestinian
reconciliation that has been carried out with the help of
Egypt. We lament the lack of progress in that matter,
and we call on all parties not to abandon dialogue but
rather to invest the political capital necessary for
reaching the necessary agreements.
As I said at the outset, this month marks a year
since the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009) - in the
negotiation of which my delegation actively
participated - and of the unilateral cessation of
hostilities in the Gaza Strip. Despite that, the situation
of the civilian population in Gaza continues to
deteriorate, and the blockade that impedes access to
humanitarian aid has not been lifted. Now that winter
has begun, it is of vital importance that the border
crossings be opened in order to avoid a humanitarian
disaster and to initiate reconstruction.

The Gaza blockade fosters the illicit trafficking
of materials, fuel and food and opens the door to the
illicit trafficking of weapons, endangering the security
of the entire region. Proof of that has been the increase
of rocket attacks against the Israeli civilian population,
which in turn have led to new military responses, in a
vicious circle. We condemn those acts of violence,
especially those targeting civilian populations, and we
once again urge all actors to respect at all times the
provisions of international humanitarian law.

We are particularly concerned about a renewed
spiral of violence that could have devastating effects
on civilian populations. The international community
should do all that it can to stop that as soon as possible.
We therefore emphasize the need to establish an
international monitoring mechanism that insures a
lasting ceasefire, the opening of border crossings and
the control of illicit arms trafficking. We support all
initiatives aimed at establishing such a mechanism,
including that suggested by the Secretary-General. We
await the next report from the Secretary-General
regarding violations of international humanitarian law
and of human rights committed during the Gaza
conflict.

Peace requires not just a renewed dialogue
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. Efforts
towards regional peace must also continue. We
welcome the formation of the new Government in
Lebanon and the commitment by President Sleiman
and by Prime Minister Hariri and his Government to
continue reinforcing the process of national
reconciliation and to comply with the provisions of
relevant Security Council resolutions. Lebanon's
participation as an elected member of this Council
reaffirms that commitment.

That is why we call on both Lebanon and Israel,
and on all actors involved, to meet the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006), particularly bearing in mind
recent incidents that must be investigated. We are
convinced that that will strengthen the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
Lebanon.

We also welcome progress being made in the
process of normalizing diplomatic relations between
Lebanon and Syria as a positive step of benefit to the
region. We express our hope that Israel and Syria will
again take up the process of indirect talks, which will
make it possible to begin to resolve the pending
matters and promote trust and security for both States.

Finally, Mexico, through its participation in the
Security Council and also in other multilateral and
bilateral forums, will continue to promote all efforts

aimed at the establishment of a lasting peace in the
Middle East.

