Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I find
myself at a loss for words to express our deep sorrow
at the scene we are witnessing today - the military
escalation that compelled the Security Council to
convene before the entire world in order to convey a
message of failure to the Syrian people. Regrettably, the
Council, which was created in the previous century to
peaceably settle disputes, is gradually becoming a mere
media platform. Instead of holding serious political
consultations, in open and closed meetings, to stop the
Syrian bloodletting, consultations have amounted to
no more than a repetition of traditional positions and
dialogue that falls on deaf ears.

We used to prepare our statements and deliver
them in the Chamber to express condemnation and
denunciation, or to share new information to apprise
ourselves of what happened and what is happening
in Syria. We have forgotten that the impact of our
statements hardly goes beyond this building or the mass
media, whereas the tragedy of the bereaved Syrian
people continues, with half of the Syrian population
displaced and hundreds of thousands of its men, women
and children killed. Allow me to express my sorrow
and sympathy to any Syrian citizen who is following
today's meeting, although I wonder if there is anyone
in Syria who is genuinely interested in following this
meeting.

Egypt voted in favour of the two draft resolutions
(S/2016/846 and S/20l6/847) that were put forward
for voting today, which focused on a de-escalation
of the situation in Syria, in particular in Aleppo.
Regrettably, although we had already known that the
two draft resolutions would fail, our voting simply
served to express our position. Egypt can no longer
tolerate the fact that the fate of the region's people is
being manipulated. Today, we are simply conveying a
message on the part of the biggest Arab population to
the international, regional and internal Powers in Syria
to end the tragedy - and end the political rivalries,
ambitions and disputes, which are claiming Syrian
lives - in that country.

It is not my wish to conclude my statement by
expressing regret, because we still have a window of
opportunity to address the Syrian crisis in earnest. If
all the members of the Council were to express and
confirm their desire to end the bloodshed, we would
seriously consider all the various approaches contained
in the two draft resolutions proposed today. Let us
agree that the two draft resolutions covered key points
that should serve as a foundation for us to build upon in
the coming days. We voted in favour of the following
five points today.

First, it is imperative to stop the targeting of Syrian
civilians and infrastructure and allow unhindered
access to humanitarian aid in conjunction with the
United Nations. Secondly, we must work towards
implementing a cessation of hostilities in Syria that
would pave the way for a full ceasefire, prioritizing
Aleppo in line with resolution 2268 (2016), in tandem
with enhancing the supervision and monitoring
mechanisms. Thirdly, it is very important to confront
certain armed groups that disregard of the will and
volition of the international community, the ambitions
of the Syrian people for a change towards a better future,
and their determination and persistence in cooperating
with terrorist groups, especially Jabhat al-Nusrah
Jabhat Fatih al-Sham. Fourthly, the Security Council
should shoulder its responsibility and the International
Syria Support Group and its co-chairmansip must play
its pivotal role in carrying out the realization of the
aforementioned points. Fifthly, earnest negotiations
must be launched among the Syrian parties with regard
to the transitional phase stipulated in the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015).

Egypt is fully preparedto work within the framework
of the International Syria Support Group and the
Security Council, - whether it be with the permanent
or non-permanent members of the Council - to carry
out and achieve the efforts to which I referred earlier.

To conclude, let me call upon members of the
Security Council to work towards restoring the
Council's role and facilitating open and serious
discussion in ending the Syrian tragedy.

