Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Major
General Bakin, Head of the Russian Reconciliation
Centre, for their briefings. I also thank the Russian
representative for providing first-hand information
on the situation on the ground, especially the Idlib
de-escalation zone. We also listened very carefully to
the statement delivered by Mr. Lillie.

China is concerned about the humanitarian situation
on the ground, and we support the efforts of the United
Nations and relevant parties to improve it. To date,
the humanitarian situation in Idlib has attracted the
attention of international community and the Council
has met many times on this matter. We hope that
our discussions will help Council members broaden
communication and deepen their understanding of all
aspects of the situation on the ground.

China supports the efforts of Russia and Turkey in
continuing to implement the memorandum promoting
the de-escalation of the conflict in Idlib. We call on
the international community to adopt common criteria,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and provisions of international law, to
counter the activities of terrorist groups. In the current
situation, all parties should seek comprehensive and
long-term solutions to counter terrorism and address the
humanitarian issues in the north-western part of Syria.
The United Nations and other parties should scale up
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in the north-western part of the country.

China is concerned about humanitarian problems
in other parts of Syria and IDP camps. We are in favour
of solutions tailored to the situation on the ground. We
note that approximately 1,000 displaced persons in the
Al-Hol camp have returned to their homes. We support
the proper resettlement of those people who are currently
living in the camps. The international community
should enhance dialogue and communication on the
issue of Rukban camp and coordinate action to help
more Syrians to return to their homes and end their
displacement as soon as possible.

Humanitarian operations in Syria should fully
respect Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, and strictly follow the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the principles governing
United Nations humanitarian relief and provisions of
international law. Communication and coordination
with the Syrian Government should be strengthened.
In areas where the security situation is relatively
stable, the international community should support
the Syrian Government in demining, rebuilding
infrastructure, restoring health care, education
and social services, launching industrial projects,
promoting development and improving people's
livelihoods so that an increasing number of Syrians can
emerge from the shadow of war and gradually return to
a stable and orderly life. China is concerned about the
negative impact of economic sanctions on the lives of
the Syrian people.

In order to meaningfully alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Syria, we must continue to advance the
political process. China supports the United Nations in
playing its role as the main channel for good offices
and supports Special Envoy Pedersen in pushing the
parties in Syria to seek solutions that accommodate
the concerns of all parties, in accordance with the
principle of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process
and resolution 2254 (2015). We hope that the parties in
Syria will narrow their differences and move forward
the political process through dialogue and negotiations.

