Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
The United States welcomes today's Security Council
consideration of the report of the Panel of Experts on
Sierra Leone Diamonds and Arms. We commend the
Panel's Chairman, Martin Chungong Ayafor, and the
other Panel members for their excellent work,
completed under difficult circumstances.

My delegation also wishes to commend and to
thank the Sierra Leone sanctions Committee Chairman,
Ambassador Chowdhury, and the members of the
Bangladesh Mission for their valuable and persistent
efforts to ensure today's Council consideration of the
Panel's report.

In addition, I would also like to welcome
Liberian Foreign Minister Captan to today's discussion.

The Panel had only four months in which to
complete its tasks, yet it succeeded in addressing
complex issues involving networks and operations that
make a point of either disguising or hiding their
activities. The Panel concluded that there is
unequivocal and overwhelming evidence that Liberia
has been actively supporting the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) at all levels. This confirms the
information that I and other Security Council members
received during the Council's mission to Sierra Leone
in October.

The Panel also focused on the crucial role of
conflict diamonds in the arms trade. Controlling the
flow of conflict diamonds and illicit arms is essential in
order to end the fighting and destabilization in Sierra
Leone and its neighbouring countries. We are intent on
ending the illicit arms-for-diamonds trade that has
caused so much devastation and human suffering in
Sierra Leone and throughout West Africa. We welcome
the upcoming visit of Economic Community of West
African States Ministers. We will work hard with
Council members, the United Nations and countries of
the region to bring the Panel's recommendations into
being and to deal firmly with illegal trade and with
sanctions violators.

I regret that the Security Council has been given a
report that is critical of one of our founding Members.
It is particularly troubling for the Government of the
United States that Liberia, which once championed the
cause of Namibian independence, is complicit in the
dismemberment of Sierra Leone and the destabilization
of Guinea. The Council has begun to consider a draft
resolution, proposed by my Government and the United
Kingdom, to impose new, multilateral sanctions against
the Government of Liberia. Let us be clear on one
point: the measures proposed in the draft resolution on
Liberia are intended to impact the Government of
Liberia. They are designed to bring an end to President
Taylor's ongoing support of the RUF and his continued
engagement in illicit arms-for-diamonds trafficking.
The goal of the proposed sanctions is to target the
support system of the presidency and Government
leadership, and each proposal was selected with that
goal in mind. Ambassador Eldon has outlined the
specific measures that are contained in the draft
resolution.

We do not seek these restrictive measures out of
animosity towards the Liberian people. Our deep
historical roots to Liberia are already well known in
this Council. The thousands of American development
workers, Peace Corps volunteers, missionaries and
other friends who have served the people of Liberia are
saddened to see what has become of the country that
once welcomed them. The tens of thousands of
American citizens of Liberian origin now residing in
the United States are justifiably concerned for their
country of origin, their families and their friends.

Regrettably, we are forced to support new
measures against the Government of Liberia because of
its illegal support for insurgents in Sierra Leone, its use
of one of the world's most repugnant insurgencies as a
proxy, its illegal exploitation of the natural wealth of
Sierra Leone and its promotion of instability in the
region.

We note the recent announcements of the
Government of Liberia that it is disengaging from
Sierra Leone and ending its support for the RUF. We
will examine this closely. But we are concerned that
these last-minute announcements in the face of
imminent Council action, after months of discussion,
are a calculated ruse designed to divide the Security
Council rather than to signal any genuine change of
policy. It is instructive that it took the possibility of
sanctions to move the Government of Liberia to even
declaratory action. The steps announced thus far are
unconvincing and not sufficient.

There is no argument within the Council, or
indeed within the international community, I believe,
on the facts. The Government of Liberia created and
now sustains the RUF. Our Security Council mission to
the region in October heard very clearly, and warned,
about Liberia's continuing role. Liberia and its proxies
are looting the natural resources of Sierra Leone and
fomenting continuing conflict. Its behaviour is a key
factor ofinstability in the region and must be changed.
We have heard proposals - read of proposals -
from Foreign Minister Captan on implementing the
Panel's recommendations, and we have heard demands
that we treat the Liberian Government as innocent until
proven guilty. I hope that the Foreign Minister will take
a message back to Monrovia that the Council is
unanimous in its belief that the Government of Liberia
bears major responsibility for the strife in Sierra Leone
and the destabilization of the region. The message I
hope the Minister will receive from this meeting is that
the question before this Council is not whether, but
how best, to deal with the role of his Government in
the region and to convince it to turn from supporting
and directing the RUF to becoming part of the solution.
The answer lies in specific actions and not in more
patience with empty promises.

The sanctions we have proposed mirror steps
recommended in the report of the Panel of Experts.
They are designed to undermine the Government of
Liberia's ability to conduct war against its neighbours.
They will not visit hardships on the people of Liberia.
Indeed, we note that several courageous Liberians have
risked their lives to call on us to adopt these sanctions.

The report of the Panel of Experts clearly
establishes the links between ongoing support for the
RUF and continuing violence and suffering in Sierra
Leone and the region. We, as a Council, must act to
break that link and to re-establish peace and security in
a region beset for too many years with conflict and
human hardship.

We look forward later on in this discussion to
hearing Minister Captan's remarks, and those of other
nations of the region. I have been frank about the
nature of the problem we must address. Let me
conclude that we are interested in results - in concrete
change, not declarations. My Government will
welcome the day when we are convinced that Liberia
has become part of the solution instead of a force for
further suffering and instability.

