Mr. Owada (Japan): The Government of Japan
expressed its position that the recent developments in the
Middle East, involving the decision by the Government of
Israel on the construction of housing in the Har Homa/Jabal
Abu Ghneim area of East Jerusalem, were regrettable. For
this reason, it is all the more regrettable that despite the
appeal of the international community, the Government of
Israel has proceeded with this construction. What Japan is
most concerned about is that this action could lead to the
undermining of the peace process which has been so
assiduously constructed over the years by the parties
directly involved.

On the basis of this conviction, the Government of
Japan conveyed its position on 19 March in a message
from Foreign Minister Ikeda to Israeli Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs David Levy, as
well as to the President of the Palestinian interim self-
government, Mr. Yasser Arafat.

As a result of this grave concern, members of the
Security Council, including my own country, were
engaged in serious and sincere efforts with a view to
arriving at a unanimous message from the Security
Council to be conveyed to the Israeli Government. It is
therefore a cause for great sadness that we have not
succeeded in our common efforts.

Under the circumstances, Japan is going to vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us, whose purpose is
to call upon the Israeli Government to cease the present
activity of constructing a settlement in East Jerusalem.

I wish to take this opportunity to express the deep
sorrow and indignation felt by the Government and the
people of Japan over the tragic event in Tel Aviv on 21
March, in which a terrorist bombing caused many
casualties, among them innocent children. It is precisely
this kind of activities - terrorist activities - that could
put the whole peace process in jeopardy by inviting a
vicious circle of violence. Japan unreservedly condemns
any form of terrorism.

We must not let such violent acts derail the efforts
for peace and stability. It is crucial that we try our best to
avoid a further deterioration of the situation, particularly
through the best efforts of the parties concerned to
exercise self-restraint. Japan urges the parties concerned
to work to redouble their efforts to put the negotiations
back on track.

