Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. In addition, I extend our compliments to
Ambassador Gunter Pleuger and his team for having
successfully conducted our work throughout a very
demanding programme during the month of April. I
also thank Mr. Danilo Tiirk for presenting us with a
highly informative update on the situation in
Bougainville.

Brazil welcomes the recent developments in the
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement
and fully supports the efforts of the United Nations to
help the parties move forward with the peace process.
Brazil commends the leading role of the United
Nations in facilitating the implementation of the
weapons disposal plan and notes with satisfaction the
destruction of approximately 83 per cent of the
weapons collected under stage III of the plan.

Since all components of the peace process are
closely linked in their implementation, we expect that
progress in the implementation of the weapons disposal
plan may increase confidence among the parties and
advance the process of bringing the constitutional
amendment and the Organic Law on Peace-Building in
Bougainville into full operation.

Only the maintenance of the rule of law and the
promotion of justice can bring about a true process of
national reconciliation. In that regard, we welcome the
steps taken to finalize arrangements to improve
policing and access to courts, and the increasing
availability of correctional services in Bougainville.
Moreover, the international community must continue
to give due priority to the need for reintegration of
former combatants into civilian life.

We urge the parties to consolidate the advances
obtained so far and to expedite their work on the third
and final draft of the constitution, with a View to
completing all stages of the constitutional process as
soon as possible. We also hope that they overcome
their differences and provide the conditions necessary
for the preparation of free general elections in the
island in the near future.

The fact that discussions related to post-conflict
issues in Bougainville are gradually replacing security
concerns should be seen as a sign of progress towards a
self-sustaining peace and a transition to autonomy in
Bougainville.

Brazil commends the Pacific Islands Forum for
its efforts to overcome the conflict and to help maintain
law and order in the region. As an important forum for
political consultation and cooperation, its role in the
conduct of the process should be acknowledged and
praised. We believe that the Security Council should
encourage regional cooperation and assistance, as
regional partners are often more likely to conceive and
promote solutions to common problems in line with
their particular environment.

It is our View that the United Nations Observer
Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB) should continue to
facilitate interaction and coordination among the people
of Bougainville - including former combatants - the
United Nations, the Government of Papua New Guinea
and other major international stakeholders.

Brazil understands that a United Nations presence
on the ground is essential to ensure stabilization.
Nevertheless, the success of the implementation of the
Peace Agreement relies, as always, on the will and
commitment of the parties themselves.

