Mr. Heusgen (Germany): In your national capacity, Mr. President, in the introduction to your long citation, you said that those who questioned the presence of Mr. Bustani here were bringing shame and disgrace to the Council. So let me ask you: who was it who brought shame and disgrace to the Council? Was it the 12 countries in the Council that did not vote with you and that tried to prevent a former official of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), who is not in a position to provide relevant information today, from speaking? Or was it Russia and China? You will recall that in 2018 (see S/PV.8209) your delegation blocked the Dutch presidency when it tried to bring in Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, the High Commissioner for Human Rights - an official who was actually in office - to brief the Council about the massive human rights violations in Syria, the mass murders, the disappearances, the rapes. You prevented that. Russia and China prevented Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein from briefing the Council. That brought shame and disgrace to the Council. Who brought shame and disgrace to the Council? Was it the 13 countries around the table that in July (see S/2020/661) were in favour of opening three crossing points in northern Syria to allow humanitarian aid into Syria, or was it China and Russia, which vetoed that draft resolution, thereby, according to UNICEF, endangering the lives of 500,000 children? So who is it who brings shame and disgrace to the Council? Is it the members here, those who adhere to the Chemical Weapons Convention, or is it Russia, which in 2018 in The Hague launched a cyberattack on the OPCW? Who brings shame or disgrace on the Council? Is it the members of the international community that try to prevent the use of chemical weapons and protect people or is it Russia, which uses chemical weapons even on its own citizens, such as Mr. Navalny, Mr. Litvinenko and Mr. Skripal and his daughter? When will we hear from you, Mr. President, in your national capacity as representative of the Russian Federation, a single word of mourning for the victims of the chemical attacks on the Syrian population, which have resulted in the deaths of more than 1,000 people?When will we hear your words of mourning for the victims of the Al-Assad regime, as described in the Koblenz trial by witnesses who attest to the thousands upon thousands of people killed in the prisons of Al-Assad and then buried in mass graves? When will we hear your words of mourning about this? When will you finally support accountability for these crimes committed by the Syrian regime so as to allow for reconciliation in that country, which we urgently need?
