Mr. Atoki (Democratic Republic of Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, as your term as
President of the Security Council draws to an end, may
I congratulate you on the very able, skilful and
competent way in which you have chaired the Council.
I would also like to thank you for having included
Central Africa, our subregion, as one of the main
concerns during your term, stressing thereby the strong
interest of the Security Council in a geographical area
that is potentially one of the richest in the world, but
which for over a decade has been devastated by
instability and breaches of international peace and
security. So I would thank you for organizing this open
meeting of the Council to consider the interim report of
the interdisciplinary assessment mission to the
subregion of Central Africa.

But first of all, I would like to extend my deepest
condolences to my colleague and brother from the
Central African Republic over the death President
David Dacko, who died unexpectedly last week at
Yaounde in Cameroon. The most recent image that we
have of President Dacko is the embrace of President
Dacko and the current Prime Minister Abel Goumba.
That was one of the high points of the Central African
National Conference, which symbolized, par
excellence, the strong desire for peace and
reconciliation of our peoples, both east and west, in the
subregion. We are very grateful to President Bozize for
having decreed a period of national mourning, and we
thank the Government of Cameroon for authorizing the
repatriation of the mortal remains of the late President.

I would like to pay tribute to the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Kalomoh, and all of his team,
whom I met personally, and I would thank them for
their excellent work and report. I would also thank him
for introducing the report this morning.

I would also like to associate myself fully with
the statement made by my colleague, the representative
of the Republic of the Congo on behalf of the eleven
members of the Economic Community of Central
African States. With his customary eloquence and
clarity, he faithfully stated the position of our
community. This makes my task much easier, and I
shall confine myself to a few points of great concern to
my own country, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

With regard to peace and security, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with the assistance of the
Council, the United Nations as a whole and the
international community, is firmly and irrevocably
committed to a peaceful and non-conflictual transition,
with the main objective now being the organization of
free, transparent and democratic elections.

With your assistance, it will be possible to realize
the reunification and pacification of our country, to
preserve our territorial integrity, and to restore State
authority throughout the national territory, which must
be supported by the rehabilitation of social and
economic infrastructures, resumption of free movement
for people and goods, and the reopening of the main
arteries of communication.

It is of the greatest importance to continue and
speed up the process of reforming a restructured,
integrated national army in stages, with a precise
timetable. The new army should deploy as soon as
possible, and my Government greatly appreciates the
bilateral and international assistance already provided.
The disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration program (DDRR), with assistance from
the international community, must also be speeded up.

Since 17 November, without international
support, the Congolese armed forces have proceeded
with voluntary demobilization and disarmament of over
a thousand ex-combatants, primarily of Rwandan
nationality. At the close of this operation currently
taking place at Kitona base, the ex-combatants will be
repatriated to their countries of origin. My Government
is calling upon the Governments of origin of those ex-
combatants to make arrangements as soon as possible
to facilitate the repatriation, reintegration and
reinsertion of the ex-combatants at home.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo will spare no effort to make sure that all foreign
troops leave the national territory. The Government
will constantly be reminding the international
community of its responsibilities on DDRR,
particularly in the context of the Multicountry
Demobilization and Re-insertion Programme for the
Great Lakes region being coordinated by the World
Bank.

Another concern is the circulation of weapons.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo hopes that the
Security Council will decide as soon as possible to
establish an embargo mechanism pursuant to the
relevant provisions of resolution 1493 (2003).

In addition, in his report, the Assistant Secretary-
General notes that several of his interlocutors believed
that the re-establishment of lasting stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was a sine qua non
condition of lasting stability throughout the subregion.
To that end, they had requested that they be allowed to
participate fully in the international conference on
peace, security, democracy and development in the
Great Lakes region and Central Africa.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo fully
agrees with that View. We consider the holding of the
forthcoming forum to be a historic opportunity to get
subregional integration started again. It is a factor for
the peace and socio-economic development of our
people.

Like the French delegation, we believe that being
fully open to our Western neighbours - and, indeed, to
all of our neighbours - is a precondition for success at
the conference. We also fully agree with the proposal
made by the delegation of the Russian Federation on
Thursday concerning participation by the national and
international private sectors in the preparation of
concrete development projects and in the consideration
of legal means to exploit the natural resources of our
subregion.

Turning now to poverty and humanitarian issues,
I would note that, as the Assistant Secretary-General so
rightly stressed, if trust is not restored among the
leaders of the subregion, then the economic integration
so essential to lasting growth will not be able to play
its crucial part in eliminating poverty. The United
Nations has a major role to play in restoring such
relations of trust, since the gaping wounds left by many
years of instability are far from healed.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
humanitarian situation in areas affected by armed
aggression is purely and simply shocking, devastating
and catastrophic. The lack of access to populations in
need and insecurity caused by the aggressors and their
associates, the outlaw warlords, remain major obstacles
to large-scale humanitarian assistance. The situation is
worsening in the eastern part of the country, especially
in Ituri and North and South Kivu. It is imperative that
bold measures be taken to ensure unhindered access to
those areas and to facilitate the distribution of
humanitarian assistance where needed.

What the Democratic Republic of the Congo truly
needs, however, as I said during the Consolidated Inter-
Agency Appeal launched by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, is a United
Nations humanitarian Marshall Plan to offset the
terrible impact of the devastating armed aggression that
disrupted the stability and socio-economic
development of the country and unleashed violence, the
destruction of infrastructure, disease - including HIV/
AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis - and malnutrition.
There have also been serious and indelible
repercussions for women, children, the elderly and
other vulnerable people.

At the economic level, the common vision of our
economic and social transition programme is based on
a market economy and the recognition of private
investment, social rights, national solidarity and
juridical and legal security for business. Our paramount
objective remains stabilization and economic recovery,
stressing in particular ongoing economic rehabilitation
and reconstruction and the fight against poverty, with
the support of the international financial institutions
and the donor community.

As for justice and human rights issues, what is
important now is to end impunity. The elimination of
impunity requires addressing the root causes of
belligerence in the subregion and providing justice for
the thousands of Rwandans of all different ethnic
groups who have suffered genocide and for the millions
of Congolese victims of armed aggression. The
elimination of impunity requires the establishment,
with the assistance of the Security Council, of an
international criminal court for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or an ad hoc tribunal on the
model of that for Sierra Leone. Either court must have
the competence necessary to adjudicate crimes of
genocide; crimes against humanity, including the use of
rape as a weapon of war; and mass Violations of human
rights, regardless of whether the perpetrators are
Congolese or foreigners. It must also cooperate closely
with institutions that support democracy, such as the
National Observatory for Human Rights, the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the Ethics and Anti-
Corruption Commission.

The elimination of impunity also requires
appealing to international agencies for compensation
for the victims of aggression, as recognized by the
international community - particularly this Council
and the African Union. It also requires pursuing and
completing the process of judiciary reform -
including military justice - in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is highly aware, as it emerges from a long war
with many international ramifications, of the
importance of regional and subregional cooperation.
We are convinced of the need to pool our resources so
as to contribute to economic integration and we intend
to pursue a policy of dialogue, openness, friendship,
cooperation and good-neighbourliness. Our most
valuable resource is our human resource - our
competent young people, who are perfectly capable of
assuming the reins of the nation. This asset is a good
outlet for the domestic and external markets and a
major factor for economic dynamism.

At the geographical level, everyone knows that
our country has agricultural, mineral and water
resources that are potentially very conducive to the
comprehensive development of the entire subregion.
This potential must be used better to ensure a better
future for our people. My country, in response to the
explicit request of our heads of State, has therefore told
the Secretary-General that we are very willing to host
in Kinshasa the United Nations office for Central
Africa, in the belief that the United Nations must now
take a forward-looking approach to the problems of
Central Africa and address them in a comprehensive
and integrated manner. This offer is, of course, subject
to any decision that the Secretary-General may take in
that respect and to prior discussion among the countries
of Central Africa.

