Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would like to begin by welcoming
the participation of His Excellency Mr. Salahuddin
Rabbani, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Afghanistan, in today's meeting, as well as his positive
contribution thereto. In addition, my delegation would
like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and his team, for the outstanding work
they are doing in the field to help Afghans find their
way, but also with the prospect of implementing the
recommendations of the UNAMA strategic review,
decided upon by the Security Council.

Like previous speakers, the Senegalese delegation
is also concerned that the security situation in the
country remains difficult, with the intensification of
armed clashes and suicide attacks, which, according to
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/783), have
increased by 5 per cent compared to the same period
last year, resulting in a large number of casualties,
mostly women and children.

At the same time, the political atmosphere seems
increasingly tense, in particular given the announcement
of the upcoming parliamentary and local district
council elections, to be held in July 2018. To make the
situation more complicated, terrorist organizations
such as Da'esh take advantage of that environment in
order to deepen their roots in the territory by engaging
in all kinds of criminal activities, including drug
trafficking. Nonetheless, we can welcome the long but
continued improvement in the cooperation relationship
with neighbouring countries and the ongoing support
for Afghanistan from the international community,
including the United Nations and its Security Council
through UNAMA.

Given the sheer human cost of the conflict in
Afghanistan, Senegal strongly condemns attacks
against civilians. Let me repeat that most of the victims
of those attacks are women and children. We would like
to pay tribute to all of the health workers, humanitarian
workers and coalition soldiers who continue working
in Afghanistan, sometimes at the cost of their lives. In
that regard, the protection of women deserves special
attention. That is why Senegal is launching an appeal to
donors to enhance their support for the Afghan national
plan of action for women and peace and security.

We reaffirm the urgent need to protect schools,
hospitals and places of worship, which have been the
main targets of suicide attacks, in accordance with
international humanitarian and human rights law. I
would like to welcome the launch of a national inquiry
on the protection of the rights of victims of armed
conflict and terrorism by the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, as well as to say that we
need to pay careful attention to their conclusions.

The difficult situation in Afghanistan raises the
key issues of security sector reform, strengthening
the operational capacities of the Afghan armed forces,
addressing the challenge of corruption, improving
military command and aligning military operations
with long-term political objectives. The work of
UNAMA is crucial in that regard, and the reform is all
the more important as the Afghan forces are facing a
reduction in the number of troops because of numerous
desertions and recruitment difficulties. In that context,
it is encouraging to note the decision taken at the most
recent meeting of NATO Defence Ministers to increase
the number of troops deployed in the Resolute Support
Mission as well as the choice made by United States
President Donald Trump to keep United States forces
in Afghanistan in the framework of the new American
strategy in the country.

As is the case in the majority of countries in
conflict, security and stability in Afghanistan will
depend upon its relations with its neighbouring
countries for a long time to come. Senegal is therefore
pleased by the continued improvement in cooperation
between Afghanistan and Pakistan, in particular
through implementing crisis-management mechanisms
for emergency communication, as well as finalizing
an agreement on carrying out operations along the
border. Also included in this positive dynamic is the
cooperation with Central Asian countries, including in
the areas of transport and communications, as well as
with the Islamic Republic of Iran for the conclusion of
a strategic cooperation agreement.

All those positive developments will allow UNAMA
to better focus on its mandate of supporting Afghan
stakeholders so as to build together a safe and stable
Afghanistan through dialogue and political efforts,
in particular during the period of upcoming elections
for 2018. The bold reforms undertaken by the Afghan
Government lead us to remain hopeful in that regard.

