Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): As you
stated, Mr. President, I have the honour of making a
statement on behalf of the Permanent Representative of
France, who is not in New York today and who is the
Acting Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), known
as the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). It is my
honour to brief the Security Council on the work of the
Committee since the last briefing of 12 November
2008.

In the past six months, the Committee has
pursued its activities according to its programmes of
work, which have been issued as official documents of
the Security Council. The Committee has continued to
analyse the Preliminary Implementation Assessments
of resolution 1373 (2001), documents that have been
presented to all United Nations Member States by
Ambassador Jurica and Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of the CTC, during information meetings.
Since last November, it has approved 21 of them,
which brings the current total to 191 files. It should
formally approve the last two in the coming months.

One of the major undertakings of the Committee
in this reporting period is the stocktaking exercise.
After receiving their preliminary assessments in 2007
and 2008, Member States were usually given 12
months to send their comments and provide updates.
The first deadlines have expired, and the Committee
has endorsed a proposal on how to conduct the
stocktaking of each Member State's implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). That process is to be carried
out in stages, involving the Committee and its
subcommittees. The Committee can thus enhance its
regular dialogue with the Member States and identify
the areas where implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) is still inadequate.

In practice, the Committee is called on to provide
follow-up to the recommendations drawn up for each
Member State by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate. On the basis of those
recommendations, among other activities, the
Committee requests additional information on the gaps
identified and invites permanent representatives to the
meetings of the relevant subcommittees, at which they
are reminded of their obligation to implement
resolution 1373 (2001). The relevant subcommittee
asks the Member States in question why they have not
responded to the Committee's communications and
encourages the permanent representatives of those
States to explore additional ways to help the Executive
Directorate to obtain further information and updates.
The Committee has already finalized 16 files in the
context of that activity.

The Committee has continued to organize visits
to Member States with their consent. That is a
fundamental element of its activities to effectively
monitor and promote implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). Besides such comprehensive visits, which
facilitate analysis of all aspects of implementing the
resolution, the revised organizational plan of the
Executive Directorate envisages a more flexible
approach by planning shorter visits focused on one or
two particular aspects of the counter-terrorism regime
in the Member State concerned. In addition, the plan
forms the basis for regional visits and for missions
given the task of examining best practices and of
resolving vulnerabilities.

Thanks to those innovations, the rate of visits has
significantly increased, which has enabled the
Committee to engage in a more in-depth examination
of the problems in a greater number of countries in all

regions. Over the past six months, the Committee has
successfully concluded on-site visits to the following
countries: Kenya, Uganda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Belgium, Denmark,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Burkina Faso, Mali,
Senegal, Panama, the Republic of Korea, Singapore
and Bangladesh.

The Committee was seized of the results of the
activities of the five cross-cutting technical working
groups established by the organizational plan of the
Executive Directorate, which covers the major areas of
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). The aim is to revise and harmonize the criteria
for technical judgements of the elements of resolution
1373 (2001) and to draw up a technical guide that will
facilitate the task of the Executive Directorate. The
Directorate has submitted the guide to the Committee,
which is currently considering it.

The Committee and the Executive Directorate
have done their utmost to strengthen dialogue with
Member States, donors and beneficiaries so as to
facilitate technical assistance. In that context, the
Committee continues to look for and match current and
potential donors and beneficiary countries in order to
strengthen their mutual dialogue and to further the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

The Committee has approved a report on the
implementation of the plan of action adopted at its fifth
special meeting, held two years ago in Nairobi, Kenya.
The Executive Directorate organized that review in
consultation with the 77 international, regional and
subregional organizations invited to participate in the
meeting. It has been noted that more than 100
conferences, workshops and training sessions had
taken place since November 2007 to promote the
implementation of the plan of action. The Committee
also posts on its website the technical assistance
requests in a table and the directory of its assistance
programmes.

In its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee has continued to remind them that they
must ensure that all measures taken to combat
terrorism comply with their obligations under
international law, in particular human rights law,
refugee law and humanitarian law. The expert on
human rights in the Executive Directorate regularly
submits information for inclusion in the preliminary
assessments, prepares the Directorate's country

visits - in two of which he himself has taken part -
and promotes a consistent approach to human rights
issues in the Directorate's activities.

Regarding resolution 1624 (2005), the Committee
has continued to include in its dialogue with Member
States their efforts to implement that resolution. In
total, 99 States have submitted reports to the
Committee on their implementation of the resolution.
The Committee continues to encourage the States that
have not yet presented a report to do so. Recently, it
endorsed a discussion paper, prepared by the Executive
Directorate, on ways to advance the dialogue.

The Committee also continues to encourage the
Member States to become party to and to implement
the 16 international counter-terrorism instruments. The
Committee plays its part in the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Under its guidance, the Executive Directorate has
continued to participate actively in all relevant
activities of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. It has participated in the work of the three
working groups of the Task Force, dealing respectively
with addressing the financing of terrorism, protecting
human rights while countering terrorism, and
integrating assistance for countering terrorism. The
Committee welcomes the intention of the Secretariat to
co-Iocate the Task Force secretariat with CTED, which
will be conducive to their closer collaboration within
the framework of their respective mandates.

The Committee, mostly through its experts and in
line with resolution 1805 (2008), cooperates and
coordinates its activities with two other subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council that deal with counter-
terrorism, namely, the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004). More
information on this cooperation has been presented
earlier today in the common message of the three
Committees.

Moreover, as part of its cooperation and exchange
of information with counter-terrorism partners during
its meetings in New York, the Committee heard several
briefings by representatives of relevant organizations
and United Nations bodies.

The Committee will need to accomplish a number
of major tasks in the next six months. First, resolution
1805 (2008) requests an interim review of CTED by
30 June 2009. I am pleased to be in a position to report
that the Committee has started informal consultations

on this issue and will submit a report to the Council
before the stipulated deadline. Moreover, in the coming
period, the Committee will focus on concluding the
major part of the stocktaking exercise. The Committee
also expects to receive a new revision of the Global
Implementation Survey of resolution 1373 (2001) by
Member States and to further strengthen contacts
within relevant countries in order to facilitate the
delivery of technical assistance.

As terrorism remains one of the major threats to
international peace and security, the Committee
represents a crucial instrument of the international
community to address that global scourge. The
Committee benefits from the constructive engagement
of its members, which assists it considerably in its
work. Furthermore, support from and cooperation with
Member States remains invaluable, especially in
carrying out the stocktaking exercise. I should
therefore like to thank all Member States for their
important contributions, which enable the Committee
to fulfil its mandate.

Finally, I would also like to extend the
Committee's gratitude to Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of CTED, and his team for their valuable
assistance. I also appreciate the continuous support
provided by the Secretariat.

Let me conclude with a few words in my national
capacity, while aligning myself fully with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union. France is
very committed to the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), the crucial importance of
which is underscored by the very alarming events that
have just taken place in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. The obligations imposed by this
resolution make good sense. Compliance has
significant benefits to public health, through control of
biological facilities, taxes through border control and,
of course, security. France, which has just taken the
chair of the 1540 working group on assistance, will
spare no effort to ensure that States receive all
necessary assistance for the full implementation of the
resolution.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee,
as our Austrian colleague said earlier, has started the
important work of reviewing the entire consolidated
list of individuals, groups and entities subject to
sanctions, as requested by the Security Council in
resolution 1822 (2008). France considers the general
review and the yearly reviews that will take place
subsequently to be among the most important
safeguards for individual freedoms surrounding the
sanctions regime. My country participates actively in
this work and invites all other Member States
concerned to play their full role in this crucial exercise.

