Ms. Muganda: My name is Wevyn Muganda. I am a
25-year-old activist working at HAKI Africa, a national
human rights organization based in Mombasa, Kenya.
It is an honour to brief the Security Council today, and
I commend the presidency and other Member States
for prioritizing youth, peace and security and inviting
young briefers to this meeting.
Young people are agents of change. The revolutions
of today are led by young men and women like me, who
have put themselves at the front lines to ensure that
we live in a more peaceful, just and inclusive society.
We acknowledge the urgent need to take charge of
our future. That is why resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2419 (2018) on youth, peace and security, if fully
implemented, have the power to transform the lives of
young people and societies.

HAKI Africa has engaged thousands of young
people on human rights and peacebuilding efforts. That
has been achieved through human rights education;
youth-led social activities with justice actors and
youth reintegration in communities; and support to
the formulation and implementation of legislative
and policy frameworks, such as the Mombasa County
Action Plan for Preventing and Countering Violent
Extremism, in partnership with communities, including
young people, the national Government and the county
Government of Mombasa.

There can be no peace without justice, which is
why in the quest for transitional justice, we partnered
with the Office of the Director of Public Prosecution,
in Kenya, to conduct public enquiries into the cases of
the extrajudicial killings of 136 people on the coast of
Kenya, which took place from 2012 to date, with most
victims being young people.

The seminal progress study on youth, peace and
security, The Missing Peace: Independent Progress
Study on Youth, Peace and Security, presented in
this Chamber last year (see S/PV.8241), rightly
identifies injustices and the lack of human rights as
key contributors to the violence of exclusion. So often,
young people are seen as just victims or perpetrators,
rather than as citizens and key partners for peace.

Our biggest challenge lies not just in rehabilitating
young people, but also in partnering with the majority
of young people, who, as we all know, are not interested
in violence. That should be done by fostering a
conducive environment that allows for their meaningful
participation in decision-making. It also means
supporting young people to become the difference and
to make a difference as peacebuilders themselves and

through their organizations, movements and networks.

I spend my Sunday afternoons with young people
in our chill spots. In Mombasa, we call them maskanis,
in reference to the informal spaces where young people
gather during their free time. Research has shown that
the police have been accused of going to those spaces
to harass, illegally arrest and, in some instances, solicit
bribes from young people. Those are also spaces that
extremist groups can use to recruit some young people.
But, more importantly, it is also in those spaces that
HAKI Africa has identified the most powerful young
influencers and activists. We have invited many young
women and men to participate in trainings on human
rights, peacebuilding and leadership, and they have
become peacebuilders who are leading local initiatives,
for example, on community policing. To reach the most
vulnerable and marginalized, we must go to the places
where young people are, spend time there and move
away from town halls and formal workshops.

I love the Internet. The Internet is where I socialize,
learn and get entertained. It is also where Ipublish youth-
friendly articles on human rights, social cohesion and
active citizenship. That includes presenting alternative
narratives to violent extremism through my blog
Beyond the Lines and accessible pieces on national and
local instruments, such as Kenya's strategy to counter
violent extremism. To date, the blog has reached over
110,000 young people and has helped build an online
community of peacebuilders and active citizens.

KauliZetu Mtaani is a Swahili phrase that means
"our opinions in the hood". It is also a personal initiative
that I started this year to amplify the excluded voices of
young people by filming the debates and conversations
in maskanis on social issues and sharing them online.
I believe that every voice should be heard. Every
voice counts.

My experience is one of many young human
rights defenders and peacebuilders working locally.
As part of the '16x16' initiative of the United Nations
Development Programme Youth Global Programme, I
have joined a group of impressive young activists from
around the world who lead organizations, movements
and networks that contribute to advancing Sustainable
Development Goal 16 on peaceful, just and inclusive
societies. We have received incredible support and
have had opportunities to engage meaningfully with a
range of partners, locally and internationally. We need
more initiatives like that, which can truly strengthen
youth agency.

While progress has been made to implement the
youth, peace and security agenda, we still have to
create an enabling environment for peacebuilding and
ensure that young people can truly be in the driver seat
of peace and security. I urge Member States to fully
implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). In
my view, the three key steps that should be taken are
the following.

First, the participation of young people in
decision-making processes at all levels should be
enhanced, including by listening to the voices of
local actors.

Secondly, the human rights of all individuals
should be protected, with a particular focus on youth,
especially young women and sexual minorities, human
rights defenders and peacebuilders.

Last but not least, greater accountability and
regular reporting in the Security Council on how well
it is doing with and on youth should be ensured.

Resolution 2250 (2015) has secured me and my
young peers a seat in the car. We are deeply excited
about the journey, and that is why we need to be in the
driver's seat to reach our destination. We want to take
charge, and we want to drive forward. Will the Security
Council lead with us?

