Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Like previous speakers, I
wish to thank Mr. Bildt for his briefing on the situation in
the Balkans. We have appreciated his frank assessment of
what needs to be done by the international community and
by the countries concerned if the self-sustaining stability to
which Mr. Bildt referred is to be achieved. We appreciate
the fact that his position as Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General on the Balkans has provided him with a very
useful vantage point from which to see the problems of
each country as part of a larger mosaic and points to the
need to have a comprehensive settlement which must
encompass the region as a whole.

As Mr. Bildt pointed out, the Balkan region
preoccupied the international community for most of the
decade of the 1990s and, while there is reason for
optimism in some cases, we recognize that there is still
much to be done. The recent outbreaks of violence in
Kosovo indicate that there is still a long way to go and
we are concerned that incidents such as those in
Mitrovica will further set back the fragile peace process.

We agree that there is still a critical role for the
United Nations in peace-building in the Balkans. We see
that the entrenchment of peace and security is an essential
prerequisite for the development of the region, including
the full integration of refugees and internally displaced
persons into the societies.

Peaceful coexistence and the building of a multi-
ethnic society are critical to the long-term development of
the Balkans, and we must emphasize that there cannot be
discrimination on the basis of religion, nationality or
ethnicity, because as long as these persist there will be no
real progress. We therefore strongly condemn any ethnic
or other violence based on any discrimination, and in this
regard we emphasize the importance that we attach to the
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia.

My delegation believes that there are several areas
in which the United Nations must continue to work if it
is to assist in peace-building, reconstruction and
development efforts. These include administrative reform;
the maintenance of law and order, including the
establishment of effective and efficient judicial and law-
enforcement systems; the safe return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their places of origin; the
combating of corruption; and the overall strengthening of
civil society.

The strengthening of local institutions and the
building of capacity are also integral components of
peace-building efforts. These efforts cannot by themselves
bring about the desired results, and we see the ultimate
success of the United Nations peace-building efforts in
the Balkans and the region as a whole depending on a
number of factors, including the strong political will of
the leaders, regional cooperation and the commitment of
the international community to assist the process.

 

The regional framework for cooperation, as
exemplified in the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe,
demonstrates the need for coordination between various
initiatives in the region, and we hope that these will provide
an incentive for the rebuilding of the Balkans and facilitate
the region's integration into the wider community.

We agree with Mr. Bildt that there will have to be
dialogue on which a consensus can be based. As he said,
any lasting agreement must meet the minimum demands of
all and the maximum demands of none. I therefore wish to
congratulate Mr. Bildt for his efforts to promote peace and
security in the region and wish him continued success.

