Mr. Pascoe: On 18 October, Israel and Hamas
implemented the first stage of a prisoner exchange
agreement. Israeli Sergeant Gilad Shalit, held in Gaza
without international access since 25 June 2006, was
released by Hamas. Four hundred and seventy-seven
Palestinian prisoners - many of whom had been
imprisoned for involvement in attacks on Israelis -
were released, mostly to Gaza, but also to the West
Bank, East Jerusalem, the occupied Syrian Golan and
Israel proper. Forty-two prisoners were released to
Turkey, Qatar, Syria and Jordan. In all, 205 prisoners
were transferred, in accordance with the exchange
agreement, to locations other than their residence
before detention.

In their public remarks following the exchange,
Hamas officials unfortunately and unacceptably lauded
violent resistance, and some of the released prisoners
made deplorable statements glorifying acts of violence.
Prime Minister Netanyahu announced that Israel would
continue to fight terrorism.

Approximately 5,000 Palestinians remain in
Israeli prisons. A further 550 of these are to be released
within two months in the second phase of the exchange
agreement. Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails
suspended a hunger strike the day before the prisoner
exchange, following the reported agreement of the
Israeli authorities to end solitary confinement. We
continue to follow closely the security, political and
human rights dimensions of the prisoner issue.

The Secretary-General, who had long called for
an end of the unacceptable captivity of Gilad Shalit and
for the release of Palestinian prisoners, welcomed the
releases as a significant humanitarian breakthrough.
The Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process actively supported
channels of dialogue throughout that period. We
reiterate the Secretary-General's thanks to Egypt for its
contribution to this outcome, and to Germany for its
efforts.
11-56034

We have seen political will brought to bear to
resolve a humanitarian issue, as well as a readiness in
that context to take difficult decisions. We call for the
same determination to be displayed with regard to the
most important issue, namely, the quest for a lasting
peace. The parties must rise to that challenge.

The Quartet statement of 23 September provides
a framework for the parties to find a way forward. We
welcome the separate meetings, expected to be held on
26 October, among negotiators from each side and
Quartet envoys and the Quartet representative to agree
on a method for proceeding in the negotiation. Special
Coordinator Serry will participate in those meetings,
and is in close dialogue with the parties in preparation
for them. We remind the parties that the Quartet
reaffirmed the international legal basis for peace talks
and called for the parties to overcome the obstacles and
resume negotiations without preconditions. The
Quartet further called for proposals within three
months on borders and security, with a view to
achieving substantial progress within six months and
an agreement no later than the end of 2012. The
Quartet stressed the need for the parties to refrain from
provocations and reiterated their Road Map
obligations.

In that regard, we have registered our deep
concern at Israel's settlement actions. The Israeli
announcement of 1,100 East Jerusalem settlement units
on the day that the Council last met was followed by
the announcement, on 10 October, of 11 new housing
units in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Pisgat
Zeev. On 11 October, the Israeli authorities
significantly advanced plans for the construction of
approximately 2,600 housing units in the East
Jerusalem settlement of Givat Hamatos, which would
amount to a new settlement in an area of vital
importance for the viability of a two-State outcome.

The Israeli authorities are also not acting
effectively against the construction of illegal outposts
on private Palestinian land. On 14 October, the
Secretary-General made clear that those developments
were unacceptable and ran counter to the Quartet's call
and Israel's commitments under the Road Map. I would
remind the Council that settlement activity is illegal
under international law and should cease. Unilateral
actions on the ground will not be recognized by the
international community.
11-56034

At the same time, restrictions continue on land
allocation and planning for Palestinian construction in
Area C and East Jerusalem. Demolitions by the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) in Area C during the reporting
period displaced 145 people, including 81 children. We
remain concerned at plans to relocate approximately
2,300 Bedouins in the vicinity of the so-called "E-l
corridor", connecting East Jerusalem to West Bank
settlements.

The Palestinian application for United Nations
membership is being examined by the Security
Council, and is a matter for Member States. Also, the
Palestinian request for membership in UNESCO is
being reviewed before a vote by the General
Conference. That step could have repercussions for the
organization, as it has legal and political implications
for the funding provided by some Member States. The
Secretary-General is increasingly concerned about
ramifications of such a step for the United Nations as a
whole, and asks all involved to act wisely in
determining a course of action. Regardless of those
developments, a negotiated two-State solution, to
which both leaders are committed, must remain the
highest priority.

In the West Bank, both the application for
statehood and the prisoner release evoked significant
public demonstrations, but few acts of violence.
Demonstrations against the barrier, which deviates
from the Green Line, in contravention of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, also
largely remained peaceful. Coordination between the
parties remains essential to maintain a secure
environment.

However, tensions and violent incidents continue.
Settler attacks on Palestinians resulted in one death and
19 injuries, including to five Palestinian children.
Violent settlers especially targeted Palestinians
harvesting their olive groves, and damaged 664 trees.
Settlers also attacked an IDF patrol vehicle on
5 October, resulting in light injuries to an Israeli
soldier. I urge the Israeli authorities to take decisive
actions against acts of violence perpetrated by Israeli
citizens. I also note that, on 3 October in Israel, a
mosque was set on fire in the Upper Galilee village of
Tuba Zangaria. That triggered unrest, vandalism and
the arrest of local residents, as well as the subsequent
desecration of Muslim, Christian and Jewish holy sites
and property in several towns in Israel.

Palestinian attacks on Israelis in the occupied
West Bank resulted in two injuries, including the
stabbing of an Israeli child on 22 October, as well as
extensive material damage, mostly from stones and
Molotov cocktails thrown at Israeli vehicles. On
6 October, hundreds of Israeli pilgrims accompanied by
the IDF in the Palestinian city of Nablus discovered
swastikas painted on the exterior walls of Joseph's
Tomb. On the same day, Israeli authorities arrested five
Palestinians in connection with the stoning of a vehicle
travelling in the West Bank on 23 September, which
caused the death of the Israeli driver and his infant son.

Turning to Gaza, in spite of the fragile relative
calm, six indiscriminate rockets and 13 mortar shells
were fired by Palestinian militants into Israel during
this reporting period, while two IDF incursions and
five air strikes resulted in injuries to three Palestinian
militants and two Palestinian civilians. We call for an
end to militant rocket fire into Israel, maximum Israeli
restraint and respect by all parties for international
humanitarian law.

I echo the Secretary-General's expressed hope
that the prisoner exchange will be followed by more
far-reaching steps to end the closure of Gaza. Those
steps should be taken within the framework of the full
implementation of resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009), and in close coordination with the Palestinian
Authority.

In spite of the recent economic growth and the
drop in unemployment in Gaza, the sustainability of
that progress is unclear. Significant parts of the
population remain food insecure and rely on
humanitarian assistance. While agencies are
implementing approved projects, ongoing restrictions
limit the ability of the United Nations to support
Gaza's economic recovery and reconstruction. There is
a worrisome humanitarian and development vacuum
that is being filled by other actors, fuelled by an illicit
tunnel trade largely controlled by the de facto
authorities.

That situation presents genuine concerns with
regard to prospects for the emergence of a viable
Palestinian State in the West Bank and Gaza, and
deepens the Palestinian divide. We reiterate our call on
Israel for more far-reaching steps to ease its land
closures and facilitate the entry of construction
materials into Gaza, exports and the free movement of
people in both directions, with due consideration for

Israel's legitimate security concerns. We also reiterate
our call for weapons smuggling to be brought under
control.

Notwithstanding inter-factional contacts, there
has been no concrete progress towards the further
implementation of the May reconciliation agreement.
We reiterate our support for Palestinian reconciliation
within the framework of Quartet principles, Palestinian
Liberation Organization commitments and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

Turning to Lebanon, I am pleased to report that
the situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has
remained generally quiet and stable. UNIFIL recorded
no major incidents or violations, except for continuing
Israeli overflights of Lebanese airspace on an almost
daily basis. I will not go into detail, as the Security
Council will hear more in-depth briefings on Lebanon
in the coming weeks.

Lebanon of course continues to be affected by
developments in neighbouring Syria. In several
instances during the month of October, the Syrian army
opened fire across the border, carried out incursions
into Lebanon and raided houses to capture fleeing
nationals and army deserters. On 6 October, Syrian
troops killed a Syrian national on Lebanese soil. The
United Nations continues to coordinate closely with the
Government of Lebanon on the provision of assistance
to the displaced Syrian nationals who crossed into
Lebanon fleeing violence, as well as on matters of
protection and the determination of their status.

Those developments reflect the continuing
political and human rights crisis in Syria, which has led
to the deaths of more than 3,000 people since March.
Unfortunately, signs are that the face-off between the
regime and the opposition will continue, with all of the
negative consequences for Syria and the region. This is
of great concern to the United Nations. The Secretary-
General continues to call on the Syrian leadership to
take urgent action to stop the killing. He also continues
to emphasize the need for the international community
to act in a coherent manner to prevent further
bloodshed. In that regard, we note that the League of
Arab States met on 16 October to discuss the situation
in Syria. The Arab League called for dialogue and
established a follow-up committee. Its ministerial
delegation will travel to Damascus on 26 October.

Turning back to the Israeli-Palestinian peace, let
me conclude by emphasizing our deep concern at the
impasse between the parties and its potential
implications for the future. Leadership is urgently
needed and the moderate Palestinian leadership must
be supported. The parties must refrain from
provocation and should stand ready to offer serious
proposals on borders and security for negotiation. We
urge them to approach their meetings with the Quartet
envoys later this week in that spirit. Otherwise, the
impasse will only deepen, and with it, the level of
confrontation and the scale of mistrust. The
international community must stand ready to play an
active role in helping to steer the situation towards an
agreement that resolves all final status issues, ends the
occupation that began in 1967, ends the conflict and
creates an independent and viable Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel within secure and
recognized borders.

