Ms. Keita: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Darfur and the operations of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). Ihave just returned from a visit to the Sudan
and Darfur with my colleagues Assistant Secretary-
Generals Oscar Fernandez-Taranco and Mourad
Wahba, of the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Regional Bureau for Arab States of the United Nations
Development Programme, respectively. The objectives
of our visit were, first, to inject momentum in the
transition process; secondly, to convey joint messages
on the Withdrawal of UNAMID and the transition to the
Government of the Sudan, United Nations interlocutors
and key partners; and, thirdly, to explore challenges
and modalities related to the transition and how those
could be addressed early and effectively.

Before I share my observations and findings from
the visit, I would like to touch upon several updates
since the publication of the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, dated 14 January 2019 (S/ZOl9/44).
The most significant development was the declaration
of a state of emergency by President Al-Bashir on
22 February, which applies to the whole country and
is foreseen to be in place for one year. In that context,
the federal and the state Governments were dissolved,
while maintaining the national and state assemblies and
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Justice and Defence.
The Minister of Defence was appointed to also assume
the functions of the First Vice-President. In addition,
18 new governors from the military and security
apparatus were appointed to replace the dismissed
governors, known as walis. The Sudanese Armed
Forces have been given the task of delivering law and
order, in addition to national defence.

Those developments came at a time when the
Darfur peace process had come to a standstill once
again, in the context of the ongoing demonstrations
against the economic and political conditions in the
Sudan. It should be noted, however, that all along
sporadic protests in Darfur have taken place in Nyala,
South Darfur, on 13 January, and in E1 Geneina, West
Darfur, and Ed Daein, East Darfur, on 17 January. Yet,
citing solidarity with the protest movements, the Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM)/Gibril Ibrahim faction
and the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)/Minni Minnawi
faction reversed their December 2018 agreement to
resume talks with the Government of the Sudan in
January 2019.

Meanwhile, President Al-Bashir declared an open-
ended cessation ofhostilities in Darfur and the two areas
on 28 January. Subsequently, on 9 February, the SLA/
Minni Minnawi, JEM/Gibril Ibrahim and two other
groups - the Sudan Liberation Movement/ Transitional
Council and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-
North, led by Malik Agar - extended a unilateral
cessation ofhostilities in Darfur and Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile states for an additional three months. The
impact of the recent developments in Khartoum on the
dynamics related to the peace process in Darfur has
yet to be assessed, but the replacement of all walis will
have a bearing on the process, and some rebel groups
have demonstrated a stiffening of their position.

In Jebel Marra, intermittent clashes between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid faction continue. On 17, 28, and
29 January, SLA/Abdul Wahid elements attacked
Sudanese Armed Forces personnel in the Manabu
farming area, 15 kilometres south-east of G010, and
in total, three Sudanese Armed Forces personnel were
killed. On 2 February, UNAMID heard sporadic gunfire
in the area and sent out a patrol, but was prevented
from proceeding further by the Sudanese Armed
Forces, which cited the lack of security clearance.
The Sudanese Armed Forces and the SLA/Abdul
Wahid faction continued to exchange fire in Manabu
on 9, 11, 17, and 19 February, resulting in the death of
seven SLA/Abdul Wahid members and one Sudanese
Armed Forces member in total.

In addition, infighting between two sub-factions
of the SLA/Abdul Wahid was reported in Daya village,
12 kilometres north-east of Golo, on 17 January and
7 and 13 February, with four casualties. Reportedly,
those factions disagree over their prospects as
participants in the peace process, while some of their
clashes also seem to indicate competition over scarce
resources. Although those clashes have not resulted
in new displacement, civilians in the area have been
exposed to numerous incidents of robbery, abduction
and violence, attributed to both personnel in military
attire and SLA/Abdul Wahid elements. UNAMID also
received reports of repeated sexual violence by the
Rapid Support Forces in the Guldo area on 6 February.

As mentioned in the progress report before Council
members, the intensification of the conflict in areas of
Jebel Marra last year saw an increase in reported sexual
violence incidents. Conflict-related sexual violence
remains a threat to the population in Darfur, especially
displaced women and girls, who face particular risk
when they engage in livelihood activities outside
internally displaced persons camps. And the fear of
sexual violence also hampers the return of civilians to
their places of origin.

I would like to emphasize in that regard that,
during our visit to Darfur, and more specifically
to the Sortony team site, we had an opportunity to
have an exchange with internally displaced persons,
all of whom expressed their deep concern over the
departure of UNAMID in the absence of trusted and
professional law enforcement agencies. I would like
to call on the Government of the Sudan to continue
its efforts aimed at creating conditions propitious
for the return of internally displaced persons, and,
among the confidence-building measures that could
be envisaged, to pursue a constructive dialogue with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and swiftly adopt a
framework of cooperation as a basis for addressing
sexual violence, includingjustice and accountability, in
line with resolution 2429 (2018) and consistent with the
benchmarks presented in the report of the Secretary-
General of 12 October 2018 (S/2018/912).

There were three incidents of movement restrictions
around the G010 area by the Sudanese Armed Forces,
who claimed a lack of knowledge regarding UNAMID's
patrols. Another denial of access took place near
Menawashei, South Darfur, by Sudanese military
intelligence, which cited the lack of security clearance.
As a result, the mission could not verify allegations
made by the SLA/Abdul Wahid that Sudanese Armed
Forces artillery fire had resulted in the burning of
villages, thereby causing fatalities, on 24 January.
The Sudanese Armed Forces denied UNAMID access
south-east of Kutum, in North Darfur, claiming that the
area close to the Libyan border was rife with rebels and
that the safety of peacekeepers could not be guaranteed.

The frequency of inter-communal tensions and
other security incidents remains relatively low, except
for a few hotspots, in particular in the Jebel Marra
area. A group of armed men in military attire fired
indiscriminately on 13 January at a group of farmers in
Am Siro, in North Darfur 34 kilometres north-west of
Kutum, killing one. The death of an Awlad Zaid man in
West Darfur triggered clashes between Misseriya and
Awlad Zaid in a village approximately 80 kilometers
north-east of El Geneina on 16 and 21 January. Seven
Misseriya and one Awlad Zaid were killed, and 560
houses were burnt in seven villages.

In line with resolution 2429 (2018), we completed
the closure of 10 team sites by December 2018, which
were handed over to the Government of the Sudan.
The former sector headquarters in Nyala, Ed Daein
and El Geneina are due to be closed by June, leaving
the remaining 13 team sites in the greater Jebel Marra
and the logistics hub in El Fasher. The new mission
headquarters in Zalingei is now fully operational,
while the office of the Joint Special Representative was
relocated to Khartoum.

Meanwhile, UNAMID and the United Nations
country team, with the support of their respective
headquarters, continue to work together to ensure a
smooth transition from peacekeeping in Darfur and
lay the ground for sustainable peacebuilding. The
entire United Nations system is committed to ensuring
that we operate as one, in close coordination with the
Sudanese Government. In that regard, on 7 February,
the Secretary-General issued a planning directive on
the transition and, as I mentioned, during our visit
with Assistant Secretaries-General Taranco and Wahba
we participated in a retreat organized jointly with
Government representatives, UNAMID and the United
Nations country team to further enhance coordination
during the transition process.

Allow me to stress that, as noted during my visit,
the United Nations system has made considerable
political, humanitarian, and peacekeeping investments
since the escalation of the conflict in Darfur 15 years
ago. It is our collective responsibility to ensure that
UNAMID's exit does not create a vacuum that leads to
persistent local-level tensions or new risk factors. The
engagement of the Government of the Sudan will be
ever-more critical in that context. At the same time, our
visit also served to bring to the fore the challenging
factors that the Government, UNAMID and United
Nations country team are facing to maintain the pace
of the transition, including in terms of the availability
of resources.

Indeed, despite all efforts by the Mission and
the United Nations country team to conclude in less
than two months the memorandums of understanding
pertaining to the state liaison functions and the
allocation of programmatic resources to the country
team for the implementation of key mandated tasks
in the areas of human rights, the rule of law and
durable solutions for internally displaced persons,
their effective implementation on the ground could end
up been complicated by the shortages of liquidities.
In addition, efforts should be made in earnest by the
international community to mobilize the resources that
are needed to support the UNAMID exit strategy and
its immediate effect on the ability of the Government
of the Sudan and the United Nations country team
to address the challenges of the transition in Darfur,
while focusing on a difficult economic and social and
humanitarian context in the broader Sudan.

Moving forward, the recent developments and the
ongoing evolution of the conflict dynamics mentioned
earlier - namely, the lack of tangible progress in
the peace process and the localized conflict in Jebel
Marra - compels us to think through what can and
should be done during the UNAMID drawdown
and beyond. The way forward on the Darfur peace
process needs to be discussed jointly between the
United Nations and the African Union, including its
objectives, expected outcomes and interlocutors and
their constituencies, particularly in the context of
evolving national and regional dynamics. The Jebel
Marra area is still a conflict zone, without a cessation
of hostilities. Overall, there are still close to 2 million
internally displaced persons in Darfur. Local rule-of-
law capacity needs to be strengthened for the prevention
and resolution of inter-communal tensions, particularly
where clashes persist over access to land, migration
routes and other sources of livelihood. Human rights
issues, including as it pertains to the protection of
women, children and vulnerable youth from violence,
remain significant.

Between now and June, we will have an opportunity
to assess and recalibrate what UNAMID has achieved
and will leave behind. In that context, I would like to
acknowledge Security Council presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/l9, of 11 December 2018, which clarified
that some of the proposed benchmarks and indicators
contained inthe Secretary-General's report of12 October
2018 are of more immediate priority and that some
reflect longer-term peacebuilding objectives in Darfur.
The strategic review, ahead of the presentation of the
recommendations by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for the
UNAMID mandate renewal, will offer an opportunity
to better unpack those indicators. In the meantime, I
can assure the Security Council that UNAMID will
spare no effort to give priority to progress against the
benchmarks and indicators focused on the protection
of civilians, particularly relating to internally displaced
persons and returning refugees, human rights, the rule
of law, the humanitarian situation and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as requested by the
Council. I look forward to discussing initial parameters
of the review with members of the Council.

