Mr. Cheng Lie (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening ofthis meeting by the Egyptian
presidency and appreciates the Egyptian delegation's
successful leadership of the Security Council, marked
by its positive achievements, for the month of August.

With regard to the Council's work this month, I
would like to focus on the following three issues.

First, concerning peace and security, the Council
convened an open debate on peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (see S/PV.8033).
Member States exchanged views in a comprehensive
manner on United Nations-led efforts related to
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. China calls for firmly upholding the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, developing a new type of international relations
featuring win-win cooperation at its core, fostering a
new, shared, comprehensive and cooperative security
vision, and maximizing the role of the United Nations as
the core mechanism for maintaining collective security.

In recent years, the African Union (AU) has
vigorously promoted solidarity and unity among African
countries in the search of peace and development with
substantive progress. China hopes that the United
Nations and AU will fully implement the Joint United
Nations-AU Framework for Enhancing Partnership on
Peace and Security to enhance cooperation in areas,
such as conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict reconstruction.

Secondly concerning hotspots in Africa, the
Security Council considered such issues as Somalia
(see S/PV.8035), the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(see S/PV.8026) and the Sahel region (see S/PV.8024),
listened to the relevant briefings and adopted resolution
2372 (2017) on the extension of the mandate of African
Union Mission in Somalia. Such efforts help better
inform the international community of developments
on the ground so that the United Nations and the world
community, in general, can lend further assistance
to the relevant countries. China wishes to express
its appreciation.

The international community should stay the course
of political settlements of hotspot issues, encourage all
relevant parties to find peaceful settlements to disputes
through dialogue and negotiations, improve the security
situation, and ensure cooperation among various parties
within the United Nations system and between the
United Nations and regional organizations to generate
synergies. China always pursues an Africa policy
featuring sincerity, practicality, affinities, good faith,
justice and shared interests, and stands ready to work
with the international community to foster a peaceful,
secure and stable international environment - the
main contributions to peace, stability and development
in Africa.

With regard to counter-terrorism, this month the
Council convened an open meeting (see S/PV.8017)
on preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons
and unanimously adopted resolution 2370 (2017).
China hopes that this resolution will encourage the
international community to enhance cooperation, adopt
an integrated approach and collectively cut off the
channels through which terrorist organizations acquire
weapons, thereby maintaining international and
regional peace and security. Terrorism is the common
enemy of mankind.

The international community needs to stick to
a single standard, maximize the leading role of the
United Nations and the Security Council and abide
by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Member States need to play a role
and assume their primary responsibilities in the area
of preventing terrorist organizations from acquiring
weapons, strengthen effective coordination and
conduct international and regional counter-terrorism
cooperation to form collaborative synergy to prevent
terrorist organizations from acquiring weapons.

In conclusion I wish to express my best wishes
in advance for a successful presidency for the month
of September.

