Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
on organizing this debate. For a sister country such as
Colombia, it is a source of satisfaction to see Chile
presiding over the United Nations organ charged with
the difficult task of maintaining international peace and
security.

I should like to begin my statement with some
reflections on the subject we are considering. One of
the worst tragedies that much of humanity seems
condemned to experience proceeds from the use and
abuse of small arms and light weapons and from the
trade and trafficking in them. Moreover, all so-called
low-intensity conflicts are fed, maintained, expanded,
deepened and degraded because of our incapacity to
effectively fight the illicit trade in such weapons. In
addition, the possibilities of negotiating to resolve such
conflicts are negatively affected by the continuous flow
of these instruments of war and death. Even already-
signed peace agreements have failed because of the
armament of the parties, facilitated by the world traffic
in these weapons.

Scandalized or not, the world watches as major
arms traffickers with huge fortunes appear in
entertainment magazines with absolute impunity for
their grave crimes against humanity.

At the United Nations, we talk at length about
conflict prevention and resolution. One elementary and
effective way not only to resolve and prevent these
misnamed low-intensity conflicts, but also to make
them nearly impossible, is to combat the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons and to control the licit
trade in such arms more effectively. The Organization
has undertaken a process on these matters that -
although it is a slow process - my country
appreciates. However, we should ask ourselves if the
ongoing efforts are adequate and effective enough to
put an end to this scourge.

The millions of deaths and injured, the disabled
people maimed by these weapons in their massive
destruction year after year require of us more action,
more commitment and more imagination to face this
problem. Could the Security Council deal with this
issue under Chapter VII of the Charter the same way it
used resolution 1373 (2001) to fight terrorism, taking
into account that the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons is an equal or even greater threat to
international peace and security?

Here I finish my initial thoughts and begin my
comments on the report under our consideration. The
Secretary General's 12 recommendations can be
divided into those that can be implemented directly by
the Security Council - those relative to peace-
building, conflict prevention and arms embargoes and
their monitoring systems - and those that should be
implemented by Member States, to which the Security
Council can only appeal or encourage their compliance.

For my delegation, it is particularly significant
that the Secretary-General reported significant progress
or encouraging indications on most of the
recommendations to be implemented by Member
States, while progress on those to be implemented
directly by the Security Council is not as significant
and indications are not as encouraging.

In effect, this year in the General Assembly,
Member States will begin to negotiate an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons - recommendation 1.
States are also committed to provide technical and
financial support to the Interpol Weapons and
Explosives Tracking System - recommendation 2; in
this task we underline the financing provided by the
United States of America. Member States have also
enhanced transparency in armaments through an
increased participation in the Register of Conventional
Arms and the United Nations standardized instrument
for reporting military expenditures - recommendation
12.

However, a lack of compliance with arms
embargoes by Member States is noted - the subject of
recommendation 5 - due to inadequate legislation,
lack of enforcement and technical capacity limitations.
Moreover, there has been no significant progress on
legislation to ensure effective control over the import,
export and transit of small arms and light weapons or
on the use of authenticated end-user certificates - this
relevant to recommendation 9. That was noted during
last year's First Biennial Meeting of States to consider
the Implementation of the 2001 Programme of Action.
Only 98 States presented reports, where it is reflected
that 78 of them have export-import control laws and
only 39 meet end-user certificate requirements. Even
more worrisome is the situation regarding brokering
activities: only 16 countries have domestic regulations
covering this area.

Allow me here, Mr. President, to emphasize
parenthetically that export control mechanisms should
not be based on criteria that take into account only the
views and interests of the producing and exporting
countries, without consideration of the interests of the
importing countries, in particular countries affected by
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Criteria such as respect for human rights, the existence
of internal conflicts and the imbalance between defence
and development expenditures, although legitimate and
even commendable, are by their very nature subjective,
not objective criteria. Furthermore, such criteria,
applied by the exporting country, violate the right of all
States to import and possess small arms and light
weapons for their self-defence and security needs, in
accordance with Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter, which recognizes the inherent right of self-
defence. Such criteria also tend to violate the principle
of non-intervention and to decide unilaterally what
should be the security and defence needs and priorities
of the importing country. This is a typical case in
which the good intentions by the exporting State - to
control small arms exports and minimize the risk of
diversion of those weapons into the illegal trade - end
up doing great damage: preventing the affected
importing States from acquiring for their legitimate
forces the small arms and light weapons they require to
fight criminals and terrorists, who possess enough
illegal small arms and light weapons to destabilize a
country.

Therefore, we consider it to be more fair and
effective to establish strong national end-user
certificates, as well as to set up a regional and global
end-user certificate system, and to create a mechanism
for information exchange and verification. We also
advocate the adoption of additional measures such as
the certification of exports after shipping and the
double verification of the end-user certificates.

With respect to the recommendations whose
implementation depends directly on the Security
Council, we note even less progress than on those
whose implementation corresponds to States. The
Council barely took note of the Secretariat's proposal
to create a small arms advisory service on the basis of
extrabudgetary resources - recommendation 3 in the
report. It did not enhance its interaction with the
General Assembly on issues relating to small arms in
order to develop long-term strategies within the
framework of conflict prevention and peace-
building - the subject of recommendation 4. Nor did it
register major progress with respect to the links
between the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, and no progress was made on the links with
the trade in illegal drugs - the subject of
recommendation 6.

On recommendation 7, related to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, some important
efforts by the Security Council were registered.
Nevertheless, they are insufficient due to the lack of
compliance with recommendation 8 on financing those
programmes from the budget for peacekeeping
operations. Financing those programmes with
voluntary funds, which tend to be very limited, puts at
grave risk disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in post-conflict zones and, as a
consequence, peace-building. Furthermore, it leaves at
large in those zones a huge quantity or arms and
ammunition, which are transferred to other areas and
countries in conflict.

The Security Council should also give greater
attention to recommendation 10, regarding arms
embargoes in situations under its consideration,
particularly embargoes against non-State actors. More
attention should also be given to the restriction of the
supply of ammunition for weapons that are already
widely available for non-State actors in countries or
regions engaged in or emerging from armed conflicts.
On this question, it is worth underlining the
observation by the Panel of Experts on Somalia: armed
groups in that country require steady access to
ammunition more than to arms, which are already
available in great quantities in the chaotic war the
country is experiencing. The Panel therefore
recommended that the front-line and neighbouring
States be urged to establish sanctions assistance offices
on their territories with the help of regional and
subregional organizations.

This recommendation is valid for all conflicts in
which there is a destabilizing accumulation and
uncontrolled spread of small arms and light weapons
and ammunition. Neighbouring countries have the
responsibility to avoid allowing their territory to be
used to send small arms and ammunition to non-State
armed actors in countries in conflict. The United
Nations should urge these countries to assume their
responsibilities and comply with their obligations.

Allow me to conclude by noting that, over the
past decade, the use of small arms and light weapons
caused the deaths of millions of people, seriously
wounded or permanently disabled six million people
and contributed to the forced displacement of 20
million people. Countries in conflict, almost all of
them developing countries, earmark more than 10 per
cent of their annual gross domestic product for treating
the victims of these conflicts and for trying to control
the some 200 million illicit small arms and light
weapons circulating around the world. Because of these
grave humanitarian and socio-economic consequences
of this scourge and because of the serious threat that it
poses to international peace, security and stability, it is
of vital importance to have controls and rules on the
trade in small arms and light weapons at the national,
regional and world levels. As this Security Council has
already stated, arms-exporting countries are obliged to
exercise the highest degree of responsibility in these
transactions, and all countries should prevent the
illegal diversion and re-export of small arms and light
weapons.

The Secretary-General quite rightly said that
small arms and light weapons, which annually cause
millions of deaths around the world, are the real
weapons of mass destruction. Also, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia was right when he said, in
his speech to this Council on 2 August 2001:

"It is ironic that most of the conflicts in which
small arms and light weapons are used take place
in the developing world, while most of those arms
are produced in the developed world. This terrible
irony requires the application to the global trade
in such weapons of a principle that has already
been accepted in the fight against drug
trafficking: the principle of shared
responsibility" (S/PV.4355).

