Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the convening of this meeting and the valuable
information provided today by Assistant Secretary-
General Bintou Keita.

Peru notes with expectation the direct dialogue
between President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar. We
welcome the declaration of the Khartoum agreement
between the parties to the conflict in South Sudan,
signed yesterday, which we hope will lead the country
towards sustainable peace.

We trust that the next rounds of talks will make
it possible to resolve issues of the governance and
security of the country and to reach an agreement on
the proposal of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) with regard to such pending
issues. We would like to acknowledge the important
role of IGAD, through its High-Level Revitalization
Forum, as well as that of the United Nations, the African
Union and various leaders of the region, in facilitating
the dialogue between the Sudanese parties. We wish to
encourage them to persevere in their efforts to achieve
an inclusive, transparent and viable agreement.

We emphasize the importance of regional and
international support and assistance to ensure that, this
time, the peace commitments are fully respected and
implemented for the benefit of a population that faces
one of the most serious humanitarian crises currently.
In the immediate future, that implies observation of
the permanent ceasefire, the opening of humanitarian
corridors and the release of prisoners of war and
political detainees.

We must recall that the conflict in South Sudan has
forced the displacement of more than 4 million people
and that an estimated 7 million will face serious food
insecurity in the coming months. For it to last, peace
must allow for their urgent needs to be met and provide
them with a future of development. To that end, we
must express our concern about the serious difficulties
that humanitarian assistance faces in reaching the
population. The most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/609) describes fatal attacks, arrests,
bureaucratic interference, undue charges and the
intimidation and harassment of humanitarian workers.
All that must stop.

We want to acknowledge the dedicated work of
the humanitarian organizations and their workers. We
deeply regret the death of a Bangladeshi Blue Helmet
due to the attack on a humanitarian convoy this week.
The fact must be investigated and those responsible
must be brought to justice.

We commend the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan on its efforts to protect civilians. We highlight
the initiative undertaken with the United Nations
Development Programme to establish a specialized
unit to protect the rights of women and children and to
develop an action plan to prevent, mitigate and respond
to conflict-related cases of sexual violence. We are
concerned in particular about the considerable increase
in the number of human rights abuses and violations
and breaches of international humanitarian law in
recent months, as negotiations took place to revitalize
the peace process.

In conclusion, we underscore that we cannot remain
indifferent to the deaths of 383 civilians - including
elderly people, persons with disabilities and
children - and conflict-related sexual violence, which
has affected 278 women and girls. Such horrendous
crimes must be stopped and those responsible must face
justice.

