Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take
the floor on behalf of the members of the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict, namely, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom,
Uruguay and my own country, Switzerland.

The Group of Friends thanks the Uruguayan
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today's open debate, which is crucial to keeping the
protection of civilians high on the agenda. We also thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
and the representative of Oxfam for their briefings this
morning. We particularly welcome the initiative of
the presidency to invite representatives of those two
very important non-governmental organizations to
participate in today's meeting.

As noted by the Secretary-General and by the
President of the ICRC in their joint warning on
31 October 2015, the world is a turning point, and we
must react vigorously to a growing lack of respect for
international humanitarian law and the disregard for the
protection of civilians in many conflicts. We cannot be
indifferent to the immense human suffering caused by
armed conflicts, and its consequences for international
peace and security. The international community must
reaffirm the principles related to the protection of
civilians as enshrined in international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law, as well as in
international criminal law. Parties to conflict must be
reminded time and again that even wars have rules and
that those rules apply to all.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians (S/2015/453) is a stark reminder
that we need to continue our collective efforts to address
the challenges posed to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Indiscriminate attacks on civilians
have become a recurrent feature in many contemporary
conflicts. Schools and medical facilities are not spared.
Complex and dynamic security environments, as well
as access restrictions applied to humanitarian workers,
impede the delivery of humanitarian assistance. A
growing number of parties to armed conflicts openly
disregard the validity of long-established rules of
international humanitarian law. For example, respect
for the obligations governing the conduct of hostilities,
including distinction, proportionality and precaution,
as well as the prohibition on deliberately targeting
civilians and civilian objects, is eroding, including in
situations under the consideration of the Council.

All too often the lack of respect for the most basic
principles of humanity goes hand-in-hand with a
pervasive climate of impunity and utter lack of redress
for victims. We therefore must insist on bringing to
justice those responsible for the most serious crimes of
international concern. The Security Council is uniquely
positioned to promote peace and justice. We call upon
the Council to make use of its numerous options to
promote and ensure accountability. That includes
standing up to reported atrocities, establishing facts
and the truth about alleged violations, making referrals
to the International Criminal Court and following up
thereon, staying firm on addressing accountability for
past crimes in all situations and tasking peacekeeping
operations, within their respective mandates, to support
the fight against impunity.

The Security Council must demonstrate its
leadership and systematically and vigorously endeavour
to uphold the core protection of civilian standards
whenever the need arises. In that regard, the Group of
Friends welcome the Council's presidential statement
on the protection of civilians of 25 November 2015
(S/PRST/2015/23), which reaffirms its commitment
regarding the protection of civilians and its intention
to continue to review the issue regularly. The Group
of Friends welcomes in particular the reques madet
of the Secretary-General to submit a report to the
Council every 12 months, which is an important step
towards more frequent reporting about the protection of
civilians to the Council. The aide-memoire contained
in the annex to the presidential statement is an excellent
instrument for the implementation of the protection
of civilians, and should be used in a more systematic
manner by all the relevant stakeholders.

Ensuring better respect for international
humanitarian law remains the key challenge for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. At the thirty-
second International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent, held in Geneva in December 2015,
consensus was reached on a number of pressing issues
and possible ways to address them. They include sexual
and gender-biased violence, the protection of the delivery
of health care, the protection of persons deprived of their
liberty and compliance with international humanitarian
law. With regard to the latter, we regret the lack of
willingness to comit to a more expeditious and more
resolute way forward. However, the International
Conference recognized the gaps and the weaknesses in
the implementation of international humanitarian law
and the need to address them. It paved the way for an
intergovernmental process to find agreement on the
functions and features of a potential forum of States
on international humanitarian law and ways to enhance
the implementation of international humanitarian law
using the potential of the International Conference and
the regional international humanitarian law forums. We
expect all Governments to engage constructively and
in good faith in that intergovernmental process, to be
co-facilitated by Switzerland and the ICRC.

The Group of Friends welcomes the recommendations
of the Secretary-General contained in his report
entitled "The future of the United Nations peace
operations: implementation of the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/682), as well as the recommendations of the
report of the Panel on peace operations with respect to
the protection of civilians (see S/2015/446). The review
presents a key opportunity to strengthen the capacity
of United Nations peace operations to leverage all
their components, including civil affairs, to effectively
protect civilians. We look forward to engaging on how
to achieve that end. Political engagement and support
for political settlements should be seen as an integral
part of this effort. The best way to protect civilians
is by preventing armed conflict in the first instance
and, failing that, by ending armed conflict through a
negotiated and inclusive settlement.

The Group of Friends fully supports the call by the
Secretary-General for the Council to bring its collective
political leverage to bear on behalf ofpolitical solutions.
The Group of Friends also takes note of the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, adopted
in May 2015, aimed at reinforcing the protection of
civilians by troop- and police-contributing countries in
the framework of peacekeeping operations. The Group
of Friends highlights the Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse as
being ever-more relevant in the light ofrecent allegations,
particularly in the Central African Republic. We
welcome the Secretary-General's efforts to strengthen
the United Nations response and call on Member States,
including troop- and police-contributing countries, to
do the same.

In May 2016, the world will gather in Istanbul
for the first-ever World Humanitarian Aummit. The
Summit should pave the way for more coherent and
vigorous action for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We call upon all Member States to
seize that event as a unique opportunity to reaffirm
the importance of ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law, human rights and refugee law. We
further call on Member States and relevant actors
to continue their efforts to ensure the centrality of
protection in humanitarian action, including gender
considerations and the protection of other vulnerable
groups. That will require political commitment, strong
leadership, effective coordination, extensive capacity-
building efforts and systematic monitoring, reporting
and follow-up of protection issues by us all.

