Mr. Couchepin Roger (spoke in French): The
current situation in the Great Lakes region is a
topic of considerable concern for the International
Organization of la Francophonie (IOF), which has
followed with great attention the political, security
and humanitarian developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Burundi. That is why, on
behalf ofthe Secretary General of la Francophonie, Her
Excellency Ms. Michaelle Jean, I welcome the holding
of this meeting and would like to express our profound
gratitude for the opportunity to share with the Council
the point of view of our organization on the issue of
the prevention and resolution of crises in the Great
Lakes region.
The topic of this important meeting is particularly
relevant for us in particular because of the mandate that
the Bamako declaration envisions in the area of crisis
prevention and conflicts within the French-speaking
area. This meeting is part of the tireless efforts
undertaken by the international community to preserve
peace and maintain security and the well-being of the
peoples of the region.

First, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
International Organization of la Francophonie is very
attentive to the various mediation initiatives aimed at
restoring political dialogue at the national level. As the
Council is aware, in the framework of the actions that we
have carried out to continue consolidating in a lasting
way democracy in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the IOF conducted an audit of the electoral rolls
in this country in November 2015, and we transmitted
the report of that audit to the Congolese authorities.
The implementation of the outcome of the audit could
contribute to holding inclusive and credible elections
within the time frame set out in the Constitution. For
this reason, we have also been working very closely
with the facilitator of the African union, the former
Prime Minister of Togo, Mr. Edem Kodjo, in order to
contribute to the efforts aimed at bringing together
all political actors around the same table. This should
be done in order to make it possible to hold smooth
elections rapidly. Trying to reach such an agreement is
a priority for our organization.

The situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains characterized by the
continuing violence and attacks by armed groups that
threaten the security of the peoples living there. We
support and will continue to support the actions carried
out by the armed forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo, which are aimed at restoring peace and security
in the region.

Concerning Burundi, we have been following with
great interest the very encouraging signals recently
sent by the authorities of Burundi, in particular the
cancelling of the international arrest warrants against
15 dignitaries, including members of the opposition;
the fact that amnesty has been granted to several
hundred detainees; and the decision to authorize the
reopening of certain private radio stations. However,
our organization remains concerned by the lack of a
truly inclusive political dialogue and the very precarious
security situation, as well as the continuing violations
of various human rights, including freedom of the
press, and the situation of the hundreds of thousands
of refugees. We are also concerned about signs that
lead us to fear a rapid deterioration in the country's
economic situation, and especially since the European
Union, whose aid represented about 20 per cent of
the national budget, decided last week to suspend its
direct assistance to Burundi, based on the provisions
of the Cotonou Agreement. The country's economic
deterioration can only worsen the serious implications
of the current crisis for the people of Burundi.

Based on our findings during my two missions
to Burundi in 2015, the country has been under
the observation of the Permanent Council of the
International Organization of la Francophonie since
then. In that regard, we have a duty to ensure that the
national authorities are taking concrete steps to reach
a solution to the current urgent crisis, and doing so
in strict compliance with the Arusha Accords. The
welfare of the people of Burundi, and the stability and
development of the region as a whole, is at stake, as are
the values and principles that we all hold dear and that
La Francophonie, in accordance with the provisions
of its foundational texts, can never compromise on.
La Francophonie is more than ever determined to
play a full part in the search for a peaceful solution,
together with Burundi's national authorities and all of
its partners, including the United Nations, the African
Union and the East African Community.

More generally, on behalf of the Secretary General
of La Francophonie, I would like to emphasize the
impact that crises and instability have on our societies.
Instability is the wellspring of all the evils giving
the international community cause for concern, with
terrorism first among them. We therefore cannot
combat terrorism if we do not create conditions
that will encourage young people to have hope and
confidence in the future. Instability breeds distrust,
disillusionment, a loss of moral compass and identity,
all of which are what terrorist movements rely on,
motivated as they are by hatred and the destruction of
the values of peace, justice and freedom. Similarly, we
cannot claim to be able to solve the problem of forced
migration without directly tackling the root causes of
today's crises - whether they are political instability,
insecurity, weak institutions, youth unemployment, or a
lack of prospects for private and public investors. That
is why it is imperative that all of us, without exception,
strive to implement concrete measures to help prevent
crises and to preserve peace and welfare for all. La
Francophonie will contribute to all of those efforts.

