Mr. Kusljugie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like at the outset to thank you for the
opportunity to comment on the tenth annual report of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) (S/2003/829) and to share with you
some recent views of my Government regarding the
work of the Tribunal.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the report of
the ICTY President and Chief Prosecutor submitted to
the Secretary-General. I am also taking this opportunity
to thank both Judge Meron and Chief Prosecutor Del
Ponte for their comments and clear messages presented
to the Council today regarding Tribunal achievements
in the last year and current problems they are
encountering in their work.

Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
ICTY's activities and is committed to fulfilling its
obligations related to cooperation with the Tribunal.
We are committed to following the path of proven
success strategies in order to overcome as soon as
possible the difficult heritage of our past and to start
building, with mutual understanding, a modern Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Only in this way may we pass on to
future generations the message of peace and development,
based on mutual understanding and tolerance.

We deem that the Tribunal plays an important
role in the process of inter-ethnic reconciliation in our
country as well as in all of South-east Europe, since its
work is based upon the individualization of
responsibilities for war crimes. We also believe that the
work of the ICTY will unveil new evidence regarding
the atrocities committed from 1992 to 1995, thus
providing new facts about the true nature of the
conflict in the region.

We stress that, lately, the responsible institutions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in cooperation with the
experts of the Office of the High Representative, have
made measurable progress, especially in the process of
restructuring the Bosnia and Herzegovina court system
at all levels. The new Legal Reform Unit, High Judicial
and Prosecutorial Councils, and Special Chamber in the
State Court and the Special Department in the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Prosecutor's Office in the country are
now functioning. Together with the Criminal Code,
which entered into force on 1 March 2003, the court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is now operative. This will
enable the ICTY to begin transferring some cases of
mid- and low-level accused by the end of next year.
However, we expect that the apprehension and trial of
the most notorious offenders will remain the continuing
responsibility of the United Nations and the
international community.

Bosnia and Herzegovina expects the ICTY to take
all possible measures to complete its investigations by
the end of 2004, all trial activities at first instance by
the end of 2008, and to complete all work in 2010, as
decided in Security Council resolution 1503 (2003).

In order to better meet the requirements of the
Security Council resolutions with regard to the work of
the ICTY, especially those of resolution 1503 (2003),
Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully committed to fulfilling
all its obligations and is ready to cooperate with the
responsible authorities of the countries in the region in
apprehending all remaining at-large persons indicted by
the ICTY.

Bosnia and Herzegovina expresses its hopes that
the international community will, as part of the
completion strategy, assist the national judicial system
in improving its capacity to prosecute cases transferred
to it from the ICTY. We also expect that that the ICTY
will further develop and improve their outreach
programmes.

The war criminals who remain at large present a
source of continued instability in the region. We
underline that a lasting and stable peace in the region
will not be achieved unless all suspected war criminals,
including the two most notorious, Radovan Karadzic
and Ratko Mladic, are brought to justice.

