Mr. Aboul-Gheit (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and members
of the Security Council for holding today's debate and
for inviting me, as representative of the League of Arab
States, to participate in the debate.

The truth is that I am deeply saddened as I speak
before the Council today, exactly 50 years since the
start of the Israeli occupation of Arab and Palestinian
lands in June 1967. I was a young Egyptian diplomat
at the time, and in those 50 years, I have held many
positions of responsibility. Unfortunately, the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories continues without
the occupying Power showing any genuine attempt at
reaching an acceptable settlement that would end the
conflict once and for all.

We note the number of lives and opportunities that
have been lost, and the wounds that have worsened
in the past 50 years. We are left only to wonder
about the negative effects that the conflict has had
on Arab societies - how it has depleted our energy
and increased our problems, exhausted our ability to
develop and caused volcanoes of anger to erupt inside
so many of our Palestinian and Arab young people.
That anger is then expressed in several ways - some
of them so vile that they strip people of their humanity.

The Arab side was defeated in June 1967 by Israeli
aggression against its lands and it continues to pay
the price even now. Despite the fact that the 1973 war,
which I also witnessed, ccreated a new landscape and
military situation, Israelis continued to use any pretext
to maintain control of Palestinian territories - that is
in fact at the heart of the conflict. It has made a fair
and permanent settlement extremely difficult. The
Palestinian people in particular find themselves in
an extremely complicated situation. Unfortunately,
after the occupation of the remaining 22 per cent of
Palestinian territory under the British Mandate, they
have no space that they can call their own independent
State. It is an extraordinary situation that is unparalleled
in modern history, but yet it has continued for half
a century. Unfortunately, some Israelis continue to
believe that this situation can continue for years and
decades into the future.

A few months after the military operations in 1967,
the Council adopted resolution 242 (1967), which rejects
the occupation of the territories of others by force, as
per the Charter of the United Nations. The resolution
also created the basis for any acceptable settlement of
this conflict, that is, the complete withdrawal by Israel
from the occupied territories in return for normal,
peaceful relations with Israel. That approach remains
the only means to address the Palestinian issue. This
logic is, in fact, what the Arab States adopted at the
Summit of the League of Arab States in Beirut in 2002,
in the form of the Arab Peace Initiative, which calls for
the complete withdrawal by Israel and the settlement of
all pending issues in return for complete and peaceful
relations. That equation seems easy, acceptable and fair
to everyone. It was supported by the entire international
community, with the exception of Israel. To date, we
have not heard of a single Israeli politician or official
who has accepted the Initiative.

It is unfortunate that in return Israel presents only
one alternative: continued occupation. We, in practice,
have two modes of life, subjected to the authority of the
Israeli State. In that alternative there is no Palestinian
sovereignty over any territory. In that alternative the
Palestinian Government is more like a municipal
Government that manages the affairs of citizens under
Israeli sovereignty. Unfortunately, Israel has buried the
hope generated by the 1993 Oslo Accords. That hope
has practically died, affirming the bitter reality in the
West Bank and the open prison that is the Gaza Strip.

This painful reality is taking place before the eyes
and ears of the world year after year. Despite how
painful this reality is for the Palestinians, who are
losing their lives and their time in checkpoints and
behind the separation wall, this represents a complete
condemnation of the international order, of which
the Council is a great expression. We must all accept
and admit that this system has failed after 50 years
of occupation. It has failed to end this conflict, and I
cannot deny that deep disappointment is overcoming
the Palestinians due to the failure of the international
system to support them and transform their dreams and
aspirations into reality.

The peace treaties signed between Israel, on one
side, with Egypt and with Jordan, on the other, represent
hope and show us that peace is not impossible. These
are beacons of light in the long dark tunnel of conflict
and violence. There is no doubt that they have stood the
test of time; and the fact that the parties to those treaties
have held onto them show that they were based on a
solid foundation.

Today, after countless rounds of secret and public
negotiations, after sincere efforts from all parties to
arrive at a fair settlement, and after numerous interim
agreements, as well as detailed agreements signed
during different rounds of negotiations that I have
personally witnessed, after this long history of failure
to end the conflict, I say that we must be honest with
ourselves. All those plans and attempts did not succeed
because they did not address the heart of the conflict.
They have been concerned with creating interim
settlements and arrangements that do not address the
heart of the matter. Practically, this has only led to
prolonged conflict.

The heart of the matter is the occupation of territories
in 1967. No solution will be achieved without directly
and decisively addressing this matter, based on the
principle of land in return for peace. Any negotiations
not based on this assumption will be doomed to fail.

Our long experience in addressing this complicated
conflict drives us to speak honestly about previous
failures and how we must not repeat them. We must
immediately address the final settlement issue. I
reiterate that the goal must be to address the details
of a final settlement - which is the heart of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict - most important of which
are the borders, Jerusalem, security and refugees. In
that regard, I would like to present to the Council the
following points.

First, the relevant parties are, in general, unable
to manage successful negotiations alone, without
consistent and strong international support. If the two
parties, the Israelis and the Palestinians, were to be left
without international support, they would most likely
be unable to achieve any settlement or agreement,
particularly in light of the grave imbalance of power
between the two parties. In that regard, I would like to
pay tribute to every State that has attempted throughout
the history of this conflict to bring the viewpoints
of the parties closer together. In particular I wish to
mention the United States of America, the successive
Governments of which have performed different roles
that are significant. I hope that this positive engagement
with the parties will continue in a balanced manner in
order to achieve the desired settlement.

Secondly, any serious negotiation must have
an agreed framework of reference. Without that,
the negotiations will not succeed. That framework
includes Council and General Assembly resolutions,
the principle of land in return for peace, and the Arab
Peace Initiative. That framework of reference must
govern any negotiation process so that we do not engage
in any random attempts or negotiations that go round in
a vicious circle while achieving nothing.

Thirdly, the current Israeli Government is adopting
a strategy that will render impossible the two-State
solution. That Government is following a systematic
plan of building settlements, choosing the locations of
those settlements in a way that makes a viable Palestinian
State of connected territories almost geographically
impossible. We heard our friend Mr. Mladenov speak
on this minutes ago. We may have heard the statement
made by the Israeli Minister of Defence a few days ago
in which he boasted that the number ofbuilding permits
issued since the beginning of this year in the Jewish
settlements in the West Bank and in East Jerusalem
was the highest since 1992. This year alone the Israeli
Government has approved 8,354 new residential units,
3,066 of which, an unprecedented number, are slated
for immediate construction. In 1967, there were 12,000
settlers; in 1996, 150,000; and today there are 400,000,
in addition to another 200,000 in East Jerusalem.

This situation leaves no doubt as to the fact that the
plan of and the approach adopted by the current Israeli
leadership is a plan for settlement, not a plan for peace.
Resolution 2334 (2016), of December 2016, which was
adopted with unprecedented unanimity following a
long-standing failure to address the conflict, was a step
in the right direction on the path towards delegitimizing
the Israeli settlements by bringing increased pressure
to bear on Israel to change course. Other resolutions
must follow suit, particularly in terms of requesting
that the Secretary-General submit a report on its
implementation every three months.

Fourthly, the Arab Peace Initiative offers Israel a
historic opportunity to normalize relations not only
with its Arab neighbours but also with Muslim nations.
The Amman summit of 29 March 2017 reaffirmed this
initiative as a strategic Arab choice. However, I am
compelled here to reaffirm the position of the Arab
Summit: that Israel cannot reap the benefits of peace
before achieving peace.

Fifthly, Arab States have noted of late continuing
efforts on the part of Israel, which remains, under all
norms of international law, an occupying Power, to
normalize its situation in the United Nations and its
specialized agencies. Most significant in this respect
are Israel's efforts to become a member of the Security
Council in 2019-2020. Israel is in consistent violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, and, accordingly, it fails to meet the minimum
conditions required to become a member of the
Council. Accepting Israel as a member thereof would
strike at the heart of the Council's credibility and give
impetus to Israeli extremists and settlers. If Israel can
normalize its international status so easily, what will
induce it to engage in serious negotiations aimed at
ending the conflict?

It is bewildering, really, that Israel can find the
courage to submit its candidature for membership in
the Council. It never misses an opportunity to weaken
the credibility of the United Nations. We may have
heard that a few days ago the Israeli Prime Minister
called for the dismantling of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, accusing it of working against Israel. This is no
surprise, because the Agency represents an international
commitment to refugees. The Israeli Government is
trying to bury this issue completely and erase it from
the international agenda.

Sixthly, addressing the issues of the border, security,
Jerusalem and refugees is the basis for an acceptable
and lasting solution, but the current Israeli Government
continues to excel at framing the most complicated
issues as though it were trying to kill all prospects
for peace, for example requiring the Palestinian side
to accept what is called a Jewish Israeli State and
providing a minimum level of security guarantees. It
is absurd, really, for a Government whose members
do not accept the Palestinian right to an independent
State to require that the Palestinians accept its State as
a condition for negotiations.
It is painful to recall that 50 years have passed since
the occupation of the Arab territories. It is time to end
the nightmare of occupation, which is the underlying
cause of the increase in violence, radicalization and
terrorism throughout our region. I have said for many
years that violence and terrorism are the direct result of
our failure to resolve the Palestinian issue.

The world needs us to arrive at a just and lasting
solution to the conflict, in order to pave the way for
peace and development and enable the Palestinians to
regain their rights. The Security Council must uphold
its responsibilities in this regard. I hope that it will be
able to restore confidence and hope to the Palestinians
and show them that the world will not abandon them
and that they will not become forgotten statistics.

The Arab League is fully ready to work with the
Council to achieve the long-desired peace.

