Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today's important debate on
children and armed conflict. We welcome the strong
leadership that Germany has brought to the issue, both
in its role as President of the Council and particularly
in its chairmanship of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. I also thank the four briefers for
their important statements today.

Iwould like to take this opportunity to express warm
appreciation for the former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
for her advocacy and active engagement over the last
six years, which resulted in the release, reintegration
and protection of countless children across the world.

The United Kingdom welcomes Ms. Leila
Zerrougui to her appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. It is a demanding but extremely
important role on a dossier of central importance to the
core mission of the United Nations. She will have the
United Kingdom's full support, and we look forward to
working closely with her.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/261) is strewn with evidence of hideous crimes
committed against children that cannot be ignored.
Thousands of children have been killed or injured by
improvised explosive devices, landmines and rocket-
propelled grenades. Tens of thousands have been denied
access to humanitarian assistance critical to their
survival. There are hundreds of examples of attacks
on schools and hospitals. There are cases where girls
and boys, some as young as six, have been sexually
assaulted and raped by armed groups. Children, in
some case younger than 10 years old, have been forcibly
taken from their families and recruited as combatants,
escorts, cooks and porters for armed groups.

In the face of such evidence, our individual and
collective ambition on the agenda must remain high.
United Nations efforts to help children affected by
armed conflict can work, and well. Action plans
have resulted in the release and the reintegration of
thousands of children recruited and caught up in the
fighting. In its verdict against Thomas Lubanga in
March, the International Criminal Court issued its first
judgement on the issue of child recruitment, setting
groundbreaking jurisprudence for future cases and
sending a strong message to those who continue to
believe that they can safely commit grave violations
against children with impunity. In our efforts to address
such grave violations, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Council's Working Group
are vital tools that must be preserved and supported.
Against that background, we welcome the adoption
today of resolution 2068 (2012). It sends an important
message of the Council's determination to take forward
the agenda of children and armed conflict in an active,
forward-looking and wide-ranging manner. The United
Kingdom welcomes the fact that the resolution secured
strong Council support, spanning all regions. We
would have liked the resolution to have been adopted
unanimously, and regret that that did not happen.

We disagree with the assertions of some Council
members that insufficient efforts were made to find
consensus. In our view, extensive negotiations were
conducted in circumstances in which some delegations
maintained solidly negative positions towards the
agenda, proposing amendments whose effect would
have been unacceptably to constrain the role of the
Special Representative. Significant compromises were
made in an effort to reach consensus, but we cannot
accept the assertion made by some Council members
that the former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General overreached her mandate in the conduct of her
business. That accusation is completely unfounded.

The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the unacceptably high and increasing number
of perpetrators of grave violations against children,
namely, 32 parties that have been listed for grave
violations against children for five years or more. We
need an innovative and practical approach to address
the increasing number of armed groups that persistently
rob children of their futures. We must demonstrate that
they will be held accountable for their actions. We
should not tolerate such abuse.

We encourage the Security Council and the
Working Group to consider what further tools should
be available to help bring to justice those who commit
grave crimes, threatening the peace, security and
well-being of children. Children and armed conflict
is an agenda that the Security Council should be
consolidating and advancing. Consensus and Council
unity are desirable, important and worth striving for,
as happened in the negotiations, but they are not ends
in themselves. Consensus should not be secured at the
expense of an effective approach to the global challenge
of children and armed conflict. We must maintain
a high level of ambition for the agenda in the United
Nations and elsewhere. We believe that resolution 2068
(2012) gives us the right basis for doing so.

