The President: I thank the representative of
Namibia for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Slovenia.

I should like to start by joining other colleagues on
the Council in their expressions of appreciation to
Ms. Del Ponte for her very substantive briefing. Like
many others, we are looking forward to her further
briefings, including in particular her report on her visit to
Rwanda, which I hope will give another opportunity for

 

a meeting of the Security Council with Ms. Del Ponte, so
that the issues relating to that Tribunal can be fully
discussed. We also agree with the many expressions of
support that Ms. Del Ponte has received in the course of the
discussion today.
The evolution of the Tribunals and the work of the
Prosecutors has been impressive so far. I think that that is
the basic point which needs to be stressed. In a very short
time, important and effective judicial institutions have been
created. This is a major achievement of international
cooperation. A real basis has been created for a
comprehensive system of international criminal justice. This
point cannot be overemphasized.

Such an evolution is due to several factors, including,
certainly, to the inherent importance of these judicial
institutions and the support of the international community,
including the international legal professional community.
But above all, that evolution has been possible because of
the professionalism, integrity and strong commitment of the
judges, prosecutors and other personnel working in the
institutions I have mentioned.

Ms. Del Ponte also explained some of the problems,
especially that of non-cooperation by some States and
entities with the Prosecutor. I think that the basic principle
here is that the indicted persons must be transferred to the
Tribunal for trial and that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
and the Prosecutor cannot be challenged by States. This is
the basic principle, which I think is undisputed in the
Security Council.

The real question before the Security Council now is
whether and what kind of additional decisions by the
Council may be necessary. Members of the Council have
referred to possible further measures, which is something
that the Council should be thinking about further. In our
opinion, it would be important for the Council to start a
process of further, more detailed consideration of which
steps are to be taken next. The Security Council has the
responsibility to provide support and strengthen the
effectiveness of the judicial bodies it has created. I would
like to invite the Council members to think about how to
start such a process.

I now resume my function as President of the Security
Council.

I give the floor to Ms. Del Ponte to respond to the
comments and questions raised.

