Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to make a statement
at this briefing.

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Gambari for his briefing on the details of his
recent visit to Myanmar. The Secretary-General's good
offices role - mandated by the General Assembly -
has been ably implemented by Ambassador Gambari.
The task that he is undertaking is by no means an easy
one. That is because of the complex nature of the
challenges facing Myanmar in trying to transform the
country into a democratic society while at the same
time forging national reconciliation and maintaining
national unity. I therefore wish to express my
appreciation and admiration to Ambassador Gambari
for the principled manner in which he is implementing
the good offices mandate with regard to Myanmar.

The good offices role of the Secretary-General
that has been mandated by the General Assembly has
been described by Ambassador Gambari as a process
and not an event. He has also stressed that the process
must bring about tangible results.

To see where this process is right now, one must
look at the process when it began. In 2003, Myanmar
set for itself a seven-step political road map to
democracy. When Ambassador Gambari started the
good offices role, we were still at the first step of our
road map. Since then, the National Convention has
successfully laid down the fundamental principles to be
enshrined in a new constitution. Subsequently, a
commission to draft the State constitution was
established. On 19 February, it successfully completed
its task of drafting a new constitution. A nationwide
referendum on the draft constitution - the fourth step
of the road map - will be held in May. Upon
ratification, multiparty elections - the fifth step -
will be held in 2010.

In the course of his good offices efforts, many of
the things that Ambassador Gambari discussed with the
Government have come to fruition. After the tragic
event of September, the Government lifted the curfew
and withdrew the presence of the military from public
areas in major cities, where they had previously been
stationed. Some 2,600 persons, including 780 monks,
have been released from detention. The National
Convention was successfully concluded, with 8,552
prisoners released to mark that historic occasion.
Dialogue and cooperation with the International
Labour Organization (ILO) continued, and the
Government and the ILO recently concluded the
extension of the supplementary understanding between
them. Minister U Aung Kyi has been appointed as
Minister for Relations with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,
and they have met several times. Those are indeed
positive and concrete developments, made possible by
the trust and confidence that Ambassador Gambari
enjoys.

During his recent visit, Ambassador Gambari had
the opportunity to meet twice with the plenipotentiary
spokesperson team representing the State Peace and
Development Council, headed by the Minister for
Information. Ambassador Gambari has also had the
opportunity to meet with members of the commission

charged with drafting the State constitution and with
the commission for the holding of the referendum, as
well as with political parties - including the National
League for Democracy (NLD) - and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. As per his request, we
made arrangements for him to meet twice with Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi and extended his visit to Myanmar.

Ambassador Gambari's visit provided him with
the opportunity to have extensive discussions with our
authorities. Those discussions are very useful because
we are able to understand each other and draw
parameters for cooperation with the United Nations. I
am also gratified that many of our neighbours, who see
the situation as it really is, have acknowledged the
progress made in this recent visit. I am also thankful to
the Secretary-General for acknowledging that "there
was some progress".

The Secretary-General's good offices role is
mandated by the General Assembly. Yesterday, after
meeting with Ambassador Gambari, the President of
the General Assembly issued a statement that he was

"encouraged by the fact that the Special Envoy
was able to meet with key figures, including pro-
democracy leader and Nobel laureate Aung San
Suu Kyi, as well as with the Referendum
Convening Commission and the Constitution
Drafting Committee".

We take heart from that statement.

During Ambassador Gambari's visit, we were
able to explain to him the inclusive nature of the
National Convention process, which laid down the
fundamental principles to be enshrined in the draft
constitution. In fact, the National Convention was set
up by the meeting attended by all political parties. The
three important chapters of the fundamental principles
were drawn up and agreed to by the National League
for Democracy when it was part of the National
Convention. When we reconvened the National
Convention in 2004, the NLD was again invited.
However, it declined the invitation at the last minute.

The National Convention is comprised of some
1,080 delegates, out of which 635 are from the ethnic
nationalities. It also included representatives of the
political parties and representatives of the 17 insurgent
groups that have returned to the legal fold. Myanmar
had to face over 40 years of insurgency because of the
weakness in the 1947 Constitution. Some ethnic
nationalities had reservations regarding the provisions
in that Constitution. Therefore, the inclusion of
representatives of the ethnic nationalities and the
former insurgent groups in the National Convention,
and their acceptance of the fundamental principles, are
of the utmost importance. They also attest to the
inclusive nature of the National Convention process.

Under the fundamental principles adopted by the
National Convention, in addition to the existing seven
states and seven divisions, the ethnic nationalities with
sizeable populations will be allowed to form
themselves into self-administered zones, in fulfilment
of the one of their most important aspirations. The
boundaries of the existing states and the new self-
administered zones have also been agreed to by the
representatives to the National Convention. That was
no easy task. The constitution drafting commission has
completed that task.

The draft Constitution, which contains all these
provisions as well as qualifications for taking part in
the elections, will be put to a nationwide referendum in
May. During its meeting with Ambassador Gambari,
the spokesperson team assured him that the referendum
will be free and fair. In the referendum, as well as in
the elections, everyone - those who support the
Government and those who oppose its policies - will
be allowed to participate on equal terms.
08-27488

Given the complexity of the challenges that
Myanmar faces, the Government has come a long way
and has made significant strides in our seven-step
political road map. Myanmar has been cooperating, and
will continue to cooperate, with the United Nations.
After all, cooperation with the United Nations is a
cornerstone of Myanmar's foreign policy. Here I can
do no better than to echo what the leader of the
plenipotentiary spokesperson team said to Ambassador
Gambari on 10 March, when he thanked the
Ambassador for his constructive advice and expressed
our support and continued willingness to cooperate
with the good offices role of the Secretary-General
mandated by the General Assembly.

May I conclude by stressing once again that
Myanmar is not a threat to international peace and
security. That has been attested to by all of Myanmar's
neighbours. The country is making significant strides
in its national reconciliation and democratization
process. No Security Council action is warranted with
regard to Myanmar.

