Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank His Excellency President Mkapa for his report
and Mr. Le Roy for his briefing. I also welcome the
presence in the Chamber this morning of Their
Excellencies Mr. Siddiq and Mr. Amum, and thank
them for their positive statements.

As we enter the last few weeks before the
referendum on self-determination for Southern Sudan,
it is vital for the parties to fulfil their commitment to
full and timely implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and for the international community
to remain united in its support. We welcome the
commitments we have heard from the parties today.

We also welcome the steady progress of
preparations towards the 9 January Southern Sudan
referendum. In particular, we are encouraged by the
process of registration, which ended in-country on
8 December. We also welcome the assessment of the
Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan that the registration process was transparent and
free from organized manipulation and that it has
provided the basis for a credible referendum. We urge
the parties to ensure that this good progress is
maintained.

Nevertheless, some very important issues remain
to be resolved. In particular, we are disturbed by the
lack of progress on Abyei. Tensions there continue to
rise in the absence of a political settlement. We urge
both parties to show flexibility and leadership in
coming to an agreement on this as soon as possible. We
also remind both parties of the urgent need to come to
agreement on other issues of fundamental and long-
term importance to both North and South. It is
particularly important to reach agreement on
citizenship, which will reassure the Sudanese people in
both North and South that their rights will be respected
whatever the outcome of the referendum. In addition,
we continue to have concerns about human rights
issues in the Sudan more generally, and we stress the
need for fundamental rights for all citizens, including
women, to be respected.

We recognize that, as Minister Siddiq said this
morning, the Sudanese parties have come far over the
past five years and will continue to need to work
together for the peace and prosperity of all Sudanese
people, whatever the outcome of the referendum. We
note the firm commitment that the parties have made
not to return to violence, and we strongly urge them, in
line with that commitment, to respect each other's
security and refrain from any action that seeks to
undermine that. It is more important than ever to show
restraint at this critical time.

Finally, I would like briefly to address the
situation in Darfur. It is vital that this Council does not
lose sight of events there. We must work intensively
with all parties involved towards a peaceful and
inclusive political settlement and justice and
reconciliation in the region. We welcome the role
played by Chief Mediator Djibril Bassole and the
support of the Government of Qatar, and we urge all
rebel groups to join the peace process without delay
and without preconditions. This Council should be
prepared to consider firm measures against those who
refuse to do so.

In that context, we are concerned by the
resumption of hostilities between the Sudanese armed
forces and the Sudan Liberation Army Minni Minawi
faction, and we call upon both sides to uphold their
commitment to peace.

We remain deeply concerned about the security
situation in Darfur, including the recent violence in
Khor Abeche and other incidents resulting in the
displacement of civilians. Access for humanitarian
workers and peacekeepers must be improved in Darfur,
and kidnappings must come to an end.

