Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian): At
the outset, I wish to extend our sincerest condolences
to our colleagues and friends of the Russian delegation
with regard to the tragedy of the downing of the aircraft
that had military personnel on board. We are deeply
troubled by that tragedy, and we extend our deepest
condolences to the families and loved ones of the dead,
as well as the colleagues of those who died.

(spoke in English)

We thank Special Envoy De Mistura and Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for their comprehensive
and very informative briefings. It is gratifying to learn
that, despite the problems with regard to Idlib, we
have made substantial progress in the political process
towards resolving the conflict.

Kazakhstan is pleased to note that the work carried
out by the guarantors is undoubtedly aimed at preventing
escalation in Idlib, because no one wants war. In that
regard, Kazakhstan welcomes the memorandum signed
on 17 September in Sochi by the Defence Ministries
of Russia and Turkey on the stabilization of the
situation in the de-escalation zone of Idlib in Syria. We
support the creation of a demilitarized buffer zone in
Syria's Idlib province to separate Government forces
from rebel fighters based there. We commend Turkey
and Russia on the breakthrough decision to enforce
the demilitarized zone by 15 October. Now we look
forward to the implementation of the agreement by all
parties engaged in the deal. We commend the Special
Envoy's attempts to involve various States of the Middle
East, the Gulf region and Europe in the process. We
welcome his consultations on 14 September in Geneva
with the delegations of the so-called small group to
facilitate the broader dimension of our collective effort.
Although that meeting did not end in tangible results,
such consultations should be continued, as they are a
clear confirmation that the world community intends to
find a peaceful way out of the Syrian crisis. Likewise,
an innovative regional paradigm is needed to support
both the Geneva and Astana processes in order to
uphold the ceasefire and promote the peace process.
We note with satisfaction the fact that the negotiations
in Geneva agreed on the number of candidates for the
constitutional committee. We support Mr. De Mistura's
efforts to proceed with the launch of the work of that
important body.

The situation in Syria is very difficult. Like the
guarantors of the Astana process, we all need to make
every effort to ensure that the civilian population does
not suffer because ofthe struggle that must be continued
against terrorist organizations. We also urge all sides to
act with prudence with regard to the so-called threat
of the use of chemical weapons, by either side so as to
avert any further political or humanitarian crises.

We highly commend the visit of Emergency Relief
Coordinator Mark Lowcock to Damascus on 28 August
to engage with the Government of Syria on how best to
further scale up the collective humanitarian response.
We call on the international community to provide
additional financial support and the resources that
are urgently needed to respond to a potential military
escalation in the north-west of the country.

Kazakhstan is concerned about the safety and
protection of civilians in Syria's rural Deir ez-Zor
governorate, where fighting has displaced more than
20,000 people since July. As we know, recently 53
people were killed and 100 injured in air strikes on
residential areas in the Abu Kamal district. Internally
displaced people have settled in makeshift camps in
the governorate and are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance. Nearly 200,000 displaced people have
returned to Deir ez-Zor since November 2017. We
commend the United Nations on its efforts to ensure
safe access for humanitarian aid workers so as to
reach people in need. We call on all sides not to block
aid and to make every effort to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

Lastly, analysing events in recent days, Astana
assesses that developments in the situation in Syria
have created the basis for a qualitative change for
the better - the final elimination of terrorists on the
territory of the country, the beginning ofa real political
process, the revival of economic activity and the return
of refugees to their homeland.

