Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, Sir, I would like
to thank you for organizing today's open debate on the
Security Council's working methods - the sixth of its
kind - and for the very comprehensive concept paper
(S/2013/613, annex). As a member ofthe Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, we fully
support the statement delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on the group's behalf. In order to respect
the time constraints, a longer version of our statement
has been distributed.

As set out in the Charter, the Members of the United
Nations have conferred the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security to this lS-member body. It is therefore hard
to overestimate the role of its working methods. How
the Council works and how its decisions are taken is of
the utmost importance to every single country in the
Organization. Let me focus today on the transparency
and accountability of these processes.

Estonia attaches great value to transparency in
all decision-making processes and therefore highly
praises any steps taken with that as a consideration.
As the Council's decisions affect all of us, we expect
to be involved in that process. Therefore, the greater
the transparency that accompanies them, the easier
their implementation will be. Through enhanced
engagement with the interested parties, transparency
can be improved on all levels.

The Council has demonstrated responsibility
to the wider membership by adopting presidential
note S/2010/507 and more recently, in August, note
S/2013/515, committing to closer collaboration and
engagement with non-members. Estonia considers the
implementation of those decisions to be instrumental
for the future. Many of the incorporated commitments
have already been implemented. We have witnessed
a growing trend in open debates and other public
metings. That trend should continue: open meetings
should become the norm, rather than the exception.
In that regard, we would like to recall, as an excellent
example, the open debate organized a year ago by
Guatemala on peace and justice, with a special focus
on the role of the International Criminal Court (see S/PV.6849). That was the first thematic debate focusing
on the relationship of the Council with the Court, and it
was, we believe, a timely and fruitful exercise. Estonia
therefore strongly encourages members of the Security
Council to organize a follow-up debate on the topic.
We would also like to commend the Council for
organizing informal interactive dialogues and Arria
Formula meetings with other interested parties. The
informal introductory briefings on the Council's
programme of work, as well as the recently reintroduced
wrap-up meetings, are also of the great value to the wider
membership. Estonia encourages both the Council's
current and newly elected members to continue that
practice during their presidencies, so that it can become
an integral part of the Council's work.

Transparency is a multilayered issue. It should
be enhanced both horizontally and vertically. In a
decision-making process, the wider membership's
involvement should start at an early stage and continue
through to the end of a decision's implementation.
On the other hand, an even wider range of different
stakeholders, including civil society, should be involved
in the work of the Council. We believe that exclusion
creates frustration, while participation increases
ownership - and thus responsibility and accountability
as well.

A great deal has in fact been done, but there is
still room for improvement. An example of the lack of
transparency in the work of the Council was the process
that led to adoption of the long-awaited resolution
2118 (2013), on Syrian chemical weapons, which for
the first time in history determined that the use of
chemical weapons anywhere constituted a threat to
international peace and security. We certainly welcome
the resolution, but the process of making the decision
showed that transparency could be enhanced.

With respect to accountability, which is another
important goal that the Council should pursued, we
again cannot overlook Syria, the most tragic ongoing
conflict. The Council has been paralysed for too long,
and the international community has therefore not been
able to assume its responsibility to protect the people
of Syria, who have been systematically attacked and
killed by their own Government, a Government that
has not lived up to the rightful expectations of its own
people to a peaceful and stable living environment. We
would call upon the Council to reflect on its working
methods - on how such a situation has occurred and
how it could be avoided in future.

One of the issues to explore is the veto and its use.
Estonia would call on the permanent members of the
Council to seriously consider refraining from its use
in cases of genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity. In that regard, Estonia welcomes the French
proposal to define a way the permanent members of the
Council could decide to collectively renounce their veto
powers in the event ofa mass crime.

Finally, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, Estonia is ready
to work closely with the Council in order to identify
further ways to increase transparency and interaction
between all States Members of the United Nations and
the Council.

