Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Today's emergency
meeting of the Security Council is yet another clear
indication of the gravity of the situation in Sierra Leone,
underlining the imperative need to take rapid, well-
considered, resolute and adequate action in response to
the dangerous developments in that African country. Our
discussion today has to have a large perspective, not
limited exclusively to the situation on the ground. The
larger context should underscore the overall credibility
and authority of the United Nations and its role in conflict
resolution. We hope that the convening of this meeting at
the initiative of African States will enable us to take the
right decision.

Ukraine is gravely concerned over the current crisis
in the peace process in Sierra Leone. We maintain that
the responsibility for this lies entirely with the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and its leadership. We
also strongly condemn the hostile actions, which are
absolutely unacceptable, against United Nations
peacekeepers. All those responsible should be held
accountable for their criminal acts. In its official
declaration issued on 6 May, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine demanded the immediate and
unharmed release of all detained United Nations
personnel. Our delegation strongly reiterates this demand
addressed to the Revolutionary United Front.

Ensuring the safety and security of the peacekeeping
personnel in Sierra Leone is of utmost importance. At the
same time, another urgent task facing the United Nations
is that of preventing the crisis from growing into a new
war in that country. Given the current situation on the
ground, as well as the real threat of recurrence of large-
scale fighting, we strongly believe that it is incumbent on
the organ entrusted with the primary responsibility for
peace and security to take all appropriate steps at its

 

disposal aimed at bringing the peace process in Sierra
Leone back on track.

Our immediate attention should be focused on the
following priorities: to free all United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and other international staff
detained, to stabilize the situation on the ground and to
reinforce United Nations troops.

We would like to express our high appreciation to the
United Kingdom Government for its quick and prompt
decision to dispatch a British military contingent in order to
secure the strategic Lungi airport.

Today the membership of the United Nations is
unanimous in its assessment that political measures alone
are likely to fail in bringing about the desirable effect.
Against this background, we believe that the Security
Council should take tougher measures - that is, peace
enforcement. In this connection, among the conceivable
options our strong preference will be the substantial
reinforcement of the current UNAMSIL by increasing its
combat capabilities. This would require reconsidering the
current mandate of UNAMSIL, which has to be brought
entirely under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
At the same time, UNAMSIL should be properly equipped
as soon as possible so as to be able to act accordingly. All
forces to be involved in the operation should perform their
functions under the United Nations chain of command.

With regard to the issue of the revised mandate of
UNAMSIL, I would like to recall here one very pertinent
recommendation from the Carlsson Inquiry into the United
Nations actions during the genocide in Rwanda. This
recommendation stated the following:

"The overriding concern in formulating mandates
must be what presence is needed on the ground, not
short-term financial constraints. The Security Council
should be presented with proposals reflecting the real
needs of a mission, not ones tailored to a previously
perceived consensus. Mandates must be robust enough
already from the beginning of a mission."
(S/1999/1257, enclosure, p. 56)

United Nations Member States are looking forward to
this kind of proposal from the United Nations Secretariat.

We believe that the substantial strengthening of
UNAMSIL, even without giving it the task of forcibly
disarming the rebels, will demonstrate to the RUF that there
will be no option but to lay down its arms and fulfil its
obligations under the Lome Agreement. Furthermore, the
strengthening of UNAMSIL would deter rebels from
further humiliating actions against peacekeepers.

In conclusion, I would like to confirm Ukraine's
willingness to continue making its own contribution to the
United Nations peacemaking efforts in Sierra Leone. In
particular, Ukraine has already been involved in providing
airlift support for the needs of UNAMSIL.

