Mr. Baja (Philippines): I should first like to
extend our congratulations to Ambassador Konuzin for
chairing the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
to Ambassador Ruperez on his appointment as
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). I wish also
to thank Ambassador Konuzin for his comprehensive
report on the activities of the CTC.

We welcome this opportunity for the Council to
take stock of its counter-terrorism efforts through the
CTC. The adoption of resolution 1535 (2004) proves
that the Council is sensitive to the need, and is willing
to accept change, to improve its efforts in the area of
counter-terrorism.

We express appreciation for the draft plan that
Ambassador Ruperez has prepared for the organization
of the CTED, and for his openness to views and
suggestions regarding the plan.

I would like to make two comments. First, the
report states that 71 countries have not met the
deadline for the submission of their respective reports.
That is a matter for concern. That phenomenon must be
examined as a serious symptom of a possible bigger
problem. When 71 of 191 members are lagging behind
in complying with Council-imposed deadlines, we
should ask why. We should determine the cause of this
acute problem and find a remedy for it.

Do those States required more technical
assistance than the CTC is able to facilitate? Has the
CTC system of monitoring compliance with reports and
letters reached the point of diminishing returns? Do we
need to consider putting greater emphasis on other
types of engagement with other States, such as direct
dialogue, as the Chairman has suggested? Or, more
ominously, do States have issues with the legitimacy of
the methods of the CTC such that they are now
deciding to ignore them?

The second point concerns the relationship
between counter-terrorism measures and the protection
of human rights. We reiterate our view that there is a
need to incorporate human rights concerns into the
global counter-terrorism struggle. Counter-terrorism
measures could pose dangers to established human
rights protections. Rights violations could undermine
the success of counter-terrorism efforts in countries.
We hope that the CTED and the CTC will add a human
rights component to their structure and their methods.

The global effort against terrorism requires the
Security Council and the rest of the Members of the
United Nations to remain committed partners to both
concerns if success is to be achieved in eradicating the
scourge of terrorism.

