Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I have the honour to
present the thirteenth report of the Secretary-General
on the activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA), covering the period from 1 January
to 30 June 2014 (S/2014/442). Commendable efforts
continued during that period to promote development
and economic growth and to strengthen peace and
democracy at the national and regional levels.

On the economic front, with an average of
7 per cent, West Africa continues to record the highest
growth on the continent. Moreover, since the last
quarter of 2013, following the remarkable progress seen
in the stabilization process of Mali and Guinea-Bissau,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has refocused its efforts on promoting
the socioeconomic development and integration of
the region by underscoring infrastructure, energy and
agriculture.

However, the countries of West Africa continue
to experience great difficulties in responding to
expectations in the social sphere. The encouraging
economic growth figures have not necessarily had an
impact on the living conditions of the people, who have
not always benefited from the dividends of economic
progress. There have therefore been delays in achieving
the Millennium Development Goals. While progress has
been made in reducing extreme poverty in the countries
of the region as a whole, the results in terms of access
to primary education and reducing hunger have been
mixed at best. Women and young people are still the
most vulnerable groups and the most severely affected
by States' inadequate responses to the many social
challenges. Moreover, in some countries, increased
insecurity has resulted in resources being redirected to
security priorities, to the detriment of development.

With regard to the security situation in particular,
ECOWAS and its leaders have continued to play a
leading role in resolving crises in the region. Thanks
to the commitment of its member States, ECOWAS's
efforts in Guinea-Bissau, including the deployment
of a stabilization mission, have enabled the transition
process to succeed. I commend its successful conclusion
and the election of new and legitimate authorities in
Guinea-Bissau, which has opened a new chapter in
the troubled history of the country, which is working
towards a State based on the rule of law and enjoying
stable democratic institutions. The crisis in Mali, on the
other hand, revealed the limits of the region and the
continent in responding rapidly to crisis. ECOWAS and
the African Union have learned from that experience
and are now working to establish mechanisms adequate
to a rapid response to such crises. I would like to take
this opportunity to welcome the resumption of the
dialogue process among the parties in Mali, which is
the path that can lead to the lasting peace so fervently
desired for this important African country.

(spoke in English)

While the region has been working to promote
development and consolidate democracy, it also
continues to face the daunting scourge of transnational
organized crime, including drug trafficking, piracy
and criminality at sea, as well as increasing terrorist
activity. We at the United Nations Office for West Africa
have been devoting considerable energy to sensitizing
regional leaders to the need for decisive concerted
efforts to fight those serious threats to regional security
and stability. The potential for organized criminal
networks in the region to recruit unemployed young
people is very worrying. It is essential that the countries
of West Africa close ranks and establish effective
strategic and operational cooperation mechanisms to
address the threat, which runs the risk of destabilizing
the entire Sahelo-Saharan region, from the Atlantic
to the Indian Oceans. Their efforts should be strongly
backed by the rest of the international community and
the United Nations.

The region is embarking on a new electoral cycle
similar to what was experienced between 2008 and
2010. No fewer than five crucial elections will be held
in 2015, in Cote d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Guinea, the
Niger and Nigeria. The societies they will be held in
are often highly polarized, with deep political divides
and controversies related to ongoing or potential
initiatives aimed at amending constitutional provisions
on presidential term limits. The United Nations Office
for West Africa will continue to work closely with
ECOWAS and other stakeholders to help in efforts
to prevent political differences from developing into
violent crises and to provide electoral assistance aimed
at consolidating democracy in the region. In view of the
fragility prevailing there, every effort should be made
to ensure that democracy and stability are pursued with
equal commitment, since they are mutually reinforcing.

The Office has been supporting integrated regional
initiatives in West Africa, owing to the fact that the
crises occurring there are increasingly regional in
nature. In that regard, we have continued to support
the implementation of the cross-border security
strategy for the Mano River Union, which we helped
develop. In working closely with ECOWAS and the
Union in implementing that initiative, we are guided
by our strong belief that the Mano River Union has the
potential to become a beacon of prosperity and stability
in West Africa.

As outlined in the Secretary-General's report,
piracy and criminality at sea in the Gulf of Guinea
poses another significant challenge to stability, peace,
security and economic development in the region.
In that regard, the continued support of the United
Nations, through UNOWA and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, to ECOWAS,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea in their
implementation of the strategic framework adopted
at the Yaounde Summit of 25 June 2013 will remain
critical in addressing this serious problem.
The situation in the Sahel remains alarming,
due to a combination of various vulnerabilities
related to governance, security, the environment and
socioeconomic development. In the wake of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, several
initiatives have emerged, highlighting the need for
coordination and complementarity of effort so that all
external actors can work together to help the Sahel.

In the context ofthe growing insecurity in the Sahel,
the situation in Nigeria remains very worrying. Despite
the Nigerian Government's efforts, the schoolgirls
abducted from Chibok remain in captivity. I would like
to commend the countries that are supporting Nigeria's
efforts to locate the girls and obtain their safe release.
In the meantime, the level of violence against civilians
in Nigeria continues to escalate. That has resulted in
significant displacement in the north. It is disheartening
to note that within the last two weeks there have been
at least 18 attacks attributed to Boko Haram, which
have resulted in innocent civilians' tragic deaths and in
people's displacement. The Boko Haram crisis is now
affecting security in the subregion. As the Chairman of
the Cameroon-Nigeria Commission, I am particularly
disturbed by the adverse effects that the insecurity has
had on the border demarcation process, which would
otherwise have been close to completion.

With the growing insecurity in Nigeria's north-
east, coupled with increasing political tensions and
divisions in the run-up to the 2015 general election,
the country is at a crossroads. In my View, therefore, it
is critical that Council members continue to lend their
support to efforts and initiatives aimed at preserving
stability in Nigeria, which in the past few decades has
played a prominent role in maintaining regional and
global peace and security. The present situation also
underscores how vital it is that the Nigerian political
class take a unified stand in confronting the persistent
insecurity in the country.

During my forthcoming visit to Nigeria, as the
high-level Representative of the Secretary-General,
I and the United Nations country team will review
the implementation status of the integrated support
package adopted by the United Nations in consultation
with the Nigerian authorities, aimed at complementing
the efforts to address the Chibok abduction and its
related challenges. I will also continue to encourage
the countries of the Lake Chad Basin to cooperate
and work together as they have undertaken to do
within the framework of the implementation of the
decisions reached at the Paris Summit and the follow-
up ministerial meeting in London. In that regard, I
welcome the African Union's decision to consider the
possibility of deploying a task force in the region to
address the challenge posed by Boko Haram activities,
building on the initial steps taken by the countries of
the region.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to the
fact that West Africa is currently struggling to respond
to a deadly pandemic caused by the Ebola virus. The
outbreak identified in February in the south-eastern
region of Guinea has rapidly spread to Liberia and
Sierra Leone. While significant progress in efforts to
contain the outbreak of the disease has been recorded,
a relapse has been noted in the past few weeks, with
the risk of further spread within the region. The World
Health Organization reports that since February there
have been at least 759 infections and 467 deaths related
to the disease. It is important that the international
community pay due attention and provide support
during this epidemic, which is one of many other
challenges to stability in the region.

Finally, I wish to thank the Council for its
continued interest in and support to the efforts aimed
at consolidating peace, security and democracy in the
West Africa region.

