Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate to consider the second annual
report of the Peacebuilding Commission. Today's
deliberations should help us to take stock of the
progress made thus far and the challenges we face as
we enter the Commission's third year of work.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Chairman of the Organizational Committee,
Ambassador Yukio Takasu, for his observations and for
his admirable chairmanship of the Commission.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission was, in our opinion, one of the most
important results of United Nations reform to date. The
peacebuilding concept, as enacted through the
Commission, offers the best way for us to effectively
implement and consolidate the three main pillars of the
United Nations: security, development and the
protection of human rights. Only if they are
implemented together can sustainable peace and long-
lasting stability and prosperity be achieved.

We are equally cognizant that the chances for
substantive peace are enhanced by the speedy and
coordinated engagement of the United Nations system
as a whole following the establishment of a ceasefire
on the ground or the signing of a peace agreement. It is
therefore imperative that all post-conflict efforts be
coordinated and integrated so that they can be utilized
to capacity while substantially reducing overlap.

It was for those particular reasons that Croatia
supported and greatly values the establishment in 2006
of the Peacebuilding Commission and its subsequent
work on country-specific issues. We believe that its
second session brought many positive developments
that can be built upon in the future, in particular those
related to the more focused approach to countries on
the Commission's agenda. We hope that this approach
will be maintained, in particular with respect to the
new countries on the Commission's agenda - Guinea-
Bissau and the Central African Republic - whose
inclusion we very much welcome. Furthermore, we see
the expansion of the Commission's agenda as a clear
sign of its growing relevance, Vitality and strength
within the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

That having been said, we would like to echo the
Views expressed by some members around this table on
the need to keep in mind that the Commission's
evolution should go hand in hand with its flexibility. In
our View, enhanced flexibility brings more
responsiveness and more agility to the Peacebuilding
Commission in addressing post-conflict situations.
Similarly, although we value the current interaction
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, we believe that room still exists for
enhancing such cooperation and for making better use
of the Commission's input in the Council's
deliberations.

My delegation sees benefits in the idea put
forward in previous debates with regard to soliciting
the advice of the Peacebuilding Commission on
country-specific issues placed on the agendas of the
Security Council and the Commission. In our opinion,
that would be of benefit first and foremost to those
countries being debated, and give other interested
parties and organizations the opportunity to provide
relevant information that would allow the Security
Council to adopt more informed decisions.

All the activities that we are talking about today
will obviously not be possible without sufficient,
timely and flexible funding. As one of the founders of
and contributors to the Peacebuilding Fund, Croatia
hopes that the Fund will be able to further evolve into a
mechanism capable of responding promptly to the
Commission's needs.

Finally, we hope that during its third year, the
Peacebuilding Commission will continue to build on
the previous experience and work done thus far, taking
in and applying the lessons learned and strengthening
its efficiency, flexibility and dynamism in response to
the peacebuilding needs of the countries on its agenda.

