At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her valuable briefing and her ongoing efforts in support of Iraq. Tunisia is closely following the positive developments in the political situation in Iraq, in particular the Government's continued efforts to enact reforms that meet the demands and fulfil the aspirations of the Iraqi people, as well as the progress made by the Government in preparing for the early elections that will take place on 6 June 2021. While we acknowledge the importance Iraq attaches to completing the relevant legislation and to the enactment by the Council of Representatives of the electoral law, with a view to organizing free, fair, transparent and credible elections, we hope that the Security Council will respond to the Iraqi Government's desire to strengthen the role of UNAMI so that it may provide additional support and technical assistance and help to monitor the elections. Tunisia welcomes the Iraqi Government's efforts to strengthen the role and participation of women in decision-making by adopting the National Development Plan for the Empowerment of Women, which will have a positive impact and make a valuable contribution to promoting national unity and stability. Tunisia also notes with satisfaction the Iraqi Government's efforts to combat corruption and hold perpetrators accountable, including by establishing a permanent committee to investigate corruption and major crimes. We hope that work will continue to strengthen Iraqi sovereignty over border crossings, place all weapons under State control and complete the reintegration process. Against the backdrop of these positive developments, my delegation welcomes the agreement between the Federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government on a temporary solution to budget transfers and encourages the parties to continue cooperating and to step up efforts to tackle existing challenges in order to reach a sustainable and long-term agreement on issues of common concern. Tunisia reaffirms its commitment to the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, in line with the Charter of the United Nations, and calls for dialogue and cooperation to resolve border issues. My delegation also calls on the Iraqi Government to continue its efforts to ensure the protection of all diplomatic missions and diplomatic personnel in Iraq. Iraq is in a difficult economic situation because of low oil prices, on the one hand, and the large expenditures associated with its war on terrorism, on the other. In that connection, we welcome the efforts to address the economic and financial crisis, and the economic reform measures that the Government has submitted to the Council of Representatives. We urge the international community to provide Iraq with the necessary assistance to overcome the challenges it is facing at this stage. We express our concern about the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on the daily life of the Iraqi people and note the efforts made by Iraqi national institutions, in particular, the High Committee for Health and National Safety, to curb the spread of the epidemic and contain its effects. We also commend the United Nations and its specialized agencies on the role that they have played in supporting the Iraqi Government's efforts to respond to this pandemic. With regard to Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations, Tunisia highly values the cooperation between the two States and their tireless efforts to consolidate it further. We applaud Iraq for its readiness to uphold its obligations, including with regard to the Kuwaiti archives and the search for missing persons. We are satisfied with the progress that has been made in that regard, and we hope that the effort will continue in the same spirit of cooperation and solidarity between the two countries.
