Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, may I
congratulate you on your fine work as President of the
Security Council this month. I welcome the initiative
that enables us to discuss this very important issue,
namely the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

Armed conflicts are characterized by their
changing nature, which involves a multiplicity of
factors, requiring, in turn, an integral approach. The
parties involved, the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Human Rights Council, as well as other organs of the
system within their respective fields of competence,
must develop prevention strategies to safeguard peace
and protect civilians, dealing with the underlying
causes of armed conflicts: poverty, external
intervention by international corporations, desire for
domination on the part of some countries, and so forth.

Our State has had the responsibility of protecting
civilians displaced by the internal conflict being
experienced by our Colombian neighbours and have
received them as brothers and sisters and as though
they were citizens of our country. These are civilians
who flee from their lands and their homes to escape the
internal war. Many of them settle in our country, and
we welcome them and integrate them into our society.
Other displaced persons return to their homes in
Colombia when they see the opportunity for a fresh
start. In these circumstances, they have been treated in
strict compliance with humanitarian law and in keeping
with our constitutional responsibility to respect human
rights.

Nonetheless, that has not been the fate of other
peoples in the world, and here I must refer to the

specific case of the long-suffering people of Palestine.
The illegal occupation of Gaza by the Government of
Israel towards the end of 2008 and in early 2009 gave
rise to the criminal imposition of a curfew on the
civilian population, which still persists. On that
occasion, over 1,300 Palestinian children and women
were killed and 5,300 were wounded or mutilated for
life by these undesirable practices. This situation must
not go unpunished. Otherwise, some countries waging
war would be encouraged to engage in the perverse
practice of targeting civilians and the people for
military attacks. Practices such as these must be the
subject of the most rigorous consideration by this body,
fully backed by the General Assembly, and the
necessary legal measures to avoid more civilian lives
being lost because of the impunity syndrome must be
taken.

Wrongful practices against civilians also include
the detention of children, adolescents and women in
military conflicts for the alleged purpose of obtaining
information about the conflict and its protagonists, a
situation that is in clear violation of the human rights
of civilians. Another practice consists in attacking
humanitarian missions, such as the Red Cross and the
Red Crescent and United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as we have seen in Gaza in recent months,
with the destruction of infrastructure for public
services, housing, schools and United Nations
buildings where staff of this Organization who were on
a humanitarian mission lost their lives.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates that the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts resides
with States, and that the international community can
play a constructive role in support of national efforts,
always with respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States.
We also view with concern the attempts of some
States to interpret as they see fit the concept of
responsibility to protect contained in paragraph 139 of
the Final Document of 2005 World Summit. Some
countries have groundlessly tried to affirm that this
concept is a norm that can be implemented without the
required discussions, but we believe that the General
Assembly must discuss this concept and provide it with
a consensus interpretation.

Finally, Venezuela would like to reiterate its
commitment to peace and its readiness to debate in the
General Assembly all measures to effectively protect
civilians in armed conflict. We are convinced that it is
in that body that we can achieve the genuine political
commitment of States in the implementation of the
norms of international humanitarian law and human
rights on behalf of civilian populations affected by
such conflicts.

