Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like at the outset to
express its satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding
over this meeting of the Council. We welcome you
once again to New York. We extend our thanks to your
friendly country, Pakistan, and to your delegation for
having included this important item on the agenda of
the Council this month. It is a subject of great
importance, particularly at this juncture.

My delegation would also like to welcome the
Secretary-General and the eminent personalities who
participated in our discussion. They have very rich
experience of the work of the United Nations,
especially in the field under consideration today.

The Security Council has the greatest authority of
any United Nations organ. It is mandated to maintain
international peace and security. While the General
Assembly may make recommendations to Member
States and adopt resolutions, the Security Council has
the authority to adopt resolutions whose
implementation is compulsory, in accordance with the
Charter, in particular its Chapters VI and VII. The
Security Council may investigate any dispute, or any
situation which might lead to international friction or
give rise to a dispute. The Council can also recommend
any measures or actions with a view to resolving such
conflicts, if it considers them to constitute a threat to
international peace and security.
The Security Council can also refer any matter
relating to international conflict to the International
Court of Justice for its consideration. It can also rely
upon the legal advice of the International Court of
Justice. That has happened only once, as we heard from
one of our guests this morning. The Security Council
has broad authority that allows it to decide on
measures to be taken in situations that pose a threat to
international peace and security or that risk
degenerating into aggression. In such cases the
Security Council can resort to the use of armed force in
order to maintain peace and security.

We have heard many speakers today state that the
provisions of Chapter VI were frequently applied
during the cold war. In the past decade, however, the
focus has been more on Chapter VII - as if there were
a clear dividing line between the two chapters. Of
course, if the Security Council relied only on Chapter
VII and completely ignored Chapter VI, that might
move the Council away from the main purpose for
which it was originally established.

The role of the United Nations in preserving
collective security is defined in the Charter, and the
Security Council has the authority to look into any
situation that may threaten international peace and
security. It has the authority to make appropriate
recommendations for the pacific settlement of disputes.
The Council also has the authority to impose economic
or diplomatic sanctions against countries that act in a
manner that threatens international peace and security.
The Council also has the authority to call for the use of
armed force if need be.

For more than 50 years, the United Nations in
general and the Security Council in particular have
assisted in preventing many local and international
conflicts, through the diplomacy of dialogue and
pacific settlement based on negotiation. They have also
resolved many conflicts and made, kept and built peace
in many regions of the world.

Regrettably, however, some major problems
remain, in particular the Middle East problem, one of
the oldest conflicts before the Security Council. It has
been on the General Assembly and Council agendas for
more than half a century. We wish to point out that all
Security Council resolutions on the Arab-Israeli
conflict were adopted under Chapter VI of the Charter.
The Council has not taken the appropriate measures to
achieve a peaceful settlement of that conflict, which
continues to rage despite the Madrid conference, with
its background of negotiations and its basis in Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Despite all of this, the problem remains unresolved.

The principles set out in the Millennium
Declaration and in Security Council statements on the
need for the Council to take an active role in resolving
international conflicts underline the importance of
avoiding the use of force in international relations in
any way running counter to the purposes of the United
Nations. They also stress the importance of settling
international disputes by peaceful means.

The role of the Security Council is not limited to
the use of peaceful means. It also includes using all
other possible measures to prevent a situation from
becoming a conflict threatening international peace and
security. That can be achieved by developing the
capability of the United Nations effectively to deal
with all issues related to possible conflicts, such as by
enhancing mechanisms of cooperation in the field of
information and planning, by adopting preventive
measures and by formulating a general plan to establish
a better early warning system and to improve the
effectiveness of the United Nations.

The Security Council has the mandate to settle
conflicts by peaceful means, and must therefore take
into consideration the transformations that have taken
place in our world today. The Council should also take
into consideration the feelings and reactions of the
peoples of the world, for whose security and peace the
Council is responsible. Those peoples believe that the
use of Chapter VII is not in their interest. That concurs
with the opinion of many legal experts, who favour
friendly, diplomatic instruments and solutions based on
peaceful negotiations and the provisions of Article 33
and other articles of the Charter that refer to peaceful
solutions.

We believe that improving the working methods
of the Council would make the Council more effective
and just. In order to achieve justice in its resolutions
and effectiveness in the implementation of those
resolutions, we believe that double standards should be
avoided in both the adoption and the implementation of
resolutions. Such double standards are no longer
understandable or acceptable, particular now that the
cold war has ended.

Secondly, reform of the Council's working
methods and reform to make the Council more
democratic should receive greater attention and should
be carried out in accordance with current developments
in the world.
Thirdly, the necessary increase in the membership
of the Council in both the permanent and non-
permanent categories should be made in accordance
with the request of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Fourthly, the veto power should be used less
often, since it is a tool that - to say the least - is not
in keeping with the spirit of democracy.

Fifthly, there should be close cooperation with
other organs and bodies of the United Nations system,
in particular with the Secretary-General, the General
Assembly and the International Court of Justice.

Sixthly, there should be close cooperation with
regional organizations, which can effectively contribute
to the pacific settlement of disputes. The desirability of
that approach has become very clear in the African
region.

Finally, all resolutions remain dead letters
without the clear and serious political will to
implement them.

