The President: I thank Mr. Yamamoto for
his briefing.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
to the Government of Afghanistan and, in advance
of the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan to be
held on 5 October 2016, co-hosted by the European
Union and the Government of Afghanistan, calls
on the international community to continue their
civilian and development efforts to assist the
Government and the people of Afghanistan in a
manner consistent with the Self-reliance through
Mutual Accountability Framework and with the
Afghan leadership and ownership.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of the progress attained by Afghanistan
and calls on all political entities to work together

to achieve a peaceful and prosperous future for the
people of Afghanistan.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern
about the security situation in Afghanistan, its
condemnation of the terrorist activities by the
Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, as well as
Al-Qaida, ISIL (Da'esh) affiliates and other illegal
armed groups, and its support to the Government
of Afghanistan and, in particular, to the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, in their task
of securing their country and in their fight against
terrorism and violent extremism.

"The Security Council also reaffirms its
support to an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
and reconciliation process with a view to achieving
lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan and calls
on all national, regional and international actors to
cooperate in this regard.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support to the work of United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in the implementation of
its mandate as per resolution 2274 (2016), and to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, and reaffirms that Afghanistan's
future lies in the building of a stable, secure,
economically sustainable State, free of terrorism
and narcotics, based on the rule oflaw, strengthened
democratic institutions and the guarantee and
enforcement of citizens' rights and obligations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l6/l4.

I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.

