Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to thank and commend
the Federal Republic of Germany for having organized
this meeting on the essential topic of support for the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). We are also grateful to Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
and Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Organization (IAEA), for
their valuable briefings.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is a country
without weapons of mass destruction or a nuclear
programme. We do not foresee such a programme in
the near or distant future, and we do not participate
in military or civilian programmes with other States
or international institutions on nuclear activities or
activities regarding other weapons of mass destruction,
for my country firmly champions universal nuclear
disarmament. We have always appealed to the sense
of responsibility of States with nuclear arsenals and
those with military nuclear ambitions or plans - as
the President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo has always noted in
speeches on this subject before the General Assembly
and other international forums - to move towards the
common goal of a world without nuclear weapons and
the total elimination of weapons of mass destruction
from the face of the Earth.

Fifty years after its entry into force, the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea underlines the importance of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as
the cornerstone of the international non-proliferation
regime and the basis for promoting nuclear disarmament
and developing nuclear energy for civilian purposes.
But the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has never fully
endorsed the Treaty's approach, as it seeks to prevent
the proliferation of nuclear weapons only in countries
that have never possessed them and has done little with
regard to their elimination in States that are armed to
the teeth with such weapons and with the capacity to
devastate our planet and turn it into a lifeless wasteland.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea encourages all
parties to the NPT to show real political will to hold a
dialogue and seek consensus to reform this international
Treaty, specifically article I, as soon as possible, during
the 2020 Review Conference, which also coincides with
the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty's entry into force.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea considers it
necessary to promote a nuclear disarmament process
in line with the framework provided by the Treaty on
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons adopted in June
2017, in which the nuclear Powers are expected to work
in collaboration with the non-nuclear-weapon States
to make further progress towards the objectives of
strengthening universal nuclear disarmament and the
global nuclear non-proliferation regime by considering
the wishes and the concrete and realistic initiatives of
the international community.

Our delegation is very attuned to the debate on the
humanitarian impact of the use and threat of use of
nuclear weapons. In view of the current proliferation
crisis, the Council must remain united and take united
action. It must assume its responsibility as guarantor
of international security, responding firmly to any
activity that seeks to undermine the global peace
regime and serving as a deterrent to such action, as
widely expected.

We believe that it is not enough to establish some
regions as zones free of weapons of mass destruction.
Rather, planet Earth as a whole should be declared a
nuclear-weapon-free zone. Through the signing of the
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, Africa
became a nuclear-weapon-free zone. The issue of
ensuring non-proliferation is a key issue for Africa,
given its concern about the proper management of its
uranium reserves. We therefore call upon the Council to
regulate the use of uranium from Africa and that of any
region declared a nuclear-weapon-free zone, in order
to ensure its exclusive use for civilian and peaceful
purposes and to promote non-proliferation.

We express our strong support for the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the IAEA,
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs. We support the efforts of
those entities to negotiate multilateral disarmament
instruments and prevent non-State actors, including
terrorist groups, from gaining access to nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and weapons of
mass destruction.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea emphatically
condemns the manufacture, stockpiling, distribution,
sale and use of any chemical substance as a weapon,
by anyone and in any situation, and stresses the
importance of strengthening the non-proliferation
regime on nuclear, biological and chemical weapons
and bolstering civil nuclear security.

The fiftieth anniversary of the NPT coming in
2020 underscores the importance of adapting that
international instrument to our times, which are very
different from the Cold War period when it entered
into force. We therefore encourage the international
community to explore our common ground with a
view to rewriting and bringing us closer to the NPT
of 2020, which should be different from that of 1970,
in that its scope with regard to disarmament and
non-proliferation should be applicable generally and
equally for all States, and should no longer take into
consideration the differences and prerogatives that the
NPT has privileged whereby some States are exempt
from some of the international obligations that global
nuclear disarmament requires. That calls into question
the international equality of all States.

I would like to conclude by making a strong
appeal to all nuclear-weapon States that are
embroiled in negotiations or that have yet to resolve
outstanding issues on the establishment or renewal
of non-proliferation agreements to keep going and
spare no effort to achieve those agreements. In that
regard, Equatorial Guinea reiterates its full support
for the Secretary-General's Agenda for Disarmament,
published in May 2018, Securing Our Common Future,
which outlines a series of practical measures focused
on weapons of mass destruction, conventional weapons
and new technological battlefields.

