First of all, I would like to congratulate Mr. Christoph Heusgen, Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July and to wish him and his delegation every success. I would also like to express my gratitude to him for organizing this special event on such an important issue as peace operations and human rights. This debate is a great opportunity to exchange views, and I am convinced that its outcome will be constructive and useful for the United Nations system and the Member States. In the present peace and security environment, United Nations peacekeeping is in constant evolution. The current peace operations context demands increasingly complex peacekeeping missions and coherent mandates that effectively correspond to the situations on the ground. Taking into account changes in the nature of conflicts, it is vital that the United Nations system continue its efforts to identify and address new challenges. It is important to emphasize that the protection of human rights is one of the crucial elements of United Nations peacekeeping. The challenges facing the Security Council with regard to the protection of human rights call for greater international cooperation and better coordination among the Security Council, other United Nations bodies and agencies, United Nations country teams on the ground, as well as regional and subregional organizations. Additional efforts should be made by the United Nations system to be better equipped to adequately respond to situations that specifically threaten civilian populations. In that regard, the strategic partnership between the United Nations and the African Union in the field of peacekeeping and peacebuilding must be preserved and further developed. The exchange of experts and specialists between the two organizations is essential in enhancing the planning of peace support operations and conflict prevention. One of the most important reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina was the reform of the security sector. That reform was based on, inter alia, full respect for human rights, including women's rights. The activities, which began in 2008, were aimed at the greater involvement of women in the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Women of Bosnia and Herzegovina have also participated as peacekeepers in United Nations missions to help in peacebuilding activities at the international level. They contribute to peacebuilding missions, assisting with the implementation of peace agreements and supporting Governments in implementing security reforms and protecting civilians, especially the most vulnerable population groups, namely, displaced persons, returnees, women and children. Bosnia and Herzegovina places great importance on the women and peace and security agenda. I would like to underline the need for greater implementation of that agenda and increased representation of women in decision-making processes. In a changing global context, the substantial involvement of women in efforts to prevent threats to international peace and security is as essential as it has ever been. The United Nations system must play a pivotal role in promoting women's participation in peace and security processes. Bosnia and Herzegovina collectively is committed to implementing the women and peace and security agenda and its priorities by ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in all stages of the peace process and by systematically integrating a gender policy designed to increase the number of uniformed women in peacekeeping. Bosnia and Herzegovina is also committed to implementing the protection of civilians mandates of peacekeeping missions and will support effective performance and accountability by all peacekeeping operations under the United Nations flag. In addition, Bosnia and Herzegovina has signed the voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse and will hold personnel and leadership accountable for proper conduct, including by supporting the United Nations zero-tolerance policy, with its victim-centred approach, towards all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse. Bosnia and Herzegovina recognizes the importance of including persons with disabilities and will ensure that all steps are taken to meet their essential needs and promote their protection, safety, rights and dignity in situations of armed conflict and humanitarian emergencies. In order to uphold human rights during deployment in mission areas and to protect civilians from gross human rights violations and abuses, human rights and atrocity prevention are both mandatory components of Bosnia and Herzegovina's military and police training, as well as predeployment and in-mission training for all Bosnia and Herzegovina peacekeeping personnel. Awareness of international human rights law and humanitarian law is a foundational element of the training provided at the Peace Support Operation Training Centre in Sarajevo. That training enables peacekeeping missions to monitor and investigate rights abuses, analyse potential atrocity crimes, fulfil protection of civilians responsibilities and build the capacity of State institutions. Despite a widespread perception that existing training practices and methodologies are insufficient and fail to integrate the practical training needs identified on the ground, very well-trained peacekeeping personnel, in coordination with human rights officers, can enable missions to use different types of expertise in order to maximize their mission's impact on the protection of civilians. Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a Member of the United Nations, has joined the Secretary-General in developing a set of mutually agreed principles and commitments to respond to the challenges and create peacekeeping operations fit for the future. In that regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina has endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations and the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which essentially reflects the commitments as a collective action to strengthen peacekeeping in multidimensional operations and at the same time protect human rights in peacekeeping operations. In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina stands ready to actively engage in efforts to promote equality and counter discrimination through laws and relevant institutions and will encourage rights-based, inclusive public narratives; give particular attention to discrimination against women, persons with disabilities and migrants; combat hate speech in the digital space; and seek to ensure that the United Nations system and efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development adopt a human rights response to discrimination and inequality, thereby ensuring that no one is left behind or treated differently.
