Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Perhaps you would agree with me, Mr. President,
that the election of President Farmajo, with broad
popular support, the establishment of the new Somali
Government, as well as the concrete steps taken to
realize the hopes and aspirations of the Somali people
through the establishment of State institutions, the fight
against terrorism and the realization of economic and
social development, signal a new beginning that points
to the establishment of a strong and stable Somalia.
That requires an intensification of the international
support provided to Somalia that is commensurate with
the priorities of the Somali Government, as well as
improved coordination with the Somali partners with a
View to avoiding duplicity.

It is also important to expedite the implementation
of the agreements reached a few days ago in London
with regard to the security pact and a new partnership
for Somalia. On the other hand, terrorism continues to
pose a real danger to the gains realized in Somalia in
the recent past. That danger is not confined to Somalia;
it extends to other countries both within and outside the
region, which requires the promotion of international
and regional efforts to put an end to Al-Shabaab and
other terrorist organizations. In that regard, I commend
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for
all the sacrifices it has made while working with the
Somali armed forces.

We look forward to the expeditious implementation
of the agreements between the Somali parties signed
on 16 April 2017. The agreements provide a concrete
strategy for establishing a strong, united and
professional Somali security force that can shoulder
the responsibility of providing protection and security
in Somalia. However, it is important that the need to
take gradual steps in reducing the size of AMISOM. as
it moves towards the winding down of the Mission in
2020 be taken into account.

We believe that it is also extremely important
to support the national security, military and law-
enforcement institutions that fight terrorism, as well as
those institutions that provide basic services in order to
maintain peace and security. Support is also required
for the establishment of strong State institutions that
uphold the rule of law and for a review of the country's
Constitution. Accordingly, international efforts by all
members of the international community, in particular
the United Nations, must be intensified, in accordance
with the priorities set by the Somalis themselves.
Furthermore, redoubled international and regional
efforts are needed to assist Somalia in dealing with the
humanitarian crisis resulting from the drought. The
effects of drought extend beyond the humanitarian
sphere to the economic, security and political situation
in the country. It is therefore crucial to support and
enhance the capacities of Somalia in terms of prevention
and early warning and in dealing with the recurring
crises in the country.

In conclusion, we stress our determination to
continue to support Somalia with a view to establishing
a strong and stable State for the benefit, welfare and
progress of the Somali people.

