Mr. Staur (Denmark): Let me start by expressing
Denmark's appreciation to South Africa for organizing
today's important debate in the Security Council. We
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
commitment to strengthening United Nations support
for the rule of law. Denmark agrees that we now have
before us historic opportunities for enhancing justice
and the rule of law.

Denmark aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.

We welcome the convening of a high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the topic of the
rule of law at the national and international levels
during the high-level segment of its sixty-seventh
session. As a staunch supporter of an international
system based on international law, Denmark remains
committed to actively participating in sustaining and
further coordinating efforts aimed at promoting the rule
of law.

The promotion of the rule of law and universal
human rights constitute fundamental prerequisites for
achieving sustainable peace. We are therefore pleased
that in recent years the Security Council has been
playing an increasingly important role in the promotion
of justice and the rule of law.

In recent years, the international community has
been confronted with an increasing number of
intra-State conflicts that have consequences not only
for national, but also for regional and international
peace and security. This development is of great
concern and should be addressed by focusing even
more on the important linkages between peace and
security, development and justice at the international as
well as at the national and regional levels.

As the Secretary-General said, there is a need for
enhanced political will and stronger efforts to build
national ownership when it comes to the rule of law
and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies. This also requires increased support for
multilateral efforts to promote the rule of law, as well
as enhanced donor coordination.

The promotion of the rule of law, human rights,
access to justice and security are key strategic
objectives of Danish development cooperation,
including with States in fragile situations and in
transition. Genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes often take place in chaotic situations in fragile
and conflict-affected countries with weak institutions.
Denmark is a strong supporter of transitional justice
programmes that can help heal the wounds, initiate
truth-seeking processes, and establish judicial
accountability mechanisms and reparations
programmes for the victims. Rebuilding trust in the
justice systems is crucial to breaking cycles of violence
and paving the way for stability and development.

Repression and large-scale human rights
violations pose a threat to international peace and
security and concern us all. Human rights violations
are the root cause of many conflicts 4 not least
intra-State conflicts - and must therefore be at the
core of the Council's deliberations and its responses.
To Denmark, it is clear that in order to achieve lasting
peace agreements respect for and protection of human
rights need to be addressed. Ensuring respect for and
protection of international human rights norms and
standards should be a central element of all support to
justice systems. The international community must
work towards strengthening national ownership as well
as the capacities of Governments, which bear the
responsibility to protect their populations and ensure
respect for their human rights.
Denmark is an unwavering supporter of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and we are pleased
to see the Court increasingly fulfilling its important
role in fighting impunity for the crimes of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We take this opportunity to
encourage all States not yet parties to the Rome Statute
to ratify or accede to it, and further call on all States
parties to adhere to their obligations to fully cooperate
with the Court.

However, not all instances of the most serious
crimes should be dealt with at the international level. A
fundamental principle of the Rome statute is that of
complementarity. It underscores the primary
responsibility of national judicial systems to prosecute
perpetrators of atrocity crimes. To the extent that States
themselves are willing and able genuinely to prosecute
the most serious international crimes, we view that as
the better option.

National prosecutions serve to enhance local
ownership and understanding of the proceedings -
elements that are crucial if such processes are to lead
to true reconciliation and justice. Within the Assembly
of States Parties to the ICC, Denmark, together with
South Africa, has helped facilitate the complementarity
agenda. The aim is to fight impunity more effectively
by having international justice and rule of law actors
joining efforts to support strengthening judicial,
prosecutorial and investigative capacities in domestic
jurisdictions.

Justice sector capacity-building related to crimes
within the ICC's jurisdiction is a win-win situation.
States improve their ability to process the most serious
crimes, while at the same time they increase the
general capacity of their justice sector institutions.

To conclude, Denmark trusts and expects the
Council to do its part in strengthening justice and the
rule of law, and we will continue to give full support to
the work of the Council in this respect.

