Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank Staffan de Mistura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and able leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also
welcome the presence among us of His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, and thank him for his remarks.

Today, I would like to extend special
congratulations to the Afghan people, who once again
defied terrorist threats to vote in the Wolesi Jirga
elections on 18 September. The very holding of the
elections and the improvements made in their
organization are important developments. The
impressive number of candidates and the vibrant
campaigning testified to the determination of the
Afghan people to consolidate democratic governance.

We are concerned, however, about reports of
violence and intimidation that prevented polling
stations from opening and voters from participating.
Brazil condemns these acts, as well as the derogatory
remarks made against women candidates. Those
responsible must be brought to justice without delay.

Regarding the next steps in the electoral process,
the Independent Electoral Commission, the Electoral
Complaints Commission and its provincial offices must
be allowed to carry out their duties in conformity with
Afghan legislation and free from interference.

Unfortunately, the violence displayed during the
elections reflected rising insecurity in the country. We
note with great concern that 2010 has already become
the most violent in Afghanistan since the current
military operations began. We are particularly
saddened by the toll on civilians. The 55-per cent
increase in overall child casualties is extremely
disturbing. Brazil commends the efforts of the
pro-Government forces to reduce civilian casualties,
which now stand at 12 per cent of the total figure.

However, more must be done, especially
regarding casualties from escalation-of-force incidents,
which experienced a very significant increase.
Sustained progress in the military operations and in the
transition to greater Afghan responsibility for security
is an important element of any strategy to reverse the
current trends. A conditions-based process of the
Afghanization of security is at the core of the
commitments made at the London and Kabul
Conferences. We were therefore pleased to learn that
progress is being made in recruiting and training
Afghan security personnel and in strengthening the
ethnic and regional balance and human rights
preparation of troops and police.

Afghan forces must be provided with the enablers
and equipment necessary to perform their functions in
a very challenging environment. Continuously
enhancing Afghanistan's ownership of its security also
requires upholding Afghan sovereignty and regulatory
powers over private military and security companies
operating on Afghan soil.

Continued progress is key to other aspects of the
Kabul progress, especially reconciliation and
reintegration, the regional dimension and the delivery
of governance and development to the Afghan people.
In this regard, we welcome the establishment of the
High Peace Council and note the recent appointment of
its members, including several women, by President
Karzai. Representation of Afghans from all regions and
ethnic backgrounds and women's and civil society
organizations is an important safeguard to ensure that
the reconciliation process does not come at the cost of
the rights recently reclaimed.

The efforts to strengthen the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board and to align its standing
committees more closely to the clusters of the Afghan
National Development Strategy are other important
steps in moving the Kabul process forward, especially
on aid coherence. In this regard, my delegation would
appreciate it if further information could be provided in
future reports on the execution of the Afghan national
priority programmes, as well as on the implementation
by the donor community of the London and Kabul
commitments on budget aid and the realignment of off-
budget aid.

Brazil fully concurs with the Secretary-General's
assessment that the Kabul process can be successful
only if it delivers at the local level countrywide. We
commend UNAMA's efforts to support the alignment
of sub-national programmes and work plans with the
national priority programmes, as well as to build
capacity at the provincial and district levels. Making
sub-national administrations more representative of
local realities and better able to provide governance
and development is key to building stability in
Afghanistan.

Developing agriculture is of the utmost
importance in helping to lay the foundations for both
prosperity and peace in Afghanistan. The important

role of agriculture in exterminating or reducing poppy
crops and drug trafficking, for example, cannot be
overstated.

Brazil is committed to strengthening its
contribution to the stability and development of
Afghanistan. The recent decision of my Government to
open a resident embassy in Kabul was a practical
demonstration thereof. But we are not waiting for it to
happen before we step up our cooperation with
Afghanistan. Just yesterday, a technical mission led by
the Brazilian Cooperation Agency left Afghanistan
after extensive meetings to identify areas for technical
cooperation in agriculture, mining and the cutting and
polishing of gemstones. The mission was organized in
close consultations with the Afghan Government in
order to ensure that our cooperation is fully consistent
with Afghan priorities.

Both in the framework of international forums, in
particular the Security Council, and through an
enhanced presence in Kabul and a renewed impetus in
our bilateral relationship, Brazil stands ready to work
together with the Afghan people and its Government
towards a brighter future.

