Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom warmly welcomes Malaysia's initiative to
hold an open debate on the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants in peacekeeping
environments. Effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is crucial in building lasting peace and security
in post-conflict societies.

We are also grateful to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for their non-paper, which
provides a sound basis for today's discussion. We welcome
the Department's plans for a manual setting out principles
and guidelines for practical disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration in a peacekeeping environment, and look
forward to its publication.

Today's debate will only be of value if it has a
practical effect on the way in which the Council addresses
conflict situations in the future. The recommendations
provided by the Secretary-General in his reports to the
Security Council are clearly crucial in this respect. The
Secretariat is right to flag disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration requirements in peacekeeping operations. This
must continue, in particular when making recommendations
on a new or developing operation.

For their part, the Security Council and the General
Assembly must ensure that a United Nations peacekeeping
operation has an appropriate mandate and sufficient
budgetary and human resources for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration tasks assigned to it. If an
operation is to carry out disarmament or provide security
at disarmament sites, its mandate must provide the
appropriate authorization and the right force level, based
on clear and practical advice from the Secretary-General.
Half-measures do little to contribute to lasting peace. The
possible peacekeeping operation in Sierra Leone will
provide an early opportunity for the Council to translate
today's debate into concrete action. How valuable it
would be if we could, with that kind of experience in the
field, thrash out a blueprint for action on future occasions,
which would give us confidence that these things can
work.

In that spirit, I would like to touch on some elements
that seem to the United Kingdom to be important in
constructing an effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme and many of these elements
reflect the priorities spelled out to us just now by the
Deputy Secretary-General.

First, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
must be given a higher priority in peace agreements and
be subject to careful planning. Where possible, a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan should
be written into a peace agreement with its provisions set
out clearly. It is important that all parties understand what
is on offer, including through public information
campaigns.

Secondly, effective international coordination is
essential. The United Nations funds and programmes, the
Bretton Woods institutions and multilateral and bilateral
donors all have a role to play, but their efforts must be
concerted. As a rule, the United Nations should provide
the coordinating framework.

Thirdly, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes must be well resourced to be
effective and tailored to the specific circumstances of
different societies, including existing norms of weapons
possession.

Fourthly, we must address the specific problem of
child soldiers. Child soldiers are often the last to disarm
and the first to rearm. Often as much victim as
perpetrator, the child soldier requires special attention and
treatment. The emphasis must be on long-term
reintegration.

 

Fifthly, the security of collected weapons is important
if they are to be placed under the control of legitimate
military authorities. Otherwise, they must be destroyed as
soon as possible. Those who surrender weapons must also
be given a strong and credible guarantee of their security.

The need for security is also tied into the need for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration to be set in
the context of wider security sector reform, including the
restructuring of armed forces and assistance to the civilian
police force and judiciary. Unless the State itself can
provide security to its citizens, there will be no incentive
for disarmament. This is why the United Kingdom has
focused a significant proportion of its aid to Sierra Leone
on contributing to the radical restructuring and training of
the Sierra Leone armed forces.

The third and equally important element of today's
debate is reintegration. The United Nations has a lot of
experience, both good and bad. In Mozambique, for
instance, a long-term reintegration programme worked. My
delegation looks forward to hearing from the representative
of Mozambique in this debate about his country's
experience in this regard. In Angola, the programme did not
work. The fact that it did not work contributed to a much
longer and costlier conflict in that country. In effect,
reintegration meant returning to UNITA's ranks. We have
to find a way to ensure that former soldiers have a stake in
building the peace and that their future is assured.

My sixth point is that disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration cannot be effective if new weapons are
flowing into the target area. We must therefore ensure that
arms exporting countries exercise responsibility in their
small-arms transfers and we must combat the illicit
trafficking of such weapons.

But disarmament need not always take place in the
context of a peace agreement and the deployment of a
peacekeeping operation. The initiatives taken up, for
instance, by the Governments of Albania and Mali, with the
support of the United Nations Development Programme and
the European Union, provide commendable examples of
attempts to deal with surplus weapons in civilian
possession. This "security first" approach should be
applauded. For example, the demobilization of child
soldiers in long-running civil wars may be possible even
before a peace agreement is concluded.

The United Kingdom is particularly pleased that you,
Sir, are chairing our meeting on this subject today. Your
presence is a clear signal of the importance which Malaysia
attaches to this subject. We look forward to working
closely with you, with your delegation and with other
Council members on this issue in the future and we are
glad to support the draft declaration which Malaysia has
proposed to conclude this debate.

