Mr. Tupouniua (Tonga): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Pacific small island developing
States, comprising Fiji, the Federated States of
Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, the Kingdom of Tonga.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict. We congratulate you on
your leadership in taking the initiative to highlight the
impact of armed conflict on the security of children.

The issue of armed conflict and its impact on
children is of great importance to the world, and it is
also relevant to our region. Children and young people
make up a large percentage of our population, and the
challenge of providing a safe and secure environment
is of paramount importance to our leaders. We may not
have the problems of child soldiers, as experienced by
some United Nations Member States, but our region
has experienced internal conflicts, and those conflicts
have had a negative impact on our children and young
people. We also face the challenge of cleaning up our
environment to make sure it is free of old munitions
from previous world wars. Old munitions are
hazardous to our environment. They affect our waters
and fishing environment. They also have a negative
impact on the health of our children. Therefore, a long-
term approach would be beneficial to maintaining a
safe and secure environment for the next generation.

The work initiated by the Security Council has
made a difference in exposing the detrimental impact
of armed conflict on children. The Security Council's
initiative on children and armed conflict has yielded
positive results in extending more protection to
children in conflict situations. The Working Group of
the Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict
has systematically reviewed 18 country reports of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict, and
13 sets of recommendations were adopted on the basis
of the conclusions of the reviews. Nine peacekeeping
missions involve child protection advisers, and the
security of children has also been featured in peace
agreements.
It is important that the Security Council sustain
the efforts to implement the four formal action plans
listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's annual
report in order to end the recruitment of child soldiers.
We are aware that an estimated 1,400 children have
been released as a direct result of compliance with the
action plans. There is a need, however, to also focus on
preventative measures with regard to that issue.
Protecting the physical security of children is the first
step.

We must take extra steps to ensure that children
are cared for in post-conflict development. Children
who have experienced the trauma of war, particularly
child soldiers, should receive the necessary support to
help them with reintegration into their communities.
Many reports have shown that it is particularly difficult
for child soldiers to be accepted by their families and
communities due to the atrocities they were forced to
commit during times of conflict. Efforts are needed,
therefore, to work with Member States and grassroots
organizations to make provisions for child soldiers.
Many lack access to education, basic housing and
health care. Younger children, particularly young girls,
are easy targets for violence, sexual assault and human
trafficking. The recent report of the Vienna Forum to
Fight Human Trafficking noted that the increasing
demand for forced labour and sexual exploitation
leaves children vulnerable.

It is important to sustain the health and well-
being of children by eliminating possible security
threats to their mental, physical and emotional well-
being and to create an environment that promotes
safety and healthy development for those children after
they have been rescued. It is also important to
stimulate economic development and growth in post-
conflict settings so those children and young people
will have access to education, vocational training and
employment opportunities. In particular, it is important
to provide our children and young people with
educational and vocational opportunities to promote
political and economic security within our region.

We hope that the Working Group will continue to
monitor the treatment of children and child soldiers in
conflict situations. Greater cooperative efforts between
the Working Group and relevant United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and UNICEF, are important in making
provisions to promote community-based reintegration
for children in post-conflict development.
The preventative approach advocated to deal with
the issue of children in armed conflict situations also
applies to other threats to international peace and
security. It is important to take active measures to
address the security implications of cross-cutting
issues, as those issues are not labelled as traditional
security threats but, in reality, have serious security
implications. For instance, climate change is a cross-
cutting issue that is relevant to international peace and
security, and it is our hope that the Security Council
will adopt a proactive approach to addressing the
security implications of climate change, as it has done
with the issue of children and armed conflicts.

