Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting
and for the opportunity to speak to the Security Council.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Let me start by rewinding the clock to December
2016, after the Council's adoption of resolutions 2270
(2016) and 2321 (2016) in response to North Korea's
fourth and fifth nuclear tests, in the hope that that
would change North Korea's behaviour. When we fast
forward to December 2017, however, the situation has
deteriorated further. This year, North Korea conducted
yet another nuclear test and launched 20 ballistic
missiles. To be fair, the international community
responded by further strengthening and implementing
the Security Council's resolutions, while not losing
sight of the efforts to resume a dialogue. Those
endeavours, however, have not been enough to bring
North Korea back to the negotiating table for talks
on denuclearization.

A little more than a couple of weeks ago, North
Korea launched its most advanced ballistic missile,
with an intercontinental range. Afterwards, it claimed
to have completed its State nuclear force. Despite
the differing assessments, what is certain is that
North Korea is indeed in the final stages of nuclear
weaponization. If that is in fact completed, it will
fundamentally alter the security landscape in the region
and beyond. Many commentators point out that it will
aggravate tension in an already heavily militarized
region, and they even worry about the risk of nuclear
proliferation to rogue States and non-State actors. North
Korea also threatens to shatter the foundations of the
international non-proliferation regimes and continues
to inflict lasting harm on its own people. Now more
than ever, the international community must grasp the
gravity and urgency of this threat and find ways to halt
North Korea's nuclear programme and bring it back to
the path of denuclearization.

What matters most now is not mere assessments of
the North Korean threat but rather our united will and
firm action against the regime. North Korea is waging a
fierce battle of wills with the international community.
It wants to be recognized as a nuclear-weapon State
on its own terms and conditions. Our answer should
be absolutely no. We should not be coerced by North
Korea's continuing provocations but rather uphold
our principles, while responding firmly to its reckless
behaviour. At the same time, we should not be provoked
into conflict nor should we shut the doors to dialogue
and peace. Our common goal is the complete, verifiable
and irreversible denuclearization of North Korea
in a peaceful manner. In that context, I would like
to underscore that the 2018 PyeongChang Olympic
Winter Games should be an Olympics for peace. My
Government urges North Korea to join the Olympic
Games and to seize that opportunity for dialogue.

North Korea is also waging a battle ofactions against
the international community. Time and again, it has
found and taken advantage of the loopholes in Security
Council resolution, and it has preyed on the weak links
in the international community. The sanctions are not
an end in themselves. They are meant not to bring down
North Korea but to bring it to the negotiating table for
talks on denuclearization. However, if we are to bring
an unwilling North Korea back to the table, we must
fill in all the gaps identified in the implementation of
the resolutions. In that regard, we deeply appreciate the
active efforts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006).

The international community has made some
progress, including through its restrictions on oil
supplies, the export ban on North Korea's key products
and its ban on overseas work authorizations. Many
countries, even those with a long-standing relationship
with North Korea, have joined those efforts, including
by expelling individuals on the sanctions list. The record
number of submissions of implementation reports for
resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321 (2016) is a testimony to
the enhanced awareness of the international community
regarding the North Korean threat.

However, in our race against North Korea, we
need to do more - much more. North Korea's evasive
tactics are becoming more sophisticated, and the
regime continues to exploit every weak link. In fact,
the Republic of Korea has been actively cooperating
with its partners to identify and stop North Korea's
attempts to evade sanctions, to seek alternative routes
in order to sell coal and other banned products and to
illegally import oil. Let me emphasize that none of us
should become such a weak link, and none of us should
condone groups or individuals who assist North Korea
in its defiance of the Council. In that regard, sharing
best practices in countering North Korea's evasive
tactics will be helpful in closing loopholes.

I began my remarks by recalling how we ended 2016
and how North Korea defiantly continued its series of
provocations in 2017. We cannot afford to meet once
again at end of 2018 with the feeling that the situation is
one of de'ja vu like in the 2017 situation and regretting
our business-as-usual approach. Council members and
the international community must redouble their efforts
to ensure the seamless and complete implementation of
sanctions, and apply as much pressure as is necessary
until North Korea returns to the negotiation table with a
sincere willingness to commit to denuclearization.

We should convey to North Korea that sense of
urgency, so that it understands unequivocally that it
will pay heavily for its provocations, that it will never
be accepted as a nuclear-weapon State and that dialogue
leading to denuclearization is the only viable option.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its solid commitment
to achieving the denuclearization of North Korea
and the establishment of lasting peace on the Korean
peninsula. We will work closely with all countries to
that end.

