I thank Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for the detailed report submitted to the Council (S/2020/309, annex) and for their informative briefings today. Estonia commends the Mechanism for its work and the progress made during the reporting period, both in the Hague and in Arusha, including all the efforts aimed at ensuring business continuity to the greatest extent possible under the current extraordinary circumstances. We take note that the restrictions in place to curb the spread of the pandemic have adversely affected timelines for case completion and that any delays would be kept to a minimum. We also note the work of the Mechanism on the ongoing trial proceedings in the Stanisic and Simatovie case, the appeal proceedings in the Ratko Mladic case and the pretrial phase in the multi-accused Prosecutor v. Maximilien Turinabo et al. contempt case, now joined by the Ngirabatware contempt case. We further welcome other activities of the Mechanism, including in relation to the its unified filing system and that system's public interface - the unified court records database - created to allow public access to the judicial records. We further recognize the initiatives taken to address gender parity in the Mechanism's staffing and the steps taken to eliminate harassment. International criminal justice and the fight against impunity continue to depend on a collective effort. After the French authorities arrested Felicien Kabuga on 16 May, Mr. Kabuga, who is known as the financier of the Rwandan genocide, is finally going to face justice for acts committed 26 years ago. We commend the resolve of the Office of the Prosecutor and the many countries and international entities, such as INTERPOL and EUROPOL, for their assistance. We now strongly urge Member States to provide the necessary assistance so that the six remaining fugitives may be arrested and brought to trial. The essence of the efforts of the International Residual Mechanism is to establish justice and provide recourse to victims. Last year, we commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide and next month we will commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide. We know from the past that little was done internationally to stop the killings when they were taking place. That is why the Council must do better in future to prevent and react to similar horrendous crimes. The International Residual Mechanism assists States and individuals in doing better to keep the promise of never again. Estonia continues to support the Mechanism's work and the extension of its mandate.
