Mr. Scott (United States of America): Permit me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Council presidency and to thank the Permanent
Representative of France for his service as President
during the month of June. I should also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Danilo Turk for his
detailed statement and for his contribution to the
success of the United Nations effort in Bougainville.

The inauguration of the first Autonomous
Bougainville Government on 15 June marked a
milestone after a decade of conflict in the Papua New
Guinea province - a conflict that caused over 25,000
deaths. An international monitoring team reported no
significant violence or voter intimidation during the
elections of 31 May, despite the absence of foreign
military or police support. Observers had feared that
the departure of outside security forces would seriously
undermine ongoing elections but, to the credit of the
people of Bougainville, the elections of 31 May came
off without undue disruption or fraud. The successful
inauguration of the new Government is one of the last
steps in the peace process.

The United States wishes to congratulate
President-elect Joseph Kabui and members of the
House of Representatives of the Autonomous Region
of Bougainville. We wish them success in fulfilling the
aspirations of the people of Bougainville. At the same
time, we call upon them to respect the democratic
outcome of the elections and to cooperate
constructively with their legitimate new Government
for a peaceful and prosperous future.

The United States also commends the
Government of Papua New Guinea for its commitment
to the full implementation of the Bougainville Peace
Agreement. That also would not have been possible
without the support of the international community,
especially other Pacific island countries and the Pacific
Islands Forum, and the engagement of the Security
Council.

The United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville and its successor, the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville, both played key
roles deserving of our special thanks. What the United
States hopes will prove to be lasting peace in
Bougainville is the result of years of hard work,
negotiating, mediating and facilitating conflict
resolution. We express our appreciation to all those
involved in the growth of democratic movements and
institutions, which are the best hope for human
freedom and peace in all the world.

