Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
would like to reiterate that the security situation in
the country remains calm, peaceful and stabile. The
European Union (EU) military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to play an important role in
supporting our efforts in dealing with threats that could
undermine a safe and secure environment, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. In
addition, we take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation to those Member States that participate in
the EU-led force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

With regard to the functioning of the highest State
institutions, the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been meeting regularly. Bearing in mind that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has moved from being a
host country to one that now participates in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as in NATO
operations such as the International Security Assistance
Force, we would like to highlight that the Presidency
has adopted decisions on extending the participation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in international operations
in Afghanistan, on peacekeeping operations in the
Democratic Republic of Congo and on the contribution
of troops to the United Mission in Mali.

As to the references in paragraph 30 of the report
that the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina was
unable to agree on situation in Ukraine, I would like
to clarify the following. While we deeply appreciate
the role of the High Representative in overseeing
the implementation of the agreement without being
responsible for the evaluation of foreign policy
decisions, I want to remind the Security Council that
the Presidency is responsible for conducting the foreign
policy ofthe country and makes decisions by consensus
on all foreign policy issues according to the Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Furthermore, I would like to remind the Security
Council that my country is fully determined to promote
a peaceful resolution of the conflicts in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, the Presidency issued a
statement on 6 March that called on all the parties to the
dispute in Ukraine to refrain from the use of force and
to immediately engage in political dialogue to resolve
the situation in the interests of peace and regional and
global stability.

We believe that involving women in conflict
prevention and mediation and deploying women
protection advisers to United Nations peacekeeping and
special political missions are crucial to building and
reinforcing peace. We have been working on additional
efforts to advance that issue and have adopted a
policy whereby one third of candidates nominated for
peacekeeping missions must be women.

The Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina also continued to convene on a regular
basis, adopting new laws and sets of amendments to
existing legislation. Those included the 2014 State
budget, the public procurement law and amendments
to the law on the electricity transmission company and
amendments to the law on money laundering and the
financing of terrorist activities. The work plan of the
Council ofMinisters for 2014 was also adopted, as were
a framework budget for the period 2014 to 2016 and a
partnership action plan for NATO for the same period.

As in all other countries of the world, we have our
own challenges. We face difficult economic crises and
bitter austerity measures with negative implications on
all aspects of human life. In that connection, we would
like to inform the Council that protests against poor
economic conditions took place in several major cities
of the country on 7 February. The Council of Ministers
held two sessions with the relevant State-level law
enforcement agencies to discuss how best to improve
the provision of security for the institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

However, the challenges we face will not
discourage us from fighting for better respect ofhuman
rights and a better life for our citizens. We see a need
to work on eliminating all serious obstacles in order to
achieve the noble goal of universal respect for human
rights. Without sustainable progress on the protection
of all human rights, especially economic and social
rights, including strengthening the rule of law and
anti-corruption and financial accountability measures,
there is no sustainable development and security. All
those components are mutually reinforcing. In that
regard, we welcome the European Union's readiness to
support initiatives to improve economic governance,
strengthen competitiveness and stimulate economic
growth in my country.

Peaceful societies are the basis for sustainable
development. That is the reason that we are dedicated
to working for the future, which means more work
on political will and the allocation of resources in
order to ensure the implementation of strategies and
programmes for development. In addition, there is also
the issue of the accountability and ensuring quality of
life for our citizens, especially women, girls and youth,
in dignity with equal opportunities, including access to
health services, education and meaningful employment.

In addition, we would also like to inform the
Council that the Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the House of Peoples have adopted amendments
to legislation that regulate the issuance of citizen
identification numbers. In accordance with the
provisions ofthe election law ofBosnia and Herzegovina,
we expect the Central Election Commission of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to announce this month the holding of
general elections to take place in October.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made significant
progress towards European integration despite all
the complexities present within its society. Genuine
commitment to the European path has been our
highest priority. In that regard, we would like to take
this opportunity to commend the European Union's
increased engagement and heightened role in our
country, including the enhanced presence by the
combined European Union Special Representative and
its delegation.

My country remains a potential candidate for
European Union membership. The Stabilization
and Association Agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the European Union was ratified in
2011 but has not yet entered into force. However, the
Agreement's trade-related part came into force upon
its signing and has been successfully implemented ever
since 2008 in all its domains.

Nonetheless, political dialogue aimed at finding
solutions for all open questions has continued so
that the Agreement can come into force. That would
enable the country to submit a credible application for
European Union membership. We strongly believe that
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress along the European
Union's enlargement path is also in the interests of all
European Union member States. Therefore, serious
and progressive engagement by the European Union
is important to helping our country to facilitate the
implementation of the necessary reforms on our path
towards a European future. Such engagement would
also be a constructive way of resolving the outstanding
difficulties and fostering the dynamic of the integration
process.

We are also making additional efforts necessary
for completing the "5+2" agenda, which is obligation
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative
and for the resolution of all outstanding issues. The
implementation of the Sejdic-Finci judgment of the
European Court of Human Rights also remains to be
addressed.

The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has played an important role in the
prosecution of those responsible for serious violations
of international law on the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. The Tribunal is supposed to serve as a
constant reminder that there is no impunity for such
serious crimes. We still insist on our common goal
to investigate the crimes that were committed and to
adequately prosecute the perpetrators of those crimes,
regardless of their ethnicity. In that light, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues its constructive cooperation
with the Tribunal. Considering that the Tribunal will
soon complete its mandate, further processing of war
crimes will have to be transferred to national judicial
systems.

As regional cooperation also plays an important
role, we are certain that the protocol on the exchange
of evidence and information on war crimes, signed
between the Offices of the Prosecutors of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, will serve as an
impetus towards strengthening communication and
enhancing coordination among the Offices. My country
remains dedicated to further promoting and increasing
regional cooperation, which is in the common interest
of the countries in the region.

The implementation of the existing human rights
instruments, sustainable return and local integration
of refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs)
remains the priorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
continue good cooperation between partner countries in
the framework of the Sarajevo process on refugees and
IDPs, and see that the comprehensive and coordinated
return of refugees and IDPs throughout the region is
crucial to lasting peace.

Regarding the initiative launched by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in the past year and renewed recently, on
eventually declaring the termination of refugee status
for the refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
believe that the UNHCR decision to terminate that
status needs to be further discussed, especially bearing
in mind the effect of such a decision on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such determination on the
part ofthe UNHCR would most likely have an impact on
the situation of those groups, for which the conditions
to return to their pre-war homes have not been met.
Annex VII of the Dayton Peace Agreement guarantees
to all refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as

internally displaced persons, the right to return to their
pre-war homes.

The current figures from UNHCR provide strong
evidence that the parties to annex VII have not yet
created the conditions necessary for the voluntary
return of refugees and IDPs to their pre-war homes.
Therefore, we strongly believe that the proposed
declaration of cessation of refugee status jeopardizes
the realization of the objectives of the revised strategy
for the implementation of annex VII of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. For those reasons, I would like to
inform the Council that my country does not support
the decision to terminate refugee status in 2014, but
insists that consideration of the cessation of refugee
status be postponed until 2017, the time of the expected
completion of the regional housing programme as well
as other programmes currently under way.

We are aware that States bear the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights
of individuals within their territories. we are fully
committed to addressing all forms of violence against
women and girls, including sexual violence in conflict.
the protection of women in conflict situations and
ending impunity remain our utmost priorities. we have a
track record of definitive action to implement resolution
1325 (2000), and we were the first country in South-
East Europe to develop a comprehensive national action
plan for its implementation. With the aim of improving
the overall situation of female victims of rape, we have
made efforts to finalize the process of developing a
second action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), which contains important provisions for
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.

This year, Bosnia and Herzegovina presented a
candidate for the Committee on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).
If elected, our candidate will place her priorities on
prevention and on raising awareness of those most
important issues. She will continue fighting prejudice
and impunity. My country attaches great significance
to its candidature and hopes thereby to advance the
CEDAW agenda.

We are making additional efforts to resolve the

remaining border and property issues with neighbouring
countries. Regional cooperation and good-neighbourly
relations form an essential part of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's process of moving towards the European
Union. We continue our active involvement in regional
initiatives and have further developed our bilateral
relations with other enlargement countries and
neighbouring European Union member States. Regional
cooperation is one of the foreign policy priorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire region. It is
an important element in the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement and indicates the scope of my
country's foreign policy. My country is committed and
dedicated to the development of friendly relationships
with its neighbours, to the processes of European
integration, and to the resolution of outstanding issues
in the European spirit.

In spite of the positive developments in the country,
we are aware of the stand-off in the political process. It
is necessary to develop a positive atmosphere that will
foster constructive political dialogue leading towards
the resolution of the outstanding issues. All changes in
Bosnia and Herzegovina must be based on the rule of
law. Therefore, the full implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement is imperative.

In conclusion, I would like to remind the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
that, in accordance with the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bosniaks are one of the three constitutive
peoples and that referring to them as Muslims is not in
accordance with our Constitution.

