Mr. F arhadi (Afghanistan): At the outset I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. I also wish to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Voto-Bernales of Peru for the
able manner in which he led the work of the Council
during the month of November. We pay tribute to all of
the members of the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan, for their recent Visit under the leadership
of Ambassador Kenzo Oshima. The Visit presented
another opportunity for the Council to review the
ongoing efforts of my Government to achieve sustained
progress in the areas of the security, social and
economic development, good governance, human
rights and the rule of law - with the support of our
international partners. Most importantly, it reaffirmed
to our people the sustained focus and commitment of
the international community to a peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan. I am also thankful to other
members of the Council - some of whom were also
part of the mission to Afghanistan - Denmark, the
United Kingdom, Peru, the United States, China,
Russian Federation, France - for their proposals,
which contained interesting points to be addressed by
the Council.

We express our appreciation to the Council for
having published - in a short period of time - a
comprehensive report on the mission's activities during
the course of its visit (S/2006/935). We also thank the
Japanese delegation for its assistance in that matter. We
fully support the recommendations presented in the
report, which was the work, in large part, of
Ambassador Oshima.

Much has changed in Afghanistan since the first
Visit of the Security Council mission in 2002. Together,
we and the international community have succeeded in
implementing milestones and benchmarks that were set
out in the Bonn Agreement. The holding of presidential
and parliamentary elections, progress towards the
formation of a national army and police, the return of
more than 5 million children to schools, including
girls, and the adoption of a constitution that safeguards
and guarantees equal rights between men and
women - are but some of the many achievements that
have taken place. Nevertheless, despite these
achievements, we continue to face daunting challenges
that affect the daily lives of our people. The prevailing
security situation and the slow pace of development
remain in the forefront of our challenges.

Terrorism constitutes the most significant threat
to the security and prosperity of our people. Just two
weeks ago, on 25 November, a suicide bomber of
foreign origin walked into a restaurant in the south-
eastern province of Paktika and carried out a suicide
attack, brutally killing 15 civilians and injuring 12
others. Such attacks and other forms of terrorism,
which occur particularly along the south and south-east
border of the country, continue to be carried out in an
organized manner.

These attacks take place despite the rigorous
efforts of both the Afghan Government and the
international community to provide security for our
people. In this regard, we note with particular concern
that cross-border terrorists and extremists operating in
Afghanistan and in the region beyond receive incessant
support in terms of financial, ideological and logistical
assistance from sources located outside Afghanistan's
borders.

In this context, allow me to refer briefly to
paragraph 8 of the Secretary-General's report of
11 September 2006 (S/2006/727) in which he states,

"The leadership relies heavily on cross-border
fighters, many of whom are Afghans drawn from
nearby refugee camps and radical seminaries in
Pakistan They are trained and paid to serve as
medium-level commanders, leading operations
inside Afghanistan, and they are able to retreat
back to safe havens outside the country."

Relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council dealing with international
terrorism, in particular Assembly resolution 49/60 of
1994, by which the Assembly adopted the Declaration
on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, and
Council resolution 1373 (2001), oblige States to refrain
from organizing, assisting and perpetrating terrorist
attacks. The 1994 Declaration on the elimination of
terrorism contains a specific provision that calls on
States to ensure that their respective territories are not
used for terrorist installations or training camps. In
addition, resolution 1373 (2001) requires States to
bring to justice any person who supports, facilitates,
participates or attempts to participate in the financing,
planning, preparation or perpetration of terrorist
attacks or provides safe havens.

We are of the View that the strict compliance by
States with the aforementioned resolutions and texts
would contribute significantly to peace and stability in
Afghanistan.

Afghanistan attaches great importance to the role
of regional cooperation in combating terrorism. A more
robust and comprehensive campaign against terrorism
not only serves the interest of peace and stability in
Afghanistan, but also benefits the security and stability
of the region and beyond.
Based on a proposal made by President Karzai,
we are preparing to convene a cross-border Jirga on
security, consisting of influential tribal and religious
figures from both sides of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
border, with a View to enhancing local and tribal
structures to eliminate the scourge of terrorism from
Afghanistan and the region. We remain optimistic
about the outcome of this initiative. High-level
contacts aiming at developing cooperation in the
elimination of terrorist acts are now being made and
are very important for the relations between Pakistan
and Afghanistan.

Additional progress in the strengthening of our
security institutions is critical to improving the security
situation in Afghanistan. Despite inadequate resources,
the national army and police are engaged in
challenging combat operations against remnants of the
Taliban, Al-Qaeda and other extremist groups in the
southern and south-eastern provinces of the country.
Our security forces continue to face significant
challenges. Indeed, the lack of modern equipment and
logistical support has had a drastic impact on the
effectiveness of both the national army and the police.
As my delegation indicated in previous statements, a
significant improvement in the overall security
situation will require the provision of additional
resources to our security institutions.

We highlight the importance of the role of the
NATO-led International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) in securing stability and security in
Afghanistan. In that regard, the recent conclusion of
the third phase of the nationwide expansion of ISAF is
yet another important step forward. We also welcome
the recent inclusion of ISAF in the Tripartite
Commission.

Acceleration of social and economic development
is indispensable to overall success in Afghanistan.
While we have achieved much progress in many areas,
we regret that the pace of reconstruction and
development remains relatively slow. Here again, we
highlight the need to initiate and implement major
reconstruction projects and expedite the provision of
basic services so that tangible and visible
improvements in the daily lives of our people may be
achieved.

We also reiterate the need for sustained
international support for the implementation of the
Compact and for our interim national development
strategy. In this regard, we highlight the need to
channel donor assistance through the Afghan national
budget, while stressing the leadership role of the
Afghan Government in designating development
priorities.

The Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(JCMB) continues to make progress in carrying out its
important mandate. As noted in the report of the
Security Council mission, the Board recently convened
its third periodic meeting on 12 November. Moving
beyond procedural matters, it has begun the process of
reviewing progress made in key benchmarks scheduled
to be completed very shortly.

Enhanced regional economic cooperation is vital
for the timely and effective implementation of the
Compact. We express the utmost appreciation to the
Government of India for having co-hosted, with us, the
Second Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan, which was held in New Delhi on
18 and 19 November. We were pleased at the broad
participation of representatives of neighbouring
countries and other international partners. At the
conclusion of the two-day meeting, participants
reaffirmed the central importance of Afghanistan's
development to the growth, stability and prosperity of
the region.

The Government of Afghanistan attaches great
importance to the fight against corruption and narcotics
as key components of the Afghanistan Compact. The
dangerous link between the production of narcotics and
terrorism poses another threat to the stability and social
development of Afghanistan. For its part, Afghanistan
has embarked on a series of measures at the national,
regional and international levels to combat the scourge
of narcotics.

The updated Afghan National Drug Control
Strategy, presented at the London Conference on
Afghanistan, provides a comprehensive strategy for the
elimination of that threat. We continue to make efforts
to implement our Strategy. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, the specialized counter-narcotics
unit of the Afghan National Police seized
approximately 66 tons of narcotics during the first half
of 2006. Furthermore, the Ministry of Counter-
Narcotics has enhanced its coordination with the
Counter-Narcotics Tribunal, the Counter-Narcotics
Criminal Justice Task Force and other relevant
agencies.
Despite our efforts, we continue to face
significant challenges in our fight against narcotics. We
reiterate once again that a particular focus should be
accorded to providing alternative crops to farmers as
an essential element of a successful counter-narcotics
strategy. Equally important is the need for transit
countries to exercise strengthened control over their
borders to curb the flow of drugs, and for consuming
countries to reduce demand in their markets and to
fight against groups that are busy trafficking in those
countries.

The fight against corruption is among our top
priorities. Having already signed the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, we remain committed
to completing its ratification, perhaps very shortly.
National legislation will be enacted to facilitate the
implementation of the Convention by the end of 2007.
In that regard, a mechanism will be established with a
mandate to monitor and evaluate the process.

Furthermore, pursuant to the instructions of
President Karzai, the Government has embarked upon a
comprehensive initiative aimed at enhancing
transparency and good governance in various
Government institutions. As part of that initiative, the
Government has established an anti-corruption
commission - headed by the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court and composed of numerous agencies -
to come up with additional recommendations for
further action by the President.

In conclusion, I would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm my Government's steadfast
commitment to overcome the remaining challenges in
implementing the provisions of the Afghanistan
Compact, with the support of our international
partners. We also express our sincere appreciation to
the international community for its ongoing support
and assistance with regard to our efforts to achieve a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan.

