The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Indonesia, Malawi, Uganda and
Zimbabwe, in which they requested to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pohan
(Indonesia), Mr. Jawayeyi (Malawi),
Mr. Semakula Kiwanaka (Uganda) and
Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Dr. Piot to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document 8/2000/657, which contains
the text of a letter dated 5 July 2000 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting a note prepared by the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS that
summarizes actions taken to-date as a follow-up to the
Security Council meeting on HIV/AIDS in Africa held
on 10 January 2000.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2000/696, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I shall now give the floor to the Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, Dr. Peter Piot.


