Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by commending you, Mr. President,
for convening this briefing, as well as the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herve Ladsous, and the Police Commissioners of
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali for their briefings.

It has been practically two years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 2185 (2014), which
was the first resolution on the functions of United
Nations police and in which the valuable contribution
to peacekeeping of the work of the United Nations
police was underscored and strategic and practical
guidance, among other services, for the heads of police
components were provided.

Similarly, the importance and growing relevance of
police work in peacekeeping operations was manifest
after the celebration of the first Chiefs of Police
Summit in June here at Headquarters, where Ministers
of the Interior, heads of Police and high-level officials
from more than 100 Member States met to analyse the
evolution of United Nations police work. In the same
way, meetings like today's contribute to maintaining
the attention generated around this theme.

Uruguay is a long-term contributing country and
is highly committed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In respect of the contribution of police
personnel, my country has participated in police work
in peacekeeping operations since 1991, with its first
contribution to the United Nations Verification Mission
in Guatemala. To date, and withou interruption, we
have contributed to numerous United Nations missions,
including those in Mozambique, Timor-Leste, Western
Sahara, Angola, Liberia, Cote D'Ivoire and Haiti.
Our participation is generally oriented towards the
deployment of individual police officerss, who mostly
acts as instructors and advisers, and in some cases also
undertake executive tasks.

As police-contributing country, Uruguay wishes
to express its recognition to the assesment work of the
Police Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in particular its visits to countries that
decide to contribute personnel. In that connection,
it is essential to continue to improve the training of
formed police units and police officials, particularly
in the field of protecting civilians, taking into account
the increasingly complex environments in which
peacekeeping operations operate.

Uruguay, as a police-contributing country, meets
all United Nations requirements thanks to the training
provided by the National School of Peace Operations
of Uruguay, where both the military and the police
components for service with the United Nations are
trained. Training is comprehensive, with a special
focus on policies of zero tolerance for sexual abuse and
exploitation, gender policies and human rights training.

To conclude, I should like to direct an inquiry to
the Mr. Monchotte, Police Commissioner of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
MINUSTAH is recognized for its achievements over
the years in training of the Haitian National Police,
as well as the progress it has made with respect to
complementarity, the gradual use of force and joint
cooperation between the police and military components
of the Mission, acting in support of and in coordination
with the National Police. I stress in particular the good
results that have been achieved with the operational
application of the 1, 2, 3 mechanism. As Ambassador
Power mentioned, the Security Council's exit strategies
for peacekeeping operations must absolutely take into
account the fact that strengthening the national police
allows the military component to withdraw first, to be
followed by the United Nations police, which would
herald the success of the mission.

In this respect, I would ask ifthe progress achieved
in training the Haitian National Police and in the
aforementioned cooperation can constitute a basis for
the exit strategy and transfer of responsibilities in the
security sector, with a view to the gradual withdrawal
of MINUSTAH military component in the future.

