Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First,
let me thank you, Mr. President, for having taking the
initiative to convene this important debate on a matter
of great concern for France. I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Taye-Brook Zerihoun for his very
instructive briefing.

France also associates itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to focus on three points.

First, the security, economic and political
challenges related to maritime insecurity in the
Gulf of Guinea are major ones - for the region, for
strategic partners and for the international community
as a whole. The statistics speak for themselves. These
maritime zones extend over 6,000 kilometres of coastal
area, from Senegal to Angola. The Gulf of Guinea hosts
one of the largest offshore oil fields of planet, with an
estimated reserves of 24 billion barrels. That represents
about 5 per cent of global reserves. For 10 years, more
than 600 attacks have been registered against vessels
on the high seas or in the territorial waters of coastal
States. While the number of attacks declined in 2015,
due in great in part to the mobilization of States in
the region, the threat level remains high, as evidenced
by the upsurge in acts of piracy since January of this
year. Trafficking in narcotics leads to the transfer from
South America to Europe of 20 to 40 tons of cocaine
per year through the Gulf of Guinea, with an estimated
sale price of€1.3 billion. Those arejust a few examples.

The second point I want to emphasize is the
mobilization of the States in the region. Resolutions
2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) call on States of the Gulf
of Guinea to develop tools, capabilities and policies
to eradicate the growing maritime insecurity in the
region. States have responded to that call. The Heads of
State of the riparian countries and the heads of regional
organizations such as the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission demonstrated clear political will to fight
maritime insecurity at the Summit of Heads of State
and Government on Maritime Safety and Security in
the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaounde in June 2013. At the
Summit, they adopted the Code of Conduct Concerning
the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships,
and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa
and decided to establish the Interregional Coordination
Centre. The latter, inaugurated in September 2014, is
meant to sit at the top of a new interregional maritime
security architecture, and everything must be done to
enable the Centre to fulfil its role. The African Union
Summit to be held in Lome in October and the planned
adoption on that occasion of an African Union charter
on maritime safety and security and economic and
social development will be essential in that regard.
Those are very positive developments and efforts that
should be commended. France encourages the States of
the Gulf of Guinea to continue along that path. And, as
we did during the 2013 Sommet de l'Elysee pour la Paix
et la Securite' en Afrique, France continues to support
the Yaounde process, which we hope will become
operational as soon as possible.

Finally, France's strategy in the Gulf of Guinea aims
to support the initiative of the countries of West and
Central Africa. As members know, France is one of the
main supporters of the States ofthe region in their fight
against maritime insecurity. France has been present
in the area for 25 years, through Mission Corymbe
and cooperation in the area of security and defence.
Since 2011 - and until 2021 ~ the Gulf of Guinea
Maritime Security Sector Reform Support project
bolsters maritime security sector reform in the Gulf of
Guinea. To ensure the consistency of French initiatives
with the States of the region, a French support plan for
securing maritime areas in the Gulf of Guinea has been
developed. France also promotes maritime security in
the Gulf of Guinea within international organizations.
France has actively participated in the development of
a European strategy for the Gulf of Guinea, which was
adopted in March 2014, as well as a European action
plan, which was approved in March 2015.

In conclusion, in France's view, the strengthening
oflocal capacities and support for regional coordination
are the principles that should guide international efforts
in that region of the world. That approach is based on
respect for the sovereignty of the States of the region,
national ownership of solutions and, finally, the need
to ensure compliance with the law of the sea and the
freedom of maritime traffic. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/4, which we adopted today, fully reflects
that approach.

