Mr. Sharma (India): Allow me, Sir, as other
speakers have before me, to express our satisfaction as
seeing you preside over this meeting.

Very few countries have suffered as much as India
has from terrorism sponsored, aided and abetted by other
States. For us, therefore, condemnation of terrorism is not
only a matter of principle. We know, from the bitterest

 

experience, how heavy a toll terrorism exacts, and we also
know that, unless there is international cooperation to
combat it, terrorism, which is a global menace, cannot be
countered by States acting alone.

We therefore took part actively in negotiating the
International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist
Bombings, which the General Assembly adopted in
December last year, and look forward to its early entry into
force. We also hope that, in due course, the international
community will be able to negotiate binding legal
instruments that would outlaw all acts of terrorism, enabling
effective action against it under international law.

Among the terrorist attacks India has endured, we
have suffered several of the type of the Lockerbie disaster.
In 1955, an Air India flight, which had been expected to
carry the Prime Minister of China, Mr. Chou En-lai, but did
not, was destroyed in flight by a bomb. It was suspected
that agents of a State which wanted to assassinate the
Chinese Prime Minister committed this act of terrorism.
They were never brought to book. In 1971, an Indian
Airlines flight was hijacked to a neighbouring country and
destroyed on the ground. In 1985, an Air India 747 was
blown up over the Atlantic by a bomb planted by terrorists
operating from foreign soil.

We understand therefore the outrage of the countries
whose nationals were the victims of the Lockerbie disaster.
Far too many of our citizens have known the pain and
shock of having members of their families killed in random
acts of terror. We know, therefore, and sympathize deeply
with the anger that the relatives of those who died on the
Pan American flight feel and understand their determination
to see the guilty punished. And as a democracy we know
that, in the face of a strong public demand on Governments
to act, the Governments of the United States, the United
Kingdom and France must not only respond, but be seen by
their citizens to be taking vigorous action.
However, the point at issue is to ensure that criminals
and terrorists are tried and receive punishments
commensurate with their crimes. As long as this is assured,
it should not be a matter of contention where they are tried.
The Convention on the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings
has not yet entered into force, but all Members of the
United Nations participated in its drafting and, since the
resolution was adopted by consensus, presumably there is
no objection to its contents. Both it and the 1971 Montreal
Convention on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against
the Safety of Civil Aviation provide for universal
jurisdiction and, in particular, stipulate that each State Party
shall take measures to establish its jurisdiction over
offences defined in those Conventions either when the
offence was committed on its territory or on board an
aircraft registered under its laws, or if the offence was
committed by a national of that State.

In the Lockerbie case, this means that, under the first
option, the United Kingdom can seek to establish its
jurisdiction; under the second, the United States; and
under the third, Libya. Clearly, there is a conflict of
jurisdiction, and that is at the heart of the problem which
the international community has been unable to resolve
since 1992. The Conventions also stipulate that if a
dispute arises between the Parties on the interpretation or
application of the Conventions, and arbitration is not
possible, any of these Parties can refer the dispute to the
International Court of Justice. We had hoped that a
pragmatic decision could have been taken which would
have expressed the united will of the international
community to bring terrorists to book. Instead, decisions
taken by this Council have deeply divided the
international community, and the accused still await trial.

There is no question that the international
community is at one in condemning the terrorism on
which the present issue hinges. Security Council
resolution 731 (1992), which condemned the act of
terrorism, was adopted unanimously in the Council. When
resolution 748 (1992), which imposed sanctions on Libya,
was being negotiated, India, as the Coordinator of the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus in the Council, worked
hard to bring about a resolution that best promoted the
interests of the international community. Our efforts were
not successful and we were among the five countries that
abstained on resolution 748 (1992). In 1993, when
resolution 883 (1993) was adopted, imposing additional
sanctions on Libya, four members of the Council
abstained. The pattern of support for these three
resolutions demonstrated that, while the Council was
unanimous in condemning acts of terrorism, on sanctions
it was divided.
In the explanation of our vote on resolution 748
(1992), we spelled out three reasons why we had
abstained. Firstly, the definition of the circumstances
under which the sanctions either would not be enforced or
would be lifted was left vague; secondly, the judicial
process had not yet run its course; and lastly, the
resolution did not incorporate a clear acknowledgment of
the duties of the Security Council towards third countries
affected by sanctions, as spelt out in Article 50 of the
Charter. These points remain valid.

 

Six years have passed since sanctions were imposed
on Libya. The International Court of Justice, in its recent
Judgment, has ruled that it has jurisdiction and so will
consider the matter further. It is in the interest of all of us
to let the judicial process take its course and to bring the
perpetrators of the crime to justice as swiftly as possible. A
long procedural wrangle on where the trial should be held
serves no one's purpose; it has simply meant an indefinite
imposition of sanctions on people who are innocent,
causing them immense suffering.

Since the decision of the International Court of Justice,
which we hope will address the substantive issues with
despatch, has removed the original reason for which
sanctions were imposed, we trust that they will be lifted.
The impasse over the last few years has the potential of
needlessly sowing discord between two Charter bodies -
the Security Council and the International Court of
Justice - and serves no one's purpose either. We therefore
hope that pragmatic decisions will be taken which would
permit the early and fair trial of the accused in an open and
credible judicial process, acceptable to the international
community.

