Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes
the convening of this meeting, which provides the
Council with an opportunity to continue its
consideration of the threat to international peace and
security posed by international terrorism, which was
first addressed by the Council way back in 1992. We
recall that, following the important initiative taken by
you, Sir, and your delegation, during your presidency
of the Council in October last year, we had a very
useful debate, culminating in the unanimous adoption
of a landmark resolution pertaining to the question of
international terrorism, namely, resolution 1269 (1999)
of 19 October 1999.

We are also grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Hans Corell, the United Nations Legal Counsel, for his
useful briefing on the subject and his comprehensive
briefing paper. Clearly, important efforts have already
been or are being made by the United Nations in
developing relevant international legal instruments to
combat and suppress the terrorist menace. We
commend the efforts of the Secretary-General in
facilitating the work of the relevant United Nations
organs, as outlined by the Legal Counsel.
My delegation has clearly put forward its position
on international terrorism during the Council's debate
on the issue in October last year and during the
ongoing discussions in the General Assembly and the
relevant Committees. I do not intend to repeat
Malaysia's position beyond reiterating three main
principles.

First, Malaysia is against terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We condemn all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism as unjustifiable criminal acts,
regardless of the motivation of their perpetrators, when
innocent civilians are deliberately targeted as victims.
Terrorism should be condemned wherever it rears its
ugly head and whether committed by individuals,
groups of individuals or state authorities; the latter,
with better means at their disposal, can sometimes be
more devastating and destructive to civil society. In
taking security measures, States must be guided by the
principle of proportionate response and not cross the
threshold beyond which such security measures may
descend to the level of terrorism, which we all abhor.
Whenever such excessive use of force by the State
occurs, resulting in massive loss of life and injury to
the civilian population, it must be roundly condemned,
as we do with respect to other forms of terrorism.

Secondly, there should be a clear and universally
agreed definition of terrorism so that it can be
differentiated from the legitimate struggles of peoples
under colonial or alien domination and foreign
occupation for self-determination and national
liberation, as recognized by the relevant resolutions
and declarations that have been adopted by the United
Nations. However, this does not justify the use of

S/PVAZAZ

 

terrorist methods by any group against the unarmed
civilian population.

Thirdly, the international community must deal
with the terrorist menace with the severity it deserves
in a well-coordinated global strategy that should be
carried out in a fair, objective and non-selective
manner and without politicizing the issue.

The fight against international terrorism is a
global effort involving States Members of this
Organization and other international and regional
organizations. The Non-Aligned Movement, in the
Durban Declaration of 1998, clearly enunciated its
position on the need to promote international
cooperation in combating terrorism, which, inter alia,
should be pursued in accordance with the principles of
international law and respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. The Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC) has also taken its own
initiative on this matter through its resolution 59/26-P
on the follow-up of the Code of Conduct For
Combating International Terrorism and the Convention
of the OIC on Combating International Terrorism, as
contained in document S/l999/1204 of 29 November
1999. The Legal Counsel has alluded to the OIC
initiative in his briefing paper. Malaysia, as a member
of the two organizations, fully subscribes to these
positions.

Over the past four years, the General Assembly's
Ad Hoc Committee, in which we participate actively,
has achieved remarkable results in strengthening legal
measures against terrorism, particularly with the
adoption of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings in 1997 and the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism in 1999.

We are pleased to note that the Ad Hoc
Committee this year has started its consideration of the
Indian-initiated draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. We are gratified to note, too,
that the draft was well received by Member States,
although a number of issues have yet to be resolved
before it can be adopted. In this regard, we feel that it
is imperative that the question of the definition of
terrorism be addressed in serious fashion so that an
acceptable definition can be included in the draft
convention. A universally agreed definition of
terrorism is important not only to clear up any
ambiguity about the term, but also to facilitate greater

and more concrete and coordinated cooperation by
States in combating this menace. In this regard, we
would urge a truly comprehensive approach in the
elaboration of the convention on terrorism in the Sixth
Committee.

Malaysia is also seriously concerned by the ever-
present danger of nuclear terrorism. We continue to
believe that, ultimately, the most effective way of
preventing what would be the catastrophic
consequences of acts of nuclear terrorism is the total
elimination of nuclear weapons; hence, the importance
we have attached and continue to attach to nuclear
disarmament leading to the ultimate elimination of all
nuclear weapons. Notwithstanding this, we commend
the Russian Federation for its initiative and look
forward to the early completion of the work on the
draft convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear
terrorism and to its eventual adoption, thereby making
the world a little safer, though not entirely safe from
the possible use of nuclear weapons. Finally, my
delegation fully concurs with the observation made by
the Legal Counsel that the fight against terrorism must
ultimately be seen in terms of practical cooperation.
This, undoubtedly, is a fundamental requirement that
should be incorporated into any international legal
instrument concerning terrorism in order to establish
clear guidelines governing States' cooperation in the
fight against terrorism. We should also recognize the
important role of regional and subregional
organizations in addressing the issue, and encourage
and support them in complementing global efforts.

