Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In accordance with
paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have
the honour to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, covering the period from
26 March to 18 June 2019.

The Committee met in informal consultations on
12 April to hear from the Panel of Experts on the Sudan
about its work programme for the current mandate.
The Coordinator informed Committee members
that the Panel would continue to monitor potential
violations of sanctions measures, follow the peace and
political processes, investigate Darfuri armed groups
in Libya and the region and work collaboratively with
the Panels of Experts on the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013),
concerning the Central African Republic.

The Coordinator also said that the Panel would
coordinate its work with the African Union and with
other United Nations entities present in the Sudan.
The Coordinator of the Panel underscored the Panel's
intention to adopt a regional approach, as requested by
the Committee.

The Coordinator mentioned the possible impact
of the drawdown of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) on the Panel's
ability to conduct its work in Darfur. The Coordinator
stated that the transitional period in the Sudan may have
an impact on the Panel's work in terms of logistics. The
currently mandated Panel has been unable to travel to
the Sudan.

On 6 June, the Committee received the first quarterly
report of the Panel of Experts on the situation in Darfur,
including the activities of UNAMID, the peace process,
the activities of armed groups, the issue of compliance
with the norms of international humanitarian law and
human rights, compliance with the Council's targeted
sanctions and the regional projection of the situation in
that Sudanese province.

On 21 June, together with Ambassador Schulz, I
organized a joint meeting of the Libya, Sudan and
South Sudan Committees. The members heard from
the respective Panels on the presence and activities of
Darfuri armed groups in Libya, the Sudan and South
Sudan and discussed how best to prevent Darfuri
armed groups in Libya and South Sudan from engaging
in destabilizing activities. The press release on the
meeting will be issued shortly.

Finally, I would like to update the Council on my
intention to visit the Sudan. Given the current political
and security situation in the Sudan, the dates for the
visit have yet to be determined.

