Mr. Owada (Japan): On a number of occasions in
the past, the Security Council has had to take action in
the face of Iraq's non-cooperation with the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) by adopting
resolutions and presidential statements condemning Iraq's
actions and demanding full cooperation with the Special

 

Commission in accordance with its obligations under
relevant resolutions. Only last week, on 13 June, the
Council had to adopt a presidential statement, in relation to
a series of obstructions to UNSCOM's aerial activity,
reminding Iraq of its obligations under relevant resolutions,
in particular resolution 1060 (1996).
However, the most recent incidents of Iraq's non-
cooperation represent persistent attempts on the part of the
Iraqi authorities to defy the rights of inspection of
UNSCOM. Ambassador Ekeus, Executive Chairman of
UNSCOM, made that abundantly clear in his briefing to the
Council on 18 June. The letter from the Foreign Minister of
Iraq addressed to the President of the Security Council also
confirmed this point by invoking, contrary to Iraq's
obligation under relevant resolutions, justifications for its
denial of UNSCOM's right of inspection. Clearly, these
recent Iraqi actions cannot simply be considered as
technical violations of inspection procedures; the authority
of the Security Council is being challenged.

Furthermore, this issue should not be looked at as a
mere technicality of violation of the sanctions regime
against Iraq. It raises the most serious question of how to
prevent the development of weapons of mass destruction,
an issue of utmost concern to all of us in the Security
Council, involving the problem of peace and stability in the
region.

In view of Iraq's recurrent violations and concealment
activities, which have continued despite consistent
expressions of condemnation and warning from the Council,
it is evident that an improvement in the Council's approach
is in order for the purpose of letting Iraq comply with its
obligations under the relevant resolutions. Simply to repeat
condemnations which have been issued in the past for
dealing with past sporadic incidents will not, in the View of
my delegation, be sufficient in light of the gravity of the
situation. A new approach is needed which should be
achievement-oriented, so that the Council can bring about
the compliance of Iraq with its obligations.

Based on this approach, Japan supports the direction
in which the Security Council will now be moving in
adopting this draft resolution. In particular, my delegation
notes that paragraph 5 of the draft resolution is an essential
element which seeks to bring Iraq to resume full
cooperation with UNSCOM. as soon as possible. It is our
sincere hope that Iraq will change its position and cooperate
unconditionally with UNSCOM.

It is particularly important in this context that
paragraph 6 expresses the firm will of the Council to take
additional measures to support UNSCOM. unless Iraq is
in compliance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of this draft
resolution. My delegation understands the purport of this
paragraph to require Iraq to cooperate fully with
UNSCOM. in form as well as in substance and to give
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to its
officials and other persons under its authority for
interviews, so that UN SCOM. can exercise all its rights as
an essential precondition for discharging its mandate.
In the view of my delegation, this draft resolution is
an essential response, needed in order for the Council to
carry out its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and for this reason Japan
is cosponsoring this draft resolution. We hope that the
Council can act unanimously.

