Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
Uruguay's presidency of the Security Council this
month, and to commend your initiative in convening
today's important debate on the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. The ministerial level of the
meeting emphasizes your keen interest in the subject
and the urgency with which it should be treated. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on the entire region, including
Palestine.

Today's meeting comes at the end of yet another
year of failure, particularly with regard to the question
of Palestine, where the situation is worsening every day
at the expense of the Palestinians, who aspire to peace
and a better tomorrow in which their dreams - of
an independent State within the June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital - can come true.
Yet despite the 24 years that have passed since the
negotiations first began, there has been no peace
settlement between Palestine and Israel, leading to
despair among Palestinians. The Kingdom of Morocco,
under His Majesty Mohammed VI, attaches special
importance to Palestine, particularly Jerusalem, and
to the importance, as has been established through
international resolutions, of ending the Judaization
of the country and the acts of aggression against the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, as an integral part of the Palestinian
territories occupied in 1967. Such acts do not serve the
interests of peace and security in the region and can
only fuel the hatred that in turn breeds the terrorism
that affects us all.

The International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People afforded His Majesty another
opportunity to affirm the importance and necessity of
ensuring that Palestinians can enjoy their inalienable
rights, including above all their right to a sovereign
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital; a viable
State, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security, as established in international resolutions.
His Majesty reiterated that the ongoing lack of
seriousness in addressing the urgent issue of Jerusalem
and its continuing Judaization would have terrible
consequences. The leaders of the Al-Quds Committee,
he said, continued to demand that Jerusalem be spared
all acts of aggression and attempts to alter its identity,
and would stand in unwavering solidarity with their
Palestinian brethren. The Palestinians, he went on,
must be allowed to live in dignity, free from violence
or acts of aggression against the Muslim holy sites in
Jerusalem, so that it can remain the symbol it has always
been of peace and coexistence between civilizations
and cultures. The situation in the occupied territories,
he said, required a swift response if the needs of the
Palestinian people were to be met, including supplying
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East with all the
resources it needs to enable it to continue providing
basic services to the Palestinians.

He also called for support for the efforts of the
Palestinian National Authority, and reiterated his
full support for the Authority under the leadership
of Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. In that regard, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Morocco paid a successful visit
to Palestine in November in order to set up a joint
committee for cooperation between our two States,
designed to address all mutually beneficial issues,
particularly in the services and health sectors.

A peace process is the only way to settle this
conflict; it will come not through war and the loss of
innocent lives but through negotiations conducted in
good faith, within clear parameters, with the goal of
achieving a solution with two States living side by side
in peace, security and cooperation. Morocco retains
the firm position that the issue rests on the provisions
of the Arab Peace Initiative and the principles of a
sustainable peace, achieved with the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State based on the June 1967
borders. It is therefore more incumbent than ever on the
international community to work to mobilize the peace
process within an established time frame, and Morocco
is ready and willing to participate in every initiative
aimed at achieving the goal of peace and security in
the region.

