Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
At the outset, I would like to associate my delegation
with the statement made by Ambassador Domisani
Kumalo, the Permanent Representative of South
Africa, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

As we are meeting here today, the situation in the
Middle East is fast deteriorating. Already, since
September 2001, over 1,000 Palestinians and 400
Israelis have died, the majority of whom were civilians.
The toll of the dead is mounting by the day. Reports
emanating from the region paint a very grim picture.

Last month the Security Council met in an
emergency session and adopted resolution 1397 (2002)
of 12 March, which had no dissenting voice. The
resolution was unequivocal in terms of what the
Council demanded of the parties. There has been
absolutely no visible movement towards compliance
with the resolution. On the contrary, what is evident is
the systematic destruction of the Palestinian Authority
and the confinement of its leader to his offices, with
little or no services. That situation can only fuel more
anger, resentment and, to say the least, humiliation.

On 30 March, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1402 (2002) which, inter alia, in paragraph 1
"calls for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah". The situation
on the ground shows the opposite. More cities are
being occupied, and one wonders what the fate of the
occupied territories will be.

An analysis of the situation reveals the following:
the destruction of the Palestinian Authority can be
construed as undermining any semblance of the right of
the Palestinians to a State of their own. This conclusion
is borne out by the fact that no statement to that effect
has come from the Israeli authorities in the current
campaign. The right to self-determination is provided
for in the Charter of the Organization. No amount of
prevarication can assuage the determination of a people
to free themselves and establish their own self-rule.

My Government is gravely concerned at the
escalation of violence and of the military incursions in
the Palestinian Authority areas. The incursions have
been accompanied by widespread destruction of hard-
earned properties, particularly in Palestinian areas.
Collective punishment is being visited on the
Palestinian people, violating the basic tenets of the
Organization.

In our previous interventions, we had occasion to
speak of the disproportionate use of force by the Israeli
authorities. The situation is even worse today. One
need not emphasize the unequal strength of forces, to
put it mildly, between the parties. In making appeals to
the parties, it is important to take that reality into
account.

My Government appeals strongly to the Security
Council to take urgent action to stop the carnage that is
going on in the region. The requirements of security
have to be balanced by an unequivocal assurance to the
Palestinians that statehood, both viable and respected,
is around the corner. Violence or attacks will not solve
the Palestinian question or ensure the security of Israel.

My Government believes that for any meaningful
movement towards resolution of the crisis, the
authority and safety of President Arafat have to be
guaranteed. The Council should have no ambiguity on
the issue.

My Government appeals to both sides to comply
with Security Council resolutions, but more so to the
Government of Israel, which has the upper hand in the
current confrontation. At the end of the day, only
peaceful negotiations will provide the much-needed
solution to the historic conflict. It is therefore
incumbent upon both parties to urgently summon the
political will to return to the negotiations. Only a
couple of weeks ago there seemed to be some glimmers
of hope that a negotiated resolution was possible. Now
one wonders whether it has been dashed.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
Government's support for the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, and his tireless efforts to achieve a
ceasefire and a peaceful resolution of the conflict. The
situation demands of the Security Council urgent action
in conformity with Article 24, paragraph 1, and other
relevant sections of the Charter. The world demands
resolute action, and nothing less. There should be no
further unnecessary loss of life, especially of civilians.
We appeal to the Council to draw on the vast arsenal of
instruments at its disposal in order to restore peace in
the region. We believe that the major players should
have unfettered freedom to be a part of the solution.

Time is of the essence. It is our hope that the
Council will not be found wanting. The road map for
the Palestinians should be laid out so as to give them
hope and determination.

