Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over today's meeting
and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his detailed
briefing. I welcome all the representatives of troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) to today's meeting.
China joins previous speakers in condemning the
attacks in Burkina Faso yesterday, which led to at least
29 deaths. We offer our condolences to the Government
and the people of Burkina Faso and the families of
the victims.

United Nations peacekeeping operations (PKOs)
have contributed significantly to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Currently, as
the deployment environments and mandates of
peacekeeping operations are becoming increasingly
complex, constant adjustments in the light of the
situation on the ground are necessary. In September
2017, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2378 (2017), which supports the reasonable
and necessary reforms of PKOs.

In 2018, Secretary-General Guterres put forward
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, and 152 Member
States signed the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, thereby
injecting new momentum into the reform. Over the
past year, the initiative has been steadily advanced.
At the same time, continued efforts should be made
to implement the relevant Council resolutions and
initiatives to effectively improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of PKOs. China would like to share the
following views on promoting PKO reform.

First, the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations must be upheld. Peacekeeping
operations should be governed by such basic principles
as the consent of the party concerned, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in self-defence and defence
of the mandate. Those principles are also in line with
the basic norms governing international relations, such
as sovereign equality, non-interference in the internal
affairs of others and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

The peaceful settlement ofdisputes through political
means is at the core of the Charter. Peacekeeping
reform and the implementation of relevant initiatives
must strictly follow the basic principles governing
peacekeeping operations and the purposes and
principles of the Charter. Enhancing consultations with
the countries concerned and respecting their ownership
is important in peacekeeping operations. The mandates
of PKOs must be centred around the fundamental
goal of political settlement and be promptly adjusted
according to changes in the political process.

Secondly, PKO partnerships should be consolidated.
As the major actors in PKOs, the Security Council,
TCCs, police-contributing countries (PCCs) and the
Secretariat should discharge their respective functions
and, more importantly, maintain close coordination
and leverage mechanisms, such as Security Council
meetings wih TCCs/PCCs and the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations to strengthen communication
and forge synergies.

African Union-led peace operations are positive
steps taken by African countries to solve African
problems in African ways and an important complement
to the relevant United Nations PKOs. The United
Nations should strengthen its partnership with the AU
in all aspects of peacekeeping and provide sustainable
and predictable financial support to African Union-led
peace operations.

Thirdly, efforts must be bolstered in enhancing
capacity-building in peacekeeping in order to improve
its effectiveness. The international community should
provide greater peacekeeping capacity-building
support to TCCs that are developing countries. TCCs
should ensure that peacekeepers are adequately
trained, equipped and resourced. The Secretariat
should attach great importance to the safety and
security of peacekeepers, strengthen early warning,
provide efficient and high-quality support and ensure
the performance of peacekeeping forces.

Improving the effectiveness of PKOs requires
integrated measures. The Secretariat and the military,
police and civilian components of the PKOs are all
responsible for improving peacekeeping performance.
We should regularly take stock of and improve the
performance evaluation system and invite TCCs to
fully participate in the relevant work.

As a major financing and troop contributor to
United Nations PKOs, China has actively participated
in and contributed to them in significant ways. China
is the second-largest financial contributor to PKOs
and pays its contributions on time, in full and without
preconditions. More than 2,500 peacekeepers from
China are serving in eight missions on the ground,
including in Mali, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Sudan, Lebanon and Cyprus.

In September 2015, at a series ofsummits celebrating
the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations, Chinese President Xi Jinping announced the
establishment of the China-United Nations Peace and
Development Trust Fund and a standby force of 8,000
troops. Over the past four years, China has vigorously
followed through on its commitments. The China-United
Nations Peace and Development Trust Fund has made
an outstanding contribution to strengthening capacity-
building for developing countries in peacekeeping,
improving the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers and implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The standby force of 8,000
troops has been generated according to plan.

As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations next year, United
Nations PKOs will also usher in a new beginning.
China stands ready to work with all peace-loving
countries to dispel the shadow of war with the power of
peacekeeping operations so that the light of peace will
shine in every corner of the world.

