Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this very
important debate. We always say that, of course, but I
think that this issue does have special resonance.

Before I deliver my statement, I would like to say
that, as a member of the Group of Friends on Children
and Armed Conflict, we are very pleased to associate
ourselves with the statement delivered this morning by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group.

Australia welcomes the Security Council's
demonstrated commitment to addressing grave
violations committed against children in situations of
armed conflict. That commitment has yielded notable
and tangible results. In that regard, we congratulate
Afghanistan for signing the comprehensive action plan
to halt child recruitment and other violations by the
Afghan National Security Forces, only 12 months after
the Afghan National Police was listed by the Secretary-
General on recruitment grounds. We also commend
progress in the Philippines towards the development of
an action plan with the National Democratic Front of
the Philippines to ensure that children will not be
recruited into the New People's Army or involved in
the conflict there. We hope that the Government in
Myanmar will allow Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Commaraswamy to have access to
non-State armed groups so that action plans can be
negotiated, allowing some such groups in the country
to be delisted.

Despite those successes, in his latest report
(S/2011/250) the Secretary-General notes that attacks
and threats of attacks against educational and medical
facilities are a growing trend and are of significant
concern. We also note that such attacks are in
contravention of international law. Clearly, there is still
work to be done. Attacks on schools affect not only
children and youth but communities as a whole,
undermining efforts to reduce poverty. We therefore

welcome the resolution adopted today (resolution 1998 (2011)), which expands the listing criteria to include
the grave violations of attacks on schools and hospitals
and credible threats or attacks against school children
and educational and medical personnel. The inclusion
of both schools and hospitals reflects the relationship
between access to education and medical services and
the survival, development and well-being of children.

We encourage the Working Group to fully utilize
the toolkit available to it, including the use of
emergency or irregular briefings, in line with the
Group's terms of reference, to enable it to respond to
surges in grave violations in a timely and flexible
manner, particularly when they occur outside of the
cycle of country reports and conclusions. The briefing
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Working Group's formal meeting in May is a
good example of how this could work in practice.
Australia firmly believes that Working Group field
trips, such as those recently undertaken in Nepal and
Afghanistan, are powerful tools for securing
commitments by listed parties. We hope that the
Working Group will undertake further field visits in
2011.

Like others, we would like to welcome the work
of Special Representative Coomaraswamy on the
protection of children in situations of armed conflict,
including through her field visits, which represent an
important means by which the Council's
recommendations are realized and acted upon at the
ground level.

We look forward to increasing consideration by
the Council sanctions committees of perpetrators of
grave violations against children. We note that in 2010,
for the first time, an individual in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was listed under the sanctions
regime on such grounds.

We are concerned that some persistent
perpetrators cannot be held accountable through
targeted measures, given the absence of designated
sanctions committees. We call on the Council to
address this accountability gap on an urgent basis.

In conclusion, the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict have
made significant advances in ensuring the protection of
children in armed conflict. However, while we
celebrate our collective successes, we must also
recognize that challenges remain. We all share the
responsibility of ensuring that those who abuse
children in times of conflict do not go unpunished. We
look to the strength and the commitment of the
Security Council to lead us in that regard.

