Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening today's meeting on
Afghanistan, given the leading role that your country
plays in Afghanistan.

I would also like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA); Ambassador Kairat Umarov,
Permanent Representative of Kazkhstan and Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities; Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; and Ms. Wazhma Frogh, founding
member of the Women and Peace Studies Organization
and member of Afghanistan's High Peace Council, for
their clear briefings. I would also like to welcome our
colleague and friend, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, whose detailed
statement was of particular interest to my delegation.

My delegation remains concerned about the fragile
situationinAfghanistan,whichisbecomingincreasingly
tense because of the upcoming legislative and local
elections to be held in July 2018. The preparations
for those elections are plagued by organizational
challenges. I would like to take this opportunity to
call upon Afghanistan's political stakeholders to work
towards peace and to do what is necessary to prevent
the situation from spiralling out of control. They must
guard against the worsening of the country's security
situation, which is already dire given the lack ofprogress
in talks held with armed groups and ongoing clashes in
much of the country between Government forces and
such groups, including, regrettably, terrorist groups.

Civilians, including Afghan Turks, remain the main
targets of the asymmetrical attacks carried out by the
Taliban and the fighters of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. It is clear that the high level of violence has
claimed numerous lives, in particular among the civilian
population, including many women and children, and
has an adverse effect on the country's human rights,
humanitarian, economic and social situations. In that
environment, we commend the vital presence and
efforts of the international forces in Afghanistan.

The efforts of the Afghan Government to promote
national dialogue, combat insecurity and protect
civilians are equally important, as evidenced by the
recruitment of2,500 guards to protect places ofworship.

My delegation also welcomes the progress in the
fight against torture, and we encourage Afghan troops
to increase and improve their efforts concerning
women's participation and empowerment, including
access to justice. The convincing plea that was just
been made by Ms. Frogh on increasing the participation
of women and young people is worthy of a great deal
of interest. We believe that the Afghan authorities,
together with their multilateral and bilateral partners,
including UNAMA, must provide the greatest possible
support for the implementation of the 2025 Afghanistan
national action plan on women and peace and security.

On the humanitarian front, the situation is
improving, with 30,000 displaced persons this year.
That is why we commend the joint efforts of the United
Nations and its partners towards ensuring regular
delivery of humanitarian assistance, although that
has sometimes been at the expense of the lives of the
personnel involved, to whose memory we pay tribute.

On the economic area, Senegal welcomes the
positive progress in the fight against corruption, which
has significantly contributed to the healthy economy,
thanks to the efforts of the Afghan authorities, which we
encourage and congratulate. We echo the satisfaction
that has also been voiced in international forums.

However, we must continue to fight against drug
trafficking, an area in which indicators have even
worsened, according to the relevant Afghan ministry
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1056) indicates
that there has been an increase of 63 per cent in areas
under cultivation and an increase of 87 per cent in opium
production. That is all the more concerning given that
illegal trafficking in opium constitutes a significant
source of financing for armed groups and terrorists.

I would like to specifically mention UNAMA and
all United Nations personnel, and take note of their
tireless efforts to promote national dialogue and to
protect women and children.

Senegal's mandate on the Security Council is
coming to an end, and I would like to reaffirm the
hope of my country to see Afghanistan involved in a
political process that is as inclusive as possible, with
a view towards ending a conflict that has devasted the
country for so long, which would end the suffering of
its people and resolutely propel Afghanistan towards
peace, stability and sustainable development. That hope
is based on the effectively charting and implementing
the Kabul process, which is a process that Senegal
strongly supports, as it constitutes a unique framework
for coordination, integration and alignment of the many
and varied initiatives - be they national, bilateral
or multilateral - that are currently under way in, or
planned for, Afghanistan.

For only the Government and the people of
Afghanistan can, and should, be the masters of their
destiny by integrating and taking ownership of the
fruitful opportunities in the region and the international
community generally. I am certain that the Group
of Friends of Afghanistan, in which the Japanese
delegation plays a driving role, and the Security Council
members, will help to make the Kabul process the main
platform for seeking peace, security and sustainable
development in Afghanistan.

