Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council today on
our joint African Union (AU)-United Nations mission
to South Sudan, which was the first-ever of its kind
undertaken by UN-Women and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), undertaken
jointly with the AU, represented by Mr. Chergui and
Ms. Specioza Kazibwe of FemWise. That augurs well
for reinforcing the nexus linking development, peace
and security, and humanitarian assistance. In our
meeting with the Government of South Sudan, that was
also appreciated.

Our collaboration with DPKO is an important
development, given the role that it plays in mission
settings as a peacekeeper, peacemaker and protector of
civilians, a considerable number of whom are women.
In their own right, women are defenders of peace and
are critical to invest in for the sustainability of all peace
efforts. I join my colleagues in commending South
Sudan on the signing ofthe Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, and
I welcome the important provisions of the agreement
that address women, especially the 35 per cent quota
for women in the composition of the executive branch
of the revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity of the Republic of South Sudan. The women truly
welcomed the agreement and called for the immediate
cessation of hostilities. They called on all leaders of
warring factions and armed parties to communicate
with their followers and inform them of the peace
agreement, as the fighting had not completely subsided.
They also said that the same message must be conveyed
to militias and non-organized forces. They are anxious
for progress and are forging ahead with reconciliation,
even though among themselves, as women, they had no
disputes or hostilities to resolve.

What they had in common, as they said, was that
they all found themselves caught up in a man's war in
which they all had been victims of sexual assault, their
families were killed, and their livelihoods destroyed.
They had no access to the leaders in their country,
who, they said, were responsible for the crisis. They are
asking us, as the United Nations and African Union,
to help them ensure their contact with the leaders and
that the leaders are held accountable. They believe
that implementing the 35 per cent affirmative action
quota is critical at all levels and within all branches
of the Government, not just at the national executive
level. Furthermore, women want to ensure that the
constitutional review process includes them so that
their needs and concerns are considered right from the
start. They requested the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the AU to ensure the
continuous monitoring of the inclusiveness and
effectiveness of the agreement and that the monitoring
process begins now with the pre-transitional structures.

We have been reviewing events in South Sudan
since our mission. We are concerned that, despite
the guarantees, the parties have yet to honour their
commitment to ensuring women's meaningful
participation in the implementation of the revitalized
agreement. In particular, honouring the 35 per cent
affirmative action principle has yet to take root. Ofthe
new bodies, the National Pre-Transitional Committee
now has 10 members, one of whom is a woman,
amounting to 10 per cent. The National Constitution
Amendment Committee has 15 members, two of whom
are women. There are no women in the Independent
Boundaries Commission, the Technical Boundaries
Committee or the Joint Transitional Security
Committee. The Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism is also expected
to include 31 per cent women. None of those recently
formed institutions meets the 35 per cent quota. It is
important that we not fail to overlook those statistics
and take appropriate corrective action.

That is where members of the Security Council
come in. They can be of support. They can encourage
the parties to ensure that women are included in a timely
manner before it is too late. I urge IGAD and African
Union colleagues to ensure that the peace agreement
is also implemented in a manner that honours the
commitments made.

The women also urged that they be included in
security sector reform and security institutions so
that those institutions can properly fulfil their role in
protecting all the people of South Sudan, including
women and girls. They outlined the importance of being
included as women in leadership and participatory
roles so that the security institutions are reconstituted
in a manner that is gender-sensitive and focuses on the
protection of civilians from gender-based violence,
including the protection of all citizens - men
and women alike. The inclusion of women is also
essential for reorganized security forces, and, with the
recruitment of women at a minimal level of 35 per cent
into commissioned and non-commissioned cadres, to
change the face of the security forces and curb negative
masculinities, prioritize gender within disarmament
and demobilization, including in the organization of
cantonments, and strengthen accountability for conflict-
related sexual violence. South Sudanese women stand
ready to meaningfully participate in bringing peace to
their country. They want women in the diaspora to also
play a role in South Sudan.

Women see our briefing today as an opportunity
to make sure that members of the Council are aware of
their appreciation of the revitalized agreement, as well
as their commitment to taking their destiny into their
own hands, while paying attention to the threats posed
to the full implementation of the agreement. They want
their keen interest to participate to also be seen as a
willingness to play a constructive role in the success
of the peace agreement. The women fear systematic
exclusion and need to be assured that reparations will
take into account what they have suffered and what
they have lost, including in the aftermath of surviving
sexual violence. They highlighted that it is crucial
that the Transitional Justice Mechanism deter and
punish sexual and gender-based violence, and called
for accountability mechanisms for transitional justice,
including the hybrid court for South Sudan. They also
called for the participation of civil society organizations
in the implementation and monitoring processes, which
will ensure the inclusion of women's leadership, voice
and agency. The appreciation of the women of this
particular agreement was encouraging, and they see
it as a real opportunity to deal with one of the most
devastating conflicts in the world today, through the
prism of gender equality.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and DPKO for their efforts to promote women's
participation and protection under very challenging
circumstances and the manner in which they are able
to collaborate and cooperate with the Government of
South Sudan. The women with whom we met were very
grateful for the existence of the peacekeeping mission
and trusted their lives to UNMISS. We also discussed
issues affecting female peacekeepers and how the
United Nations can attract more female peacekeepers.

That is a commendable peace agreement, and we
are ready to support it in any way that we can and
ensure the success of its implementation. I ask the
Security Council to join us, with the team that visited
South Sudan, in insisting that the parties do everything
to make sure that the very important commitments are
met and delivered.
