Mr. Marican (Malaysia): On behalf of my
delegation, I thank you, Sir, for convening and chairing
this meeting. Malaysia highly values your presence
here today, which clearly demonstrates the importance
that Spain places on the subject of today's open debate.

I wish to also warmly recognize the Foreign
Ministers of Jordan, New Zealand, Venezuela and
Palestine, and thank them for their presence here today.

I appreciate the in-depth briefing given by Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson.

We also associate ourselves with the statements to
be delivered by the representatives of Iran and Kuwait
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

The untiring efforts of the Secretary-General in his
recent visit to the Middle East region in a bid to steer
the parties towards peace and to return to meaningful
negotiations based on the two-State solution are highly
appreciated, by Malaysia in particular. We strongly
support the goal of the two-State solution. However,
we are increasingly becoming sceptical that the best
way to achieve that goal is only through direct bilateral
negotiations between Palestine and Israel. Twenty years
since Oslo, the possibility of achieving a two-State
solution based on direct bilateral negotiations appears
more remote than ever. The continuing expansion of
illegal Israeli settlements and the construction of the
illegal apartheid wall by Israel, as well as the increasing
radicalism on both sides, have perhaps irreparably
damaged any possibility of two States existing side by
side in peace and security.

Let us recall the history. In 1947, the Trustee Power
in the Middle East decided to refer the problematic
Palestine Mandate to the United Nations after it had
been severely tested and had grown weary of years of
fighting a bloody guerrilla war with Jewish paramilitary
organizations. These organizations perpetrated terror
and violence by targeting British interests and even
civilian infrastructure in their bid to achieve statehood.
The unwillingness of both sides, the Palestinians and
the Jews, to come to an agreement essentially forced
the Trustee Power to resort to the United Nations. In
response, the General Assembly subsequently decided
to partition the disputed land, creating the State of
Israel.

Now, over six decades later, in an ironic and tragic
twist of logic, the international community declares
that Palestinian statehood can be achieved only through
direct bilateral negotiations with Israel, the occupying
Power. Furthermore, there are some of us who do
not want the Security Council, let alone the General
Assembly, to play any substantial role in realizing the
two-State solution. If we had applied the same standard
to Israel and insisted for the past 70 years that it could
come into being only Via direct bilateral negotiations
with its Arab neighbours, would the State of Israel
exist today? Yet today, Palestine's attempts to access
the same legal, diplomatic and multilateral channels are
derided as unilateral and counterproductive measures
that wouldjeopardize the so-called peace process.

If the principal players are sincere about salvaging
the two-State solution, there is a need to do away with
old thinking and habits and to come up with bold action
to achieve that end - because our past approaches have
proved that we have miserably failed. For too long now,
every time violence erupts in occupied Palestine, the
approach by the international community, including the
Security Council, is to scramble to shore up the ruins
of the peace process. Then we dangle whatever we can
muster in front ofthe Palestinians, as bait to pacify them
so that their frustration and anger soon subside, in the
false hope of a successful initiative. Once the situation
in occupied Palestine returns to calm, the world will
again forget about the plight of the Palestinians, who
will continue to languish in inhumane conditions under
occupation until they lose their patience once again and
the next cycle of violence erupts.

Albert Einstein once said that insanity was doing
the same thing over and over again and expecting a
different result. After two decades of failed attempts,
let us stop fooling ourselves that this approach can
still work. It is foolhardy to wait several more decades
before we finally muster the political will and courage
to do what is right and just for Palestine.

The majority of the Member States in this
Chamber, including those around this table, have at
one time or another fought for self-determination
from colonial Powers. Based on our own historical
experiences for self-determination, perhaps we should
step back and try to understand the message that we
have been sending to the Palestinians all this while.
Effectively, what we have been saying to them is:
"Obey the occupying or colonial Power, despite the
grave injustice, discrimination, the lack of freedom
and human rights Violations done unto you; lay down
your arms and do not fight the occupation, because
doing so would amount to terrorism or anti-Semitism;
do not proceed with any legal or diplomatic means for
statehood, because it might anger the occupying Power
into not granting you independence; wait patiently
for your statehood, even though the occupying Power
is changing the realities on the ground to make your
statehood ultimately impossible; and, most of all, stay
moderate and subservient at all times, despite losing
your children and babies, your parents, your spouses
and your siblings due to the illegal targeting or
disproportionate use of force by the occupying Power,
even if there is no accountability for the perpetrators".
I really wonder how many of us in the Chamber and
around this table, with our own history of legitimate
struggle for self-determination, could pass the standards
that we are currently insisting on for the Palestinians.

The continuing occupation of Palestine and the
systematic oppression suffered by its people serve as a
powerful unifying factor that has inflamed radicalism
and extremism globally. We certainly do not condone
the terrorism and violent extremism perpetrated by
the likes of Daesh and Al-Qaida, which manipulate
the plight and suffering of the Palestinians. But can
we reasonably expect the long-suffering, oppressed,
humiliated and subjugated Palestinians to remain
passive when all legal, political and diplomatic
means of resistance have been effectively blocked for
decades? Even Malaysia - a non-Arab country in a
region culturally and geographically removed from
the Middle East, with a moderate majority-Muslim
population - is not spared from increasing radicalism
due to frustration and anger at the suffering of fellow
Muslims in Palestine.

A whole generation of Palestinians has grown
into adulthood since Oslo knowing only occupation,
blockade, repression and violence. If the occupation
continues, we will eventually reap what we sow, and
one day we will wake up to realize that peace and the
two-State solution are no longer within our reach. It is
therefore in the international community's interests to
act urgently to address the root causes ofthe conflict and
to end Israeli occupation. I wish to echo the sentiments
expressed by my colleagues around the table and by the
Secretary-General on the need to re-establish a political
horizon and to return to a meaningful peace process.
In that regard, we strongly support and welcome all
peaceful initiatives to resolve the long-standing conflict
and revive the Middle East peace process, including the
initiatives by France and New Zealand. Nevertheless,
Malaysia would stress the need to set a reasonable time
frame to achieve the two-State solution. The Council
has various tools at its disposal for the maintenance
of international peace and security that it could use to
achieve that aim.

Malaysia firmly supports the request by Palestine
for United Nations protection, including by deploying
temporary international observers in occupied Palestine.
We have numerous precedents for such United Nations
protection to guide us in our deliberations. I urge the
Council to start serious discussions on the request for
United Nations protection, in close cooperation with
the Secretary-General. I strongly believe that United
Nations protection would provide a way forward to
stem the current debilitating Violence, in line with
international humanitarian law, in particular the
Geneva Conventions. That would ensure accountability
for all parties to the conflict and enforce adherence to
international law, international human rights law and
the various General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions.

In conclusion, we are hopeful that the Council
will agree an outcome for this open debate that would
manifest our solidarity with regard to the gravity
of the situation on the ground. Should the Council
remain paralysed, rendering itself irrelevant as far as
the Middle East peace process is concerned, we must
be prepared to look beyond the Council for a solution.
We must not give up all diplomatic efforts and let the
occupation continue in perpetuity.

The international community must continue to
uphold the legitimate right to self-determination, which
has constituted one of the core principles of the United
Nations since it was created 70 years ago. We owe it to
the Palestinian people to mobilize our political will and
explore the other peaceful, legal and diplomatic avenues
available to us in order to end the longest occupation in
modern history. With that I reiterate the position of my
country that, if we do not act, there is no doubt that
we will be condemned by history and we will face a
bleaker future.

