The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Israel and Lebanon, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mahmoud
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

It is so decided.
The Security Council will begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
response to the request contained in the letter dated
13 July 2006 from the Charge d'Affaires of Lebanon
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/2006/517.

I wish to draw the attention of the members to
documents S/2006/518 and S/2006/522, containing the
text of letters dated 13 July 2006 from the Charge
d'Affaires of Lebanon addressed to the President of the
Security Council, and document S/2006/515,
containing the text of a letter dated 12 July 2006 from
the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the
President of the Council.

The Security Council will now hear a briefing by
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations. I give him the floor.


