The present statement complements the statement to be delivered on behalf of the European Union (see annex 30). We thank Germany for today's timely discussion, as well as France and Tunisia for their tireless efforts aimed at achieving the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) in support of a global ceasefire. The link between pandemics and security operates on three levels; it adds a layer to existing conflicts, it can complicate the work of United Nations peacekeeping operations and it can contribute to the aetiology of new conflicts. The security threat stemming directly from a pandemic applies both to individuals as well as to State institutions, the latter not limited solely to health systems, as pillars of human security. However, over and above the direct and obvious threat, many derivative effects of large-scale global pandemics can be destabilizing factors: the economic impact, owing to the negative correlation between conflict and prosperity; inequalities - further amplified by the socioeconomic impact of pandemics - resulting from the unrest they can beget; emergency measures that may threaten democracy and the rule of law; violence against women and children, which can destroy the fabric of society; further marginalization of vulnerable groups; and non-inclusive recovery, including by failing to make vaccines global public-health goods. These risk factors are compounded if the United Nations performs poorly. It is a litmus test for the United Nations and its effectiveness in delivering when faced with a global phenomenon that requires international cooperation, but also for the Council, specifically because the United Nations was designed to uphold international peace and security. The very essence of multilateralism is to go beyond each of us as Member States in order to construct an international community that is more than the sum of its parts. If we fail to exemplify international cooperation when it is most needed, we damage the United Nations and make concessions that disfavour solidarity in order to protect our own citizens. Instead of using the United Nations for its original purpose, we risk destroying the Organization, using its very raison d'etre as our weapon. As to the specific role of the Security Council, in the first instance, there is the need for it to ensure that the United Nations peacekeeping operations it has mandated are able to protect their own personnel and help a host country minimize the impact of a pandemic on the conflict afflicting it. But beyond this, and notwithstanding the clear primacy that should be afforded to hard security issues by the Council, we cannot overlook that factors beyond hard security have become existential. This fact compels us to adapt to the nature of threats and embrace a more comprehensive concept of security, given that just as root causes of conflict cannot be divorced or compartmentalized, nor can our response. In addition, conflicts have proliferated beyond what the Council was created to tackle, leaving prevention as the only route to maintaining international peace and security. In our opinion, the only positive aspect of coronavirus disease is that it increases our awareness and compels us to review our performance as States Members of the United Nations in real time and make sure that we have at our disposal all the tools necessary to prevent future pandemics and that we are able to implement a comprehensive response plan that is mapped out in advance.
