Mr. Chergui (spoke in French): 1 thank you, Mr. President, for having scheduled this meeting to discuss a country that is dear to us, the Central African Republic. As we are holding this meeting, the Central African Republic is entering a decisive phase for peace, stability and reconciliation, for which the mobilization of the international community has been remarkable. This was recently expressed during the virtual high-level ministerial meeting held on 1 October on the Central African Republic, on the margins of the seventy-fifth regular session of the General Assembly. There have been some promising developments, and we hope that the people of the Central African Republic can take up the challenge of holding elections within the constitutional timelines and while implementing the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The progress in preparing for the elections is also significant. For example, since the adoption, on 23 September, of the law amending and complementing the new provisions of the electoral code, the National Electoral Authority has taken advantage of the additional time to reach voters on the ground and throughout the diaspora within a very limited time frame. We welcome the publication by the Authority of the electoral lists. Almost 2 million voters, 97 per cent of the voting- age population, have already been registered. It can be said that the context seems favourable to the convening of the elections by 28 October by the Head of State, in accordance with the amending law. Furthermore, we take note of the statement by the Government on the insurmountable obstacles facing refugees in terms of this election. We owe them an explanation for this, and attention must be given to the difficult circumstances that they face until they are able to return to their country. With regard to the implementation of the political agreement, the African Union welcomes the joint mission organized by the facilitators and guarantors on 5 October in the north-west of the country. That mission helped to ease tensions in that part of the country and in the resumption of the suspended registration in the north-western communes, which will contribute to a more conducive environment for the holding of elections, in particular the deployment of electoral operations in that area, to the benefit of the local population. The African Union in particular welcomes the release of the two police officers who were taken hostage by the Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation movement and calls for the immediate and unconditional release of the remaining hostage, who is still detained. The African Union also expects that the armed groups will continue to adopt a positive attitude to avert violence and tensions, because all efforts must be aimed more than ever towards implementing the peace agreement. We have noted a significant decrease in the violence following the measures taken by MINUSCA and the Central African Armed Forces and the effective deployment of all State authorities across the national territory, with the support of the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States. I also take this opportunity to welcome the initiative of the Government to adopt on 2 October, in coordination with the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic, MINUSCA and the internal security forces, a security plan for the elections to ensure they are held peacefully and on schedule. As the elections approach, members of the opposition party and certain civil-society organizations have complained about a lack of consultation on subjects of concern that continue to fuel debate and disagreement, in particular refugee voting, the electoral timetable and the uptake of their functions by incoming members of the National Electoral Authority. I would like to echo the words of my dear brother Mankeur and call on all the people of the Central African Republic to distance themselves from any appeal that risks jeopardizing the climate of peace, in particular, to steer clear of fake news and rumours; and to trust the Government and the international community, which is supporting the country during this extremely important period. The African Union welcomes the latest developments on these issues, which yielded positive outcomes in building trust between the parties in the Central African Republic with the appointment on 14 October of 11 new members of the National Electoral Authority, who will take up their functions on 19 October. The African Union urges the Government and the Authority to expedite this process. In that regard, we welcome the dialogue launched by President Faustin Archange Touadera and the efforts of the political class and civil society in the Central African Republic to maintain an ongoing dialogue, in accordance with the desire expressed by the Government to work with all stakeholders and with the support of the international community to maintain a climate of peace. The holding of elections in accordance with the constitutional timelines and the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic must be a top priority for the Government and all political actors in the country since they are essential preconditions for the success of the national recovery and peacebuilding plan for the Central African Republic, which must be focused on social-impact projects. With regard to what has been said about strengthening humanitarian assistance for those internally displaced by conflict and, now, the victims of the coronavirus disease pandemic, I believe that they deserve the strongest show of increased solidarity from the members of the Security Council. We would also like to commend those countries of the subregion that have, either bilaterally or through ECCAS, continued to provide support for lasting peace and stability in the Central African Republic. I also welcome the cooperation among various international organizations - the United Nations, the African Union, ECCAS and the European Union - and with other bilateral partners, which has made it possible to achieve progress through joint efforts in seeking a lasting solution to the crisis in the Central African Republic. I welcome the fact that in just a few days, I will meet once again in the Central African Republic with my friend Jean-Pierre Lacroix; the President of the ECCAS Commission; and, potentially, the Vice-President of the European Commission to support the Government and other Central African Republican stakeholders to assist the country on its path towards peace and development.
