Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Like previous
speakers, I wish to welcome you, Sir, as you preside
over today's meeting, and to express our gratitude to
the delegation of Singapore for convening this
important meeting. I am particularly pleased to
welcome you, Mr. Minister, as the representative of a
country with which Ukraine has maintained excellent
bilateral relations. I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Ms. Louise Frechette for her
introductory statement.

As Ukraine's core position on East Timor has
already been stated in the Council on numerous
occasions, I shall confine myself to making a few short
remarks in connection with today's joyful and historic
event.

We are gathered here today to welcome the
attainment of independence by East Timor and to share
our profound delight at what we, the international
community, under the auspices of the United Nations,
have achieved in East Timor since 1999. Undoubtedly,
this success not only opens a new chapter in the history
of United Nations peacekeeping operations; it also
demonstrates the relevance and the viability of the
principles of the United Nations Charter.

On behalf of the Government and the people of
Ukraine, let me express my warmest congratulations to
the people and the leaders of East Timor on having
fulfilled their yearning for a free, independent State.
We also congratulate the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
and appreciate their able and effective leadership of the
international efforts in East Timor.

I would like to note the pivotal role of the United
Nations and pay tribute to the efforts of the staff of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and the East Timorese in bringing
East Timor from a post-conflict situation to
independence despite enormous challenges. Incredible
progress was made during the past two and one half
years in establishing the foundations of the State, in
particular, in the political and security spheres and in
social and economic development. Together we have
done a greatjob.

My country is proud to have taken an active part
in the international nation-building efforts for East
Timor. We have contributed a number of officers to the
UNTAET civilian police component since its inception,
thus assisting the establishment of an effective East
Timorese Police Service and promoting its capability,
as well as ensuring a stable security environment for a
smooth transition to independence. Ukrainian
participation in the Security Council Mission to East
Timor and Indonesia in November 2000 once again
demonstrated the importance attached by my
Government to the creation of the independent State of
East Timor.

Our enthusiasm for East Timor's independence
should not lead us to lose sight of the huge problems
that await the future Government. The job, of course, is
not finished. We need to ensure that the tremendous
achievements in East Timor will be sustainable.

At this critical moment it is also important to
send a clear message of encouragement and strong
support to the East Timorese people. We believe that
the establishment of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) by Security
Council resolution 1410 (2002) confirms the
determination of the international community to assist
independent East Timor. This resolution marks the
launching of a new phase of partnership between the
United Nations and East Timor, in which steadfast
cooperation and support in many critical areas will be
required to help the people of East Timor exercise their
sovereignty.

In conclusion, I wish peace and prosperity for the
people of East Timor. I would also like to reaffirm our
support for the efforts of UNMISET and the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
East Timor, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, and all East
Timorese in achieving these noble goals.

