Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and
Malcorra and Special Representative Hedi Annabi for
their extremely useful introductory statements.

United Nations peacekeeping operations, which
were invented out of necessity, have now played a
central role over 60 years now in restoring stability in
countries emerging from conflict. I would like to pay
tribute to all those who have ever served on those
missions over the years. At the moment, there are
90,000 uniformed military and police and 20,000
civilian personnel serving around the world. Many
dedicated men and women have given very selflessly
of themselves.

Launching a peacekeeping mission is one of the
most effective measures that the Council can take to
promote peace and security. Due to rapid changes in
the operational environment, United Nations
peacekeeping efforts are now facing challenges. The
nature of conflicts and threats has changed. Missions
are increasingly confronted with non-State actors, who
have little respect for international law and threaten the
stability of entire regions, employing sophisticated
tactics and ever-more-lethal weapons. United Nations
workers are often the first targets of those actors.

The growing complexity and enormity of the
tasks that the Council mandates those missions to carry
out are also having a serious impact on the
performance of missions. Peacekeeping missions are
increasingly asked to do much more than traditional
tasks such as monitoring ceasefire agreements. Their
mandates now cover providing protection to civilians,
supporting humanitarian assistance and coordinating
international support for socio-economic stability. Such
mandates require diverse skills and expertise, and
significant changes must be made in the way they are
implemented.

Obviously, when the Council takes action that
includes a mandate for the protection of civilians, it
creates expectations. If those expectations are not met,
that leads to criticism and disappointment about the
apparent under-implementation of mandates. It is
primarily the responsibility of the Council, and not of
the Secretariat, to rectify that situation and decide what
the changes should be.

We have seen many successful cases of
peacekeeping operations, but we have also experienced
disappointments. The year 1994 was one of great crisis
that is not comparable to the present. But we do have
challenges, operational challenges that entail different
kinds of issues. We should try to find a way to more
effectively and efficiently implement peacekeeping
operations. That is the task, as well as to better meet
the expectations of people on the ground. We therefore
appreciate the initiative of the delegations of France
and the United Kingdom to develop practical
recommendations in due course.

In 2000, the Council adopted resolution 1327
(2000) after reviewing the farsighted Brahimi report
(S/2000/809). The Council decided on that occasion to
give peacekeeping operations "clear, credible and
achievable mandates" (resolution 1327 (2000), annex,
part I) and "to ensure that the mandated tasks of
peacekeeping operations are appropriate to the
situation on the ground including such factors as the
prospects for success" (ibid., part ID. This is an overriding principle of the utmost importance, both
today as at the time.

Since this is a kick-off debate on a policy review
of peacekeeping operations stretching over the next
few months, I would like this morning to make three
points on improving strategic oversight.

First, to make a sound decision on launching a
new or expanded mission, the Council should be fully
informed of the realities on the ground. Timely
political and military information and high-quality and
professional analysis are indispensable if we are to
fully comprehend the nature and challenge of the
situation and if we are to enable the mission to respond
swiftly and achieve the intended objective. The lessons
learned from other missions should be fully taken into
account in formulating a plan of operations. Specific
steps should be taken to institute this practice.

It is also important to examine the scope and
feasibility of proposed mandates in depth with the
participation of not only members of the Council, but
also other stakeholders, such as prospective troop-
contributing countries, prior to a formal decision by the
Council. The Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations could be better utilized as a
forum for this purpose.

Secondly, after a mission is launched, the Council
should closely and continuously monitor the operation
of the mission, exercise flexibility with respect to its
mandate and strength and make the necessary
adjustments to improve its efficiency. The Council
must always ensure that missions are provided with
sufficient support and the means to carry out their
mandates.

At the same time, the United Nations should
exercise maximum flexibility and seek out the most
efficient use of available resources for peacekeeping
operations, because, as a whole, they are greatly
overextended and overstretched. We therefore highly
appreciate the recent good practice of the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI) in
eliminating one battalion and arranging for cooperation
with a neighbouring mission.

The third point relates to political issues: we
should always consider a peacekeeping mission in the
broader context. It is not a substitute for but only a
supplement to the political process. The presence of a
mission, if it is mobilized together with a serious
political effort, will have a stabilizing effect on the
ground and create conditions for national
reconciliation. But without a credible, sincere effort to
persuade the parties to reach a political agreement, the
impact of a mission is limited. The Council should put
as much focus as possible on the political process
during the time peacekeepers are deployed.

Peacekeeping missions cannot be deployed
forever. Like the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
and UNOCI, every mission, in principle, should in the
future set clear benchmarks, with a realistic timeline
against which progress is regularly monitored and
reflected in future planning.

Peacebuilding efforts should produce tangible
results and change in the lives of the people on the
ground after a ceasefire or the achievement of a peace
treaty and should not wait until a peacekeeping mission
completes its mandate period. Some multidimensional

missions, such as the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), already include
elements of peacebuilding in their own mandates. But
experience in other missions, such as those in Liberia,
Haiti and Cote d'Ivoire, are also encouraging. Even in
more conventional missions, strategic consideration
should be given from the earliest stage of planning to
ensure a smooth, gradual transition to early recovery
and peacebuilding. In some cases, both processes -
peacekeeping and peacebuilding i could overlap for a
definite period, but not too long, for a seamless
transition. The Peacebuilding Commission could
provide very vital support to this work of the Council.

In conclusion, today's debate will contribute to
deepening our understanding of the challenges to
peacekeeping. We highly appreciate this timely
initiative and look forward to participating in finding
concrete and practical steps for improvement. We also
support the ongoing initiative of the Secretariat - the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support - to review and identify
approaches to maximize the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations. The General Assembly and,
of course, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations also have an important role to play.

It is essential that all these efforts in various
entities be directed towards the same goal of enhancing
the effectiveness, impact and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations and are synchronized in such
a way that, within a reasonable time frame, we will
complete our work and come up with concrete
recommendations for improvements.

In this context, the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations that the Council created after
reviewing the Brahimi report can be reactivated as a
forum for exchanges of views among the Council
members and other stakeholders, which will yield
creative ideas and make a useful contribution to the
work of the Council. As the Chairperson of the
Working Group, I intend to see to it that we
collectively take a harder look at mission-specific
operational issues and at generic issues with general
implications, always benefiting from the lessons that
past missions have taught us.

It is my hope that the policy review by the
Council over the next few months will be able to
achieve tangible improvement in this indispensable
tool created by the wisdom of our forebears.
