Mr. Simonovic: United Nations Secretary-
General Dag Hammarskjold, who gave his life in an
effort for peace in the Central African region, is said to
have remarked that the Organization was not
established to get us to heaven, but save us from hell.
Today's open debate in the Security Council, 41 years
since his death, finds us working together to help bring
peace and a brighter future in a region that has known
too much misery.

We are increasingly aware that peace-building
requires a comprehensive approach that encompasses a
wide range of political, developmental, humanitarian
and human rights programmes and mechanisms.
Actions are needed that focus on fostering sustainable
institutions and processes in many areas. That has been
emphasized in the outcome of a number of Security
Council debates. Moreover, the President of the
General Assembly last week underlined the fact that
peace and security are closely linked to issues of
poverty and that reducing poverty is the single most
important and challenging of the Millennium
Development Goals.

As a central intergovernmental body in the
economic and social field for coordination in the
United Nations system, as well as for undertaking
studies and making recommendations to other entities,
the Economic and Social Council has mandated
functions that can help in examinations and actions
dealing with root causes of Violence and with
humanitarian assistance, economic and social
reconstruction and development and human rights
processes that are at the heart of peace-building.

The Central African region is confronted with a
myriad of cross-cutting challenges arising out of a
number of conflicts that have ravaged the subregion.
As many members have noted, several of the 11
countries in the region have been affected by civil
conflicts, including Angola, Burundi, the Central
Africa Republic, Chad, the Republic of the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, which
have resulted in major loss of life and large-scale
destruction of economic and social infrastructure and
have created millions of refugees, returnees and
displaced persons. Not surprisingly, of the 11 countries,
all those experiencing conflicts, with one exception,
are in the low development category of the United
Nations Development Programme 2002 Human
Development Report.

The Economic and Social Council recognizes the
importance of cross-border influences and linkages in a
number of conflicts in Africa and, in its ministerial
communique of 2001 on supporting the sustainable
development of Africa, it called for the exploration of
the feasibility of creating a subregional United Nations
coordinating capability, possibly by using existing
United Nations regional offices, which would assist the
United Nations system in setting integrated policies
and strategies, ensure the harmonization of activities
and lend support to national and subregional peace-
building efforts and initiatives, while supporting
subregional integration. The Council will continue to
advocate for the creation of such capability.

The Council believes that it is imperative for the
countries of the subregion to own and lead their own
reconstruction. The Central African region has
enormous potential, with a population of 100 million,
and vast untapped natural resources. The Council
deplores the illegal exploitation of those resources,
especially because the sustainable development of
those resources can serve to alleviate the humanitarian,
economic and social consequences of conflict and put
those countries on the path to long-term growth. We
will add our voice to that of the Security Council in
calling for an end to that practice.

The Economic and Social Council welcomes the
recent positive developments in the region: the
withdrawal of troops from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; the signature of the ceasefire agreement
between the Burundi Transitional Government and two
rebel movements, on the occasion of the Dar es-Salaam
regional summit of 7 October; and the decision to
deploy an international observation force to the Central
African Republic to promote calm, particularly on the
country's border with Chad. We believe that these are
positive signs that the subregion is emerging from the
nightmare of civil conflict and that they will serve to
create a conducive environment for rebuilding
economies and relaunching economic growth.

You, Sir, addressed the Economic and Social
Council in your capacity as President of the Security
Council when that body recently commemorated the
tenth anniversary of the signing of the General Peace
Agreement for Mozambique, and a number of those
who are here in this Chamber were also present at that
meeting. On 4 October 1992, after 16 years of civil
conflict, the parties to that agreement undertook to do
everything in their power to achieve genuine national
reconciliation. In the decade that has elapsed since
then, Mozambique has been an African and a United
Nations success story, as well as an example of how
peace and development interlink. We need such success
stories elsewhere in Africa as well.

This past July the Economic and Social Council
adopted a resolution that we hope will lead to very
useful and positive steps by the international
community in support of African countries emerging
from conflict. This is the agreement to establish, upon
request, an ad hoc advisory group, at the ambassadorial
level, to examine the humanitarian and economic needs
of the country concerned; to review relevant
programmes of support; to prepare recommendations
for a long-term programme of support that integrates
relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and development
in a comprehensive approach; and to provide advice on
ensuring the adequacy and coherence of international
assistance.

Guinea-Bissau is the first country to request that
such an advisory group be formed. We are now
working out the details of arrangements, and I hope
that we will be able to establish the ad hoc advisory
group on Guinea-Bissau this Friday, 25 October. The
advisory group will have inter-agency support in the
conduct of its work, and we look forward to the
analysis and report that the Economic and Social
Council should receive by mid-January. In performing
its task, the Economic and Social Council Group will
closely cooperate with the Security Council's Ad Hoc
Working Group on Africa.

Let me conclude by saying that at the recent
commemoration of 10 years of a successful peace
agreement, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mozambique affirmed that post-conflict recovery and
peace-building are even harder to manage than
peacekeeping and peace negotiations, as pressures are
high for the delivery of quick and sustained results and
for continuous proof that peace is more profitable than
war. This is a sobering thought, and we should keep it
in mind when discussing the prospects for Central
Africa.

Let me thank you once again, Sir, for organizing
this debate and for inviting the Economic and Social
Council to participate.

