Mr. Aini Atan (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
important open debate, which allows non-members
of the Security Council to express their views on an
important issue that currently warrants the urgent
attention of the United Nations. I also wish to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, as well as Mr. Hagai
El-Ad, Executive Director of B'Tselem, for their earlier
briefings to the Security Council.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

The situation in Palestine remains dire. A peaceful
resolution otothe longest man-made conflict remains
elusive. Malaysia condemns, in the strongest terms,
the various instances of the excessive, disproportionate
and indiscriminate use of force by Israeli forces against
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem and in particular in
the Gaza Strip. Ifleft unaddressed, the growing tension
in the Gaza Strip in recent weeks could certainly lead
to greater chaos and turmoil in the region. In that
regard, Malaysia calls on the parties concerned in the
region to exercise restraint and make every effort to
de-escalate tensions.

Malaysia also calls on all delegations here in the
Council Chamber today, as well as the international
community at large, to demand that Israel stop all
violations and illegal activities and fully comply with
all its obligations as prescribed by the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
as well as in line with international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.

Malaysia is confident that States Members of the
United Nations can make a significant contribution to
breaking the impasse in the Middle East peace process.
Malaysia continues to believe that a two-State solution,
with the Palestinians and the Israelis living side by
side in peace, based on the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine, is the only viable
solution to this long-standing conflict.

For its part, Malaysia will continue to provide
assistance to the Palestinians, within its means. We
continue to reaffirm our unwavering support for and
solidarity with the Palestinian cause in materializing
their right to self-determination, freedom and
independence. Malaysia will work closely with the
international community and multi-stakeholders in
finding a peaceful, just, sustainable and lasting solution
to this long-standing issue.

