Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the convening of
this briefing by the Japanese presidency, and thanks
Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor ofthe International Criminal
Court, for very clearly presenting her report on the state
of the investigations and proceedings of her Office with
regard to the Darfur issue, pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005). Senegal once again pledges its full support for
Ms. Bensouda.

Committed to respect for the universality of human
rights and the fight against impunity for serious crimes
committed against victims throughout the world, in
particular in Africa, and aware of the role played by
the International Criminal Court in that fight, Senegal
continues to follow closely the work of the Court
with regard to allegations of human rights violations,
including sexual and gender-based violence committed
in conflict zones in the Sudan, especially in Darfur.

No peace can be built on the vestiges ofimpunity or
failure to hold perpetrators responsible. Accountability
should never be ignored as the thirst for justice for
victims demands unfailing commitment on the part
of every one of us. Accordingly, we encourage the
Sudanese Government to provide a rapid response to
allegations of human rights violations and ensure that
those responsible for alleged crimes are held accountable
for their actions. Subscribing to the principles of
accountability and justice, my country - like the
African Union, which calls for re-establishing peace
and justice in Darfur - continues to believe that
dialogue and reconciliation are essential steps towards
bringing about comprehensive and definitive peace and
finding a lasting solution to the acute issue of refugees
and displaced persons in that area of Sudan.

Approximately one-third of Darfur's population
are refugees. Senegal therefore once again calls on the
international community to support the peace initiative
under way, in particular the Doha peace process, whose
implementation remains slow. It is also important to
support the activities of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, which continues its tireless work
to restore peace in Darfur. Moreover, my delegation
welcomes the outstanding work being carried out not
only by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and its staff, as well
as the country team, but also partnering humanitarian
entities working towards achieving peace in Darfur.
We stress the need to strengthen the effectiveness
of UNAMID in its support for peacebuilding
and stabilization.

With regard to the crucial role played by the Court,
it is regrettable that the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor continues to be constrained by an extremely
limited budget, thereby limiting its investigative and
prosecutorial activities. The Prosecutor must have the
necessary means at her disposal to be able to fulfil her
mandate, which, we recall, includes providing justice
to victims of serious crimes throughout the world,
including in Darfur. The Assembly of States Parties to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
of which we are a member, must continue to consider
ways and means to provide the Office of the Prosecutor
the financial support that it requires.

In the Senegalese delegation's view, equally
regrettable is the passivity of the Security Council
in addressing the repeated calls of the Office of the
Prosecutor, as it has been 13 years since the Office began
providing biannual reports to Council - amounting to
26 reports as of today. However, thus far the Council has
not provided it with a single strategic recommendation.
Fortunately, the Office of the Prosecutor benefits from
the cooperation and support of a number of States and
organizations, but we encourage all interested parties to
demonstrate the same spirit of openness by cooperating
fully with the Office in the purview of its activities.
I reiterate that, firmly committed as it is to the
principles of accountability and justice, my country
continues to believe that establishing the security and
political conditions conducive to dialogue will allow all
stakeholders to find a solution that meets requirements
to bring about peace and justice for Darfur. Achieving
lasting peace in that destabilized part of the Sudan,
which is a large country, most certainly involves a
challenging but necessary endeavour.

In conclusion, in Senegal's view, the compromise
proposal introduced by New Zealand - given the
reduction in the level of violence observed in Darfur,
as well as the lifting of certain unilateral sanctions
imposed on the Sudan - provides the Security Council
with an opportunity to improve the situation that
prevailed when we adopted resolution 1593 (2005) 12
years ago.

