Ms. Kang: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the latest
developments in Yemen on behalf of the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien.

The conditions today for the people inside Yemen
are appalling. Around 7.6 million people now require
emergency food assistance to survive. At least 2 million
people are malnourished, including 320,000 children,
who suffer from severe malnutrition, which represents
a two-fold increase since March. There can be little
doubt that the serious deterioration in the humanitarian
situation has been caused by the current conflict in
Yemen.

Since mid-March, the conflict has spread to 20 of
Yemen's 22 governorates, exacerbating an already dire
humanitarian situation brought on by years of poverty,
poor governance and ongoing instability, and triggering
a large-scale protection crisis. Since March, around
8 million people have lost reliable and safe access to
drinking water. At least 1.8 million children have had
to drop out of classes, adding to the 1.6 million who
were already out of school before the crisis began.

The conflict has had a widespread impact on the
whole array of social infrastructure, including markets
and road networks. That, combined with import
restrictions, has crippled the economy and amplified
the vulnerability of the civilian population, including
their ability to procure food. Institutions that provide
basic services in Yemen are unravelling. The north
has no financial resources, and the relevant authorities
cannot procure the supplies they need or to pay salaries
to doctors, nurses and teachers.

While some 14 million people lack adequate access
to health-care assistance, Yemen's health system is
close to collapse. Prior to the conflict, some 70 per cent
of health care was provided by the private sector, which
is now no longer functioning because of the failing
economy, and the public system is unable to absorb
the burden. Health facilities are closing - including
190 that provided nutrition services - medicines and
supplies are depleted and health workers have gone
unpaid for months. Patients with chronic illness, such
as kidney disease and diabetes, can no longer find the
most basic treatments.

Relentless air strikes, shelling and violence
continue to force Yemeni families from their homes.
Today Yemen has over 2.5 million internally displaced
people (IDPs) - an eightfold increase since the start
of the conflict. While displacement has decreased in
the southern governorates, where people have been
returning home in recent months, it has increased
significantly in the northern governorates, primarily
due to air strikes. Taiz governorate now hosts the highest
number of IDPs - nearly 400,000 people - followed
by the northern governorates of Amran and Hajjah.
In addition, almost 170,000 Yemenis, refugees and
migrants have fled to neighbouring countries, often
forced to take perilous seajourneys.

The conflict is devastating the country and
causing widespread suffering as parties show disregard
for human life and the protection of civilians and
indiscriminately target civilian infrastructure, in clear
violation of international humanitarian law. More than
2,700 civilians have been confirmed killed, at least
637 of them children. At least 70 health facilities have
been hit by air strikes or shelling. Over 170 schools
have been destroyed, and more than 600 damaged. At
least 58 schools have been occupied by armed groups,
nearly all of them in Taiz governorate. Another 238
schools are hosting people displaced by the violence.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict has verified at least
740 cases of child recruitment this year - almost five
times the number in 2014. Nearly 85 per cent of those
children have been recruited by non-State actors.

Yemeni women have been particularly impacted by
the conflict, and their voices are important for us to listen
to and heed. Over 30 per cent of displaced households
in some areas of the country are female-headed, a
notable increase from the 9 per cent before the current
crisis. Approximately 70 per cent more gender-based
violence incidents have been reported since March.
Women are also disproportionately impacted by the
failing economy and social services, resulting in a lack
of access for many to life-saving reproductive care.
Despite a challenging and dangerous environment,
humanitarian organizations on the ground are
responding with life-saving assistance. Four million
people have been provided access to emergency water
and sanitation through water trucking and the provision
of fuel. Since April, monthly food distributions have
been steadily expanding, with 1.9 million people
reached in November and 3 million people planned
for December. By February, 5 million people should
be receiving food assistance each month across the
country. Over 250 metric tons of life-saving medical
supplies have been distributed to health facilities,
assisting more than 7 million Yemenis. International
and national non-governmental organizations are
playing a significant role in the response, running and
supporting health facilities, providing psychosocial
care, administering treatment to malnourished children
and implementing critical water and sanitation projects.

The announcement of the cessation of hostilities by
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Yemen and
the agreement by the Yemeni parties, as of 15 December
was seized by humanitarian actors as a long-awaited
opportunity to reach areas of the country that have been
inaccessible, in particular to carry out independent
needs assessment and projet monitoring, two activities
that have been extremely challenging due to the lack
of security guarantees and continuing hostilities. While
United Nations agencies and partners were able to
proceed with some of their intended activities, notably
in Taiz governorate, deliveries have been impacted by
continued fighting, denials of clearance for convoy
movements, and delays stemming from the resumption
of cumbersome movement notification procedures to
the coalition.

We are very grateful for the tireless efforts of the
Special Envoy. I welcome the agreement reached in
Switzerland to facilitate humanitarian access to all
affected governorates in Yemen, in particular Taiz. I call
on the parties to take concrete measures to implement
that in practice. Over 200,000 civilians in Taiz have
been effectively cut off from assistance. Three months
of virtual siege has grounded to a halt much of the city's
basic services. Over 50 per cent of its water network
has been destroyed by fighting. The health facilities
that remain open are operating with limited capacity
and are overwhelmed with the war wounded, often to
the detriment of those with chronic illness. To date,
only a small amount of supplies have entered the areas
of the city affected by the siege. Wheat, pulses, oil and
sugar have been offloaded in the warehouses of the
partners of the World Food Programme in the districts
of Al-Mudhaffar, Al-Qahirah, Al-Salh and Al-Taiziah.
The distribution of those supplies has not yet taken
place.

We continue to monitor commercial imports into
Yemen, and I am relieved to report some improvements
in that regard. Food imports have returned to pre-crisis
levels. Although still half of what they were before
the crisis, fuel imports have increased fourfold since
October. Prices remain high despite that progress, in
part because of damaged road networks throughout the
country. It is vital that continued increases in imports
of all critical commodities are sustained. The United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism is
expected to be operational in mid-January, once all
pledges have been received, thereby ensuring steady
flows of commercial supplies, especially those vital to
the survival and wellbeing of the Yemeni people.

May I once again remind the parties of their
obligations under international humanitarian law to
protect civilians from hostilities; safeguard civilian
infrastructure, including schools and hospitals; and
enable the movement of humanitarian workers and
supplies into and across all areas of the country. United
Nations agencies and partners will continue to scale up
their assistance to save lives. However, only a political
settlement can end the immense suffering facing more
than 20 million men, women and children in Yemen
today.

