Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this timely open debate. Before I continue,
I wish to express the appreciation of my delegation to
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his briefing on this important
issue.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, and with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of Kazakhstan
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The absence of progress in the peace process
between Israel and Palestine has been a matter of
utmost concern to my delegation. Efforts to help
resume dialogue and substantive negotiations between
the two parties have been made to no avail. Indeed,
the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, as asserted by
the Secretary-General at the Asia-Pacific Meeting in
Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace held in Bangkok
recently, has been at a dangerous standstill for some
time.

Like many other members of the international
community, my delegation is very clear on one
thing - the issue of settlements is the most potent
obstacle to the prospects of peace in the Middle East,
with particular reference to the two-State solution. This
does not mean that we do not consider the other final
status issues, such as borders, security, refugees and the
status of Jerusalem, to be important.

Without doubt, each of these issues is significant,
but the challenge of settlements has emerged as the key
puzzle. Regrettably, it is also one that is now continuously
manipulated by Israel. Thus, each time there seems to
be a prospect for progress of any kind, a sudden twist
emerges - such as settler violence and extremism;
the eviction of Palestinians and the demolition of their
homes; or some kind of new acceleration in settlement
construction and expansion - which then beats
back that effort or hope. Only two years ago, Israel's
manipulation of the settlement question resulted in the
collapse of the proximity talks sponsored by the United
States, following its failure to extend the moratorium
on settlement construction.

It must also be remembered that, along with the
settlement policy, Israel has also continued the illegal
construction ofthe separation wall in the West Bank, in
clear defiance of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice. Similarly, following the Israeli
military assault on Gaza a couple of years ago, Israel
has maintained its blockade on the territory, making
recovery almost impossible. Therefore, unless Israel
resolves its settlement policy and halts the evictions of
Palestinians, the demolition of their property and the
expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, it will be impossible
to conceive of any progress towards peace negotiations.

It is in consideration of this that my delegation
reiterates that Israel must fully abide by the resolutions
ofthe Council in respect ofsettlements. We call on Israel
to dismantle the settlements it has built in violation of
those resolutions, and place a complete freeze on all
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. There is no other approach
that can give the Palestinians and the international
community the confidence that Israel is serious when
it speaks about peace or the resolution of the conflict.
It remains Indonesia's View and commitment that the
conflict between Israel and Palestine must be resolved
through the two-State solution, but that cannot be done
if Israel sponsors a settlement menace that frustrates
every effort and imperils every hope.

Furthermore, we would like to reiterate that we
remain committed to the two-State solution of Israel
and a viable and independent Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in peace and
security on the basis of the principle of land for peace
and a just and comprehensive regional peace consistent
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, the road
map of the Quartet, and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The two-State solution, however, will be
meaningful only if it is comprehensive and embraces
other relevant political tracks, such as the Israel-Syria
and Israel-Lebanon tracks. Thus, Israel must withdraw
completely from the remaining occupied Lebanese land,
as well as from the occupied Syrian Golan, and comply
fully with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

Finally, we call on members of the international
community not to relent in their support of the cause of
Palestinian statehood on the basis of the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Only that outcome can
be the basis of a just solution to all other aspects of the
question of Palestine in accordance with international
law and United Nations resolutions.

To conclude, allow me to address the dire situation
in Syria. In that regard, President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono has underlined that "the responsibility to
put an end to this situation is in the hands not only
of the Syrian people and Government, but also of
the international community". Therefore, Indonesia
sincerely hopes that the world, including the Security
Council, will now be united in ending the violence in
Syria.

