Mrs. Collet (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to start by thanking the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
briefings and for outlining the challenges they face in
carrying out their duties.

At the previous meeting on this item, we
welcomed the transfer to The Hague of Ante Gotovina,
one of the four fugitives mentioned by name in Council
resolutions. At the time, we had high hopes of seeing
that example followed by the rapid transfer to the
ICTY of Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic. Those
hopes were dashed, and yet arresting and transferring
ICTY indictees to The Hague is an international
obligation for the concerned countries of the region
and a prerequisite for their integration into the
European family. It is imperative that Serbia,
Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina fully
cooperate with the Tribunal.

Cooperating with the international Tribunals is
also an obligation incumbent on all States and
international organizations. We welcome the effective
cooperation of Argentina that recently enabled the
transfer of Milan Lukic. We note, on the other hand,
that the Russian Federation has not yet transferred
Dragan Zelenovic. We also note the difficulties being
experienced in the cooperation between the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and
the Office of the Prosecutor.

We also expect the full cooperation of all States
in the arrest of Felicien Kabuga and others indicted by
the ICTR who remain at large 10 years after the
genocide. In that regard, we should like the Tribunal's
written reports to set out in greater detail developments
in cooperation received and investigations that are still
under way.

The most recent reporting period was marked,
inter alia, by the death of Slobodan Milosevic. The
French Minister for Foreign Affairs has expressed
special sympathy for all those who suffered in the
ethnic cleansing decided upon and planned with great
resolve by that man. The Tribunal and the Dutch
authorities have investigated, as required, the deaths of
Milosevic and Milan Babic. The results of those
investigations must be analysed.

We were especially interested to learn that the
judges have decided to draw lessons from the
Milosevic trial and begun to implement a number of
the working group's recommendations on accelerating
trials. We note in particular their resolve to see judges
play a more active role in managing trial proceedings,
thus adhering more closely to the investigative model.
That, of course, should take place in respect for the
independence of the Prosecutor, the rights of the
defence and the interests of the victims.

Following certain worrying irregularities, we
appeal to the ICTY scrupulously to respect the status of
its working languages.

Thanks to the improved functioning of the
Tribunals in the context of the completion strategy,
justice should be rendered to the victims in a more
reasonable time frame, opening the way to
reconciliation. To that end, we must welcome the
imminent opening of the Srebrenica trial, representing
a particularly dark page of our history. Its organization
as a single case with multiple accused will make its
significance even greater.

As regards the ICTR, we have no objection to the
President's request to have the mandate of the
permanent judges extended to the end of 2008 in order
to complete the trials under way. However, the idea of
increasing the number of judges in the Appeals
Chamber should be carefully considered.

Another important element of the completion
strategy is the transfer of accused to national
jurisdictions. That process must be accompanied by the
necessary guarantee of fair trials and the non-
application of the death penalty. Only thus can it
contribute to the development of the rule of law.
However, transfer to national jurisdictions cannot be
considered in the cases of the highest-level indictees
responsible for the most serious crimes. Those cannot
escape international justice.

For France, the mission of the Tribunals cannot
be completed so long as the principal fugitive
indictees - in particular Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Mladic and
Mr. Kabuga - remain at large. They must be
transferred to The Hague and Arusha without further
ado. Like the States concerned, they must remain
aware that the Council will not abandon that
obligation.

