Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank High
Representative Inzko for his substantial report
(S/20l7/379, annex). Our delegation would like to refer
to some key salient points and make some observations
and recommendations.

Obviously, we see progress, but there are some areas
that need close monitoring. The recent developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina must continue to receive
attention. Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a country
in transition. It needs the support of all if it is to
become a nation with strong State institutions with
inclusive dialogue in its democratic procedures and
trust in progress and normalization. We urge all parties
to the Peace Agreement to comply with all procedures
and institutions that are integral components of that
settlement, including the Constitutional Court.

Kazakhstan reiterates its commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which in turn has demonstrated its
strong commitment to implementing its reform
agenda - focused on security, stability, democracy
and socioeconomic development. We welcome positive
ongoing dialogue between the Governments of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia - with regular contact at
very high levels - and we welcome the results of the
meeting held in Belgrade in January. We encourage
them to carry those results forward.

The European Union (EU) Force must also
focus on converting defence properties into State
and civilian structures, greater fiscal responsibility
and sustainability, strengthening the Parliamentary
Assembly and developing media and broadcasting
communication. The country needs further support in
order to improve its energy system and infrastructure,
foreign trade, economic relations and other areas
of socioeconomic development. The question of
returning refugees and displaced persons and their
resettlement must also be addressed. More needs to be
done to improve the daily lives of the citizens and to
promote reconciliation.

The progress achieved on the EU integration
track will catalyse reconciliation and resolve long-
standing issues while addressing the various reforms.
It is equally important for the political leadership to
demonstrate responsibility and accountability. The
strong engagement of the international community is
an obvious necessity for the sustainable development
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and must include measures
to improve housing, education and health care, and
promote gender equality with the active involvement of
civil society.

Bosnia and Herzegovina also needs international
support to fight corruption, terrorism and organized
crime. In that regard, Kazakhstan welcomes the
initiatives aimed at combating violent extremist
activities, including the training of Da'esh fighters,
as well as the reintegration of such fighters into the
community. A good example is the strategy of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on preventing and combating of
terrorism for the 2015-2020 period. The strategy
seeks to protect the rule of law, good governance and
human rights, in order to maintain peace, security and
stability in the region. Given its impact on European
stability, that work should be followed closely by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the EU, the European Union Force and NATO.

Finally, the international community should
support Bosnia and Herzegovina's move towards
stability for inclusiveness in the political success of the
country and fostering ethnic harmony in cooperation
on national programmes. Ultimately, we must reach a
stage of stability, while overseeing the implementation
of the civilian aspects of the Peace Agreement, which
will demonstrate a new level of peace and prosperity.

