Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): My delegation takes this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General for the fine report he has submitted
to the Security Council on the situation in Rwanda,
pursuant to resolution 1029 (1995) of 12 December 1995.
In that resolution, the Security Council extended the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR) for a final period until 8 March
1996.

My delegation also wishes to express its gratitude to
the Secretary-General's Special Representative in
Rwanda, the Organization of African Unity, the
humanitarian organizations, former Presidents Julius
Nyerere of the United Republic of Tanzania and Amadou
Toumani Toure of Mali for their efforts in the quest for
peace, stability and national reconciliation for the people
of Rwanda.

In the same spirit, it would be wrong of me if I
neglected both to highlight and to praise the remarkable
work of UNAMIR.

Given the draft resolution before us, we must ask
ourselves if everything has been settled and if the United
Nations has anything further to do in Rwanda. Our
answer is that it does not. The situation is relatively clam
and stable - with the exception of the areas near the
borders with Zaire - and we note also that great progress
has been made in agricultural and industrial output,
improving health conditions and so on.

Nevertheless, we feel that there remain a number of
problems to be solved with the assistance of the
international community: inter alia, the return of refugees
and help for them when they do; the restoration of the
justice system; and improving conditions in the prisons.
We must also take into account the need to protect
representatives of international organizations, including
those of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the non-governmental organizations.

 

My delegation believes that we must keep an eye on
the activities of the elements of the former Rwandese
Government Forces, who could in fact jeopardize peace and
stability in the country. If the international community were
to abandon the Rwandese people at this stage, the result
might be disastrous and it would also send a bad political
signal, one that would have dire consequences.

Given the fragile humanitarian situation and our
concern for human rights, the international community still
has a very important role to play in Rwanda. That is why
my delegation supports the draft resolution before the
Council, since we are now convinced that it will make it
possible for the justice system to be strengthened - for the
return of refugees to be facilitated; for the national
infrastructure to be rehabilitated and, ultimately, because it
will make national reconciliation possible. My delegation
will therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us.

