Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
the representative of Somalia for their statements. They
have once again depicted one of the direst situations
we face. Unfortunately, seemingly unlike other organs
of the United Nations, the Security Council appears
unable to find an effective way to improve this thorny
situation.
The Security Council has received many reports
in which the humanitarian and human rights situation
merited particular attention. They include the briefing
presented to the Human Rights Council on 11 December
by Ms. Louise Arbour, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and the briefing to
the Security Council on 6 December 2007 by Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. Ms. Arbour
reiterated her concerns with regard to the human rights
of Somalis caught in the crossfire of the conflict,
especially in Mogadishu. For his part, Mr. Holmes
briefed the Council on the terrible humanitarian
situation in the improvised refugee camps surrounding
that city, which house some 600,000 people. According
to Mr. Holmes, that may be the largest group of
internally displaced persons in the world today.

In addition, recent political events serve to
highlight the deterioration of the Transitional Federal
Institutions. The endemic and progressive
fragmentation of Somali politics should spur the
international community and the people of Somalia
themselves to show greater support. In the short and
medium terms, there is a risk that the new Government
of Prime Minister Nur Hassan Hussein will collapse,
and along with it our efforts to stabilize Somalia.

Reports indicate that the international community
and relief organizations have made significant progress
in humanitarian coverage, but that a great deal remains
to be done. As a matter of priority, the Government and
the opposition must both address the critical political
situation and undertake specific measures to ensure the
implementation of the outcome of the National
Reconciliation Congress.

On a more strategic level, the Security Council
can no longer sit back with arms folded. The mandate
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
will again expire in February 2008, and the Council
has yet to find a way to strengthen or replace that
operation. In the coming weeks we must therefore take
fundamental decisions with regard to that operation
and the possible alternatives to replace it: either the
deployment of a multinational force or the dispatch of
a peacekeeping force. As a prelude to whatever
decision is taken, it will be necessary to dispatch a
technical assessment mission.

Finally, the Government must have zero tolerance
with soldiers and civilians leading illegal groups
throughout the length and breadth of the region. It must
reduce excessive border controls, prevent the
harassment of relief workers and dedicate greater
resources to dealing with piracy.
Our lack of action could jeopardize the credibility
of this Council. Consequently, it is crucial that we act
energetically and rapidly, given these challenges.

