Mr. Ban Ki-moon: As this is my first time back at
the United Nations and addressing the Security Council
as a former Secretary-General of the United Nations,
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
the President of the Security Council, His Excellency
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, for having
invited me to take part in this important meeting. I also
commend the Government of Kuwait for its successful
presidency of the Security Council in the month
of February.

The world we live in today is completely different
from what it was seven decades ago, when the United
Nations was founded. While we have seemingly moved
on from the era of large-scale war between States,
today we face an increasing number of emerging
global challenges. They include climate change, tens of
millions of refugees, violent extremism, terrorism and
nuclear proliferation, to name just a few. At the same
time, the fourth industrial revolution, represented by
enormous technological advancements - such as in
the areas of artificial intelligence, nanotechnology and
biological engineering - has brought about dramatic
changes in the shape and form of our daily lives. They
will also have a significant impact on the security
environment of the future world.

Under those dramatically changing circumstances
of today's world, some are questioning the role and
effectiveness of the United Nations as a whole. However,
those critics may also agree that, without the United
Nations, the international community could have never
succeeded in preventing another world war in the past
70-plus years. Furthermore, if it were not for the United
Nations, the international community would not have
been able to make significant gains on eradicating
extreme poverty, promoting public health and scaling
up access to education. Who else would have been able
to provide legitimacy for the actions that the Security
Council takes in addressing conflicts today?

The primary responsibilities vested in the Security
Council to maintain international peace and security
are therefore needed now more than ever. In that regard,
I value the Council's improved working relations with
the other interconnected pillars of the United Nations
system, and also its increased focus on the concept of
sustaining peace. Addressing the root causes of conflict
and working towards preventing conflicts before
they escalate, alongside national and international
stakeholders, will ultimately make the Council, and the
Organization, stronger as a result.
In order to effectively respond to non-traditional
and transnational security challenges such as climate
change, terrorism and violent extremism, nuclear
proliferation and cross-border insecurity, the Security
Council should undergo reforms to be more flexible in
its decision-making process. Reform of the Security
Council is long overdue.

We must also remind ourselves of the fact that the
primary responsibility for preserving peace and security
lies with Member States themselves. The failure of some
national leaders to fulfil their responsibilities to their
own peoples significantly undermines the role of the
United Nations in resolving conflicts. That can also lead
to some Member States neglecting their responsibility
to protect their own citizens, while hiding behind the
concepts of national ownership and State sovereignty.

Those political leaders often create dire political
and economic instabilities where innocent civilians bear
the bulk of the suffering. We have learned by now that,
in order to hold such leaders accountable, the Security
Council should not limit itself to simply calling for
actions in rhetoric or statements. The Council must act
on those situations.

Having said that, I would like to touch on several
international and regional conflicts.

In the Middle East, we must now be prepared for the
post-Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) era. The
Security Council must focus more on northern Syria,
the ongoing civil war in Syria, tension in the Golan
Heights and the continuing Syrian crisis of refugees
and internally displaced persons. Those issues could
resurface, seriously threaten regional stability and lead
to further conflicts among States in the region. Such
instability could lead to exacerbating tensions between
Iran and Saudi Arabia, and bring Israel and Iran closer
to direct conflict.

Violence between Israel and Hizbullah in Lebanon
and other regional threats could also have the potential
to spin out of control as a result of deteriorating
regional security.

In addition, after losing its territories of terror
in the Middle East, we cannot dismiss the possibility
of ISIS moving on to settle in vulnerable places such
as Libya.

The division among member States of the Gulf
Cooperation Council is also of serious concern. In that
regard, I highly commend the mediating role played by
His Highness Sheikh Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
Amir of Kuwait.

Exposure to the spread of terrorism and violent
extremism is especially alarming in places like the
Sahel region in Africa. As extreme poverty, terrorism,
the illicit arms trade and human trafficking are all
prevalent in a volatile cross-border environment, we
must bolster our collective actions to address such
vulnerabilities. During my tenure as Secretary-
General, in June 2013, I established the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel to address such issues.
I am pleased to see that Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission are working in triangular cooperation to
advance that important effort.

Towards the end of my second term as Secretary-
General, in April 2016, the Security Council and the
General Assembly adopted twin resolutions (resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) on
the review of United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
The resolutions expressed deep concern about the high
human cost and suffering caused by armed conflict.

Today, not only do international peace and security
issues remain at a critical juncture, but multilateralism
is also at stake. We must remember that multilateralism
cannot be upheld by one Member State alone or a group
of States. The United Nations, especially the Security
Council, must continue to endeavour to strengthen that
driving ideal, while overcoming whatever challenges
may loom over the horizon.

In that regard, I must emphasize that the entire
United Nations membership should faithfully and
thoroughly implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, while coping with other new challenges,
including the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, among others.

In that connection, as Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres has stated, I believe that the situation on
the Korean peninsula is currently our most serious
and imminent challenge. As we all know, today the
Korean peninsula is faced with serious challenges as
a result of the continued nuclear tests and long-range
ballistic missile launches conducted by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. At the end of last year, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea announced its
"completion of State nuclear force" and proclaimed
itself a "nuclear State." That is a serious threat to
international peace and security and clearly violates all
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the regime
established by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.

In fact, the Security Council has responded with
tough measures, including increasingly stronger
sanctions, to deter the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's nuclear development. Six of the 10 different
resolutions adopted since its first nuclear test, in 2006,
were adopted in the past two years alone. Firm and
unified actions by the Security Council will be essential
until North Korea's nuclear weapons and programmes
are completely, verifiably and irreversibly dismantled.

In that regard, I urge the authorities of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to fully abide
by the relevant Security Council resolutions. At the
same time, I urge all Member States to do their part
in helping to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue
through diplomatic efforts. Only by seeking solutions
to all these problems through peaceful means can we
uphold the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

In that regard, the participation of North Korean
athletes in the XXIII Winter Olympic Games, in
PyeongChang, South Korea, has aroused much hope
and expectation around the world. I warmly welcome
the recent resumption of inter-Korean dialogue and the
resulting reconciliatory atmosphere between the two
Koreas that was created before, and has existed during,
the Olympic Games.

We must keep alive that hard-won and newly
created momentum for dialogue, so that the narrow
window of opportunity it has provided will be able
to lead to a more meaningful and genuine dialogue
process towards reconciliation, peace and the ultimate
denuclearization of North Korea. The denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula would also help to spur the
establishment of wider peace and stability in North-
East Asia, thereby setting the stage for greater regional
development and prosperity.

That process also requires the whole-hearted
support of the United Nations, and I count on the
Security Council in moving the whole process to that
end. We need genuine and strong commitment from
both South and North Korea to engage in dialogue,
while supported by the United States, China, Japan and
Russia. The current reconciliatory atmosphere must be
nurtured through the continued engagement of both the
South and North Korean authorities. The United States
can also play a crucial role in engaging with North
Korea, as was suggested by President Moon Jae-in of
the Republic of Korea.

Throughout my years as Secretary-General, I
witnessed the unique power of sports in contributing
to peace and development in many places around the
world. I am happy to have seen such positive energy once
again in my country during the PyeongChang Winter
Olympics. In that regard, I would like to commend
Mr. Thomas Bach, President of the International
Olympic Committee, for his visionary leadership in
facilitating the North Korean athletes' participation
in the Games, particularly that of the joint women's
ice-hockey team.

Once again, I would like to thank the President and
the members of the Security Council for inviting me to
address the Council, during which I look forward to an
active exchange of thoughts and ideas.

