Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States thanks Secretary General Stock and
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for their informative
briefings. We are grateful to Australia for its efforts to
focus the Security Council's attention on strengthening
the implementation of United Nations sanctions.

We share Australia's View that the Council
should be constantly evaluating the effectiveness of
United Nations sanctions and asking how they can be
improved. As United Nations sanctions have become
more targeted in recent years, their implementation has
also become more challenging. Today, United Nations
sanctions resolutions often contain multiple technically
complex provisions, such as asset freezes, travel bans,
arms embargoes, cargo inspections, natural-resource
bans, maritime interdiction authorizations and bans on
luxury goods. They have the capacity to target narrower
groups than before and focus on non-State as well as
Government actors. And sanctions targets have grown
more adept at evading them. The growing complexity
of sanctions regimes, and the increasing sophistication
of attempts to evade them, necessitates a greater degree
of coordination in enforcing sanctions.

At the same time, as sanctions have become more
challenging to implement, the Council relies on them
more than ever before in responding to global threats.
We need sanctions to be effective. Just look at some of
the places and ways we use sanctions today. Sanctions
make it harder for the terrorist group Al-Shabaab to
fill its coffers through the environmentally ruinous
charcoal trade; sanctions help obstruct the efforts
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to use the
international financial system to fund its horrendous
and destabilizing terrorism and violence and recruit
foreign terrorist fighters into its ranks; sanctions limit
illicit arms flows to post-conflict States such as Cote
d'Ivoire and Liberia. Earlier this month, sanctions
supported Yemen's transitional Government by
marginalizing spoilers.

In conflicts where armed groups have committed
unspeakable atrocities against civilians, such as the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, sanctions have imposed a significant cost
on such groups' leaders, limiting their mobility and
targeting their assets. Sanctions have helped stop North
Korea from acquiring sensitive nuclear technology and
were a major factor in getting Iran to the negotiating
table. Of course, that is not to say that sanctions alone
are the silver bullet for complex crises. They must be
part of a broader strategy for exerting pressure on bad
actors. But what is certain is that without sanctions,
each of these challenges to our collective security
would be much more acute and harder to contain.

In spite of all of this, some see sanctions as unfair
or illegitimate - unfair, because sanctions may have
a broader impact beyond the individuals or groups
they are intended to target; and illegitimate, because
they question the very idea that the Security Council
should be able to impose such measures. Both critiques
are flawed. While it is true that in the past sanctions
were at times a blunt instrument where a more precise
one was needed, the Security Council has come a long
way towards significantly reducing the unintended
humanitarian effects of such measures, including
through precision targeting, humanitarian exemptions
and fair and clear sanctioning procedures.

Meanwhile, those who question the right to impose
sanctions and the grounds on which they are based are
very often the ones who are violating international
norms and laws, and who see little obligation to abide
by the collective standards we have all embraced. In
addition, by imposing sanctions on those who break
international laws and standards - the proliferators,
arms smugglers, human rights abusers, traffickers in
conflict minerals, terrorists and their financiers - we
deepen respect for key principles of our international
system. Tough, effective sanctions can change
behaviour without resorting to the use of force, helping
to avoid the horrific consequences of war.

If sanctions are to be effective, they must be
implemented. In recent years, however, enforcement of
those measures has not kept pace with their increasing
value for the Security Council's work. Implementation
gaps undermine the Council's efforts and exacerbate
threats. That is why Australia's work on focusing the
Council, through these briefings and a draft resolution
aimed at improving implementation of United
Nations sanctions, is so critical. In the spirit of that
draft resolution, we propose two goals for improving
sanctions enforcement.

First, the Security Council should continue to
encourage all parts of the United Nations system to foster
and facilitate full implementation of United Nations
sanctions. Field missions, Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General, Force Commanders and United
Nations mediators should be working hand in hand with
the relevant sanctions committees. Diverse parts of the
United Nations system should consider the ways in
which effective sanctions implementation can directly
support their efforts to build more peaceful, stable
societies.

Secondly, the Security Council should devote more
attention to helping States enforce United Nations
sanctions. We frequently hear from States that they
sometimes lack the guidance and capacity to implement
those measures effectively, as is required under the
Charter of the United Nations. Instead of just piling
on more obligations that cannot be implemented, the
Council should explore mechanisms designed to provide
States with the help they need. The draft resolution on
United Nations sanctions includes some practical ideas
on how to do this, such as establishing a sanctions policy
coordination unit within the Department of Political
Affairs that would support better communication
between the Council and the States implementing these
measures. Over time, we hope this conversation will
lead to more initiatives to bolster State capacity in this
area.

In conclusion, I would again like to welcome the
renewed focus on this critical tool. As today's threats
to peace become more complex and multifaceted, the
Council must continually review and improve all means
at its disposal, including sanctions. We should seek to
ensure that all our tools - peacekeeping, mediation,
dialogue, engagement and, yes, sanctions - are being
used together to common purpose and in the pursuit of
peace.

