Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour and
privilege to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and the countries aligning themselves with this
statement.

Haiti has made significant progress in laying the
foundation for an inclusive democratic transition, at a
pace that seemed unlikely a year ago. The support of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) has been crucial. The European Union
expresses its satisfaction that the presidential and the
first-round parliamentary elections of 7 February took
place peacefully. They mark an important step forward
in the democratic process. We welcome the high
turnout by, and serious engagement of, the people of
Haiti in exercising their democratic right to choose
their future leaders despite the major technical and
logistical problems encountered during the
organization of the vote.

We would like to seize the opportunity presented
by the presence of President-elect Rene Preval of Haiti
to congratulate him on his new mandate and to reaffirm
the European Union's commitment to the people and
authorities of Haiti in their efforts to rebuild and
develop their country.

By providing €18 million to the electoral process
and by sending an EU electoral observation mission to
Haiti, the EU has demonstrated its strong commitment
to the transition process in Haiti.

The EU notes that the second round of
parliamentary elections will be held on 21 April, and
that the swearing-in ceremony of the President-elect
will take place at the inaugural session of the newly
elected Parliament. We hope that the parliamentary
elections will be conducted in a peaceful and credible
manner, so that they enhance the democratic process,
the rule of law and the establishment of strong and
stable institutions.

The security situation remains a cause of concern.
The European Union therefore calls upon Haiti's
leaders to demonstrate strong commitment to
improving the security of their citizens in partnership
with MINUSTAH. Much-needed progress in the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes will also contribute to that.

Underlying socio-economic conditions need to be
addressed as well. Quick-impact projects are a valuable
tool in that regard.

Moreover, the reform of the Haitian national
police must be reinforced by addressing shortcomings
in the judicial system. Current and future national
authorities must find a swift solution to the problem of
the high number of prolonged pretrial detentions,
which are unacceptable from a human rights
perspective and, if continued, will have serious
implications for the country's security and stability. As
Haiti begins a new chapter in its history, it is vital that
the incoming leadership give special attention to
reconciliation and an inclusive approach.

The announced normalization of relations
between Haiti and the Caribbean community is a
positive signal. Moreover, Haiti's political and
institutional progress will require a sustained
commitment from the Haitian authorities to good
governance, including in the economic and social
sectors, the promotion of key democratic values,
respect for the independence of the judiciary and an
impartial professional civil service and police, as well
as full commitment to human rights.

In order to achieve those goals, the international
community will need to continue to assist Haiti and to
work closely with the local authorities. Ultimately,
however, the future of the country lies in the hands of
the Haitians themselves.

In conclusion, the European Union would like to
commend the crucial role of MINUSTAH in support of
the democratic transition process in Haiti and to thank
Juan Gabriel Valdes for his leadership.

