Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank Special Envoy
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings. China supports Special Envoy Griffiths
in his efforts to continue to promote the political
process in Yemen and commends the United Nations
and the relevant agencies on their unremitting efforts
to improve the humanitarian situation in that country.

The conflict in Yemen has been raging for several
years, bringing profound suffering to its people. The
frequent clashes in the Middle East have added complex
dimensions to the quest for a political settlement of
the issue of Yemen and to the situation in the region.
China believes that at the next stage, attention should
be focused on the following issues.

First, it is necessary to strengthen dialogue, enhance
mutual trust and create the conditions necessary
to resolve differences. The situation in Yemen has
undergone complex changes recently, and attacks
targeting civilians and civilian installations during the
conflict in southern Yemen, among other things, pose
obstacles to the peace process on the ground. China
calls on all the parties to exercise restraint and to
refrain from any action that could lead to an escalation
of the situation.

Through the mediation of Saudi Arabia, the Yemeni
Government and the southern groups are engaged in a
constructive dialogue, and we hope to see a positive
outcome as soon as possible. China expects the
countries of the region to continue working to create
conditions conducive to enabling the parties in Yemen
to ease tensions. We call on all parties to be guided
first and foremost by the interests of the country and
its people, to resolve differences through peace talks
and other political means and work to jointly safeguard
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Yemen.

Secondly, it is essential that the parties work
diligently and in good faith to fulfil existing
commitments and fully implement the agreements
already reached. The Stockholm Agreement, an
important achievement arrived at through the good
offices of the United Nations, has contributed to the
overall ceasefire situation in the Al-Hudaydah area.
On 14 October, in accordance with resolution 2481
(2019), the Secretary-General submitted a review of the
performance of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement, in which he concludes
that the efforts of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee have made an effective contribution to the
reduction of violence, an acknowledgement that we
appreciate. The Mission has been assisting the United
Nations humanitarian agencies and cooperating with
the United Nations Development Programme on issues
such as port revenue management and mine action. We
appreciates its work and that of the Committee. We hope
that the Yemeni parties will continue consultations on
issues such as prisoner exchanges and the statement of
understanding on Taiz, using the good offices of the
United Nations, and make progress as soon as possible.

Thirdly, we must continue to advance a
comprehensive political settlement of the issue of
Yemen. The parties should seek a comprehensive
political settlement based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015),
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism and the outcomes of the
Yemeni National Dialogue Conference. The United
Nations should continue to play its role as the chief
channel of good offices. The Security Council should
stay united and provide strong political support. China
supports Special Envoy Griffiths in preparing for a
resumption of comprehensive political negotiations. We
hope that he will maintain close communications with
all the parties, enhance their mutual understanding
and urge all to implement the commitments they have
already made in order to lay a solid foundation for the
next stage of political negotiations.

Fourthly, we must continue to give more attention
and support to the humanitarian issue in Yemen. The
humanitarian situation in the country continues to
worsen, with the Yemeni people bearing the brunt of
the suffering due to famine, cholera, oil shortages and
soaring prices. China encourages the countries of the
region to continue helping to ease the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. We hope donor countries will
strengthen their coordination with the United Nations,
honour their pledging commitments and ensure that
humanitarian supplies reach all the people and regions
in need of them. China has provided a large amount of
support to Yemen in the areas of economy, education,
health care and food through bilateral and multilateral
channels and will continue to do so to the best of
its ability.

