Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to welcome to the Council His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dacic, Prime Minister of Serbia, and His
Excellency Mr, Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister of
Kosovo. I would also like to welcome Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and to thank him for his
briefing.

The municipal elections of 3 November were the
first to be held throughout the territory of Kosovo under
Kosovo law. The first round of the elections took place
calmly in most of the municipalities and participation
was generally satisfactory. The elections in the
northern municipalities were a key element of the first
agreement on principles governing the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina, concluded in
Brussels on 19 April 2013. A new and important stage
in implementing the agreement is therefore under way.

I pay tribute to the Serbian and Kosovo
Governments, which have honoured their commitments
and encouraged citizens to take part in the elections.
I also convey our gratitude to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, which has an
important role in facilitating the elections in the four
northern municipalities, and to the European Union,
which deployed election observers to Kosovo.

Luxembourg, however, is forced to condemn the
violent incidents that occurred in a number of polling
stations in northern Mitrovica. Such an attempt to deny
voters their right to express themselves in democratic
elections is unacceptable. We welcome the strengthened
presence provided by the Kosavo police, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the Kosovo Force during the second ballot, which took
place without incidents the day before yesterday in
northern Mitrovica. We hope that the second round, to
take place on 1 December, in the relevant municipalities
will enable the election to be concluded in the calm that
befits a democracy.
The EU-facilitated dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade continues to produce tangible results.
In that context, we commend the crucial role that the
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Ms. Catherine Ashton, continues to play. On
8 September in Brussels, an important agreement on
energy and telecommunciations was reached. We
encourage the two Prime Ministers and their teams
to step up their efforts in order to complete in the
coming weeks the implementation of the 19 April
agreement in the areas of customs, the police and the
judiciary, in particular, by regulating the modalities
for the transfer of Serbian police officers and Serbian
judicary to Kosovo's institutional structures. The
full implementation of the 19 April agreement will
contribute to continuing negotiations on the conclusion
of the stabilization and association agreement between
the European Union and Kosovo, the second round
of which is scheduled for 27 November, and to the
opening of accession negotiations with Serbia, whose
first intergovernmental conference must take place by
January 2014.

The normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo must go hand in hand with the firm pursuit of
reforms to guarantee the rule of law in Kosovo. The
Kosovo authorities must continue to work closely with
the European Union's Special Representative for Kosovo,
Mr. Samuel Zbogar, and EULEX. The EULEX mission
continues to play a vital role in achieving normalization
between Belgrade and Pristina, combating organized
crime and corruption, the prosecution of perpetrators
of war crimes and the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes.

In that regard, Luxembourg condemns in the
strongest terms the attack of 19 September on a EULEX
convoy, which took the life of a customs officer of the
mission. We offer our condolences to the European
Union, the Lithuanian authorities and the family of
the deceased. The perpetrators of that attack must be
brought to justice. Threatening the security of EULEX
personnel, who work daily for the benefit of Kosovo
citizens and for their protection. cannot go unpunished.

Luxembourg welcomes the positive developments
in Kosovo since the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999) and the establishment of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. More than
half the States members of the United Nations have
recognized Kosovo's independence. Implementation
of the 19 April agreement will normalize the relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. The time has come
for the international community to take into account
their new realities in its approach, including that of the
Security Council, and to adapt, in the middle term, the
presence of the international community on the ground.
As the European View of Serbia and Kosovo develops,
the United Nations presence will become less of a
factor.

Serbia and Kosovo know that they can count on the
consistent support of Luxembourg on the path towards
a shared European future.

