Ms. Korpi (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the
associated countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association country member of the
European Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with
this statement.

The European Union welcomes the initiative by
Slovenia to hold this meeting and the opportunity to
participate in this important debate on conflict prevention.
We acknowledge the importance of this link in the chain
of thematic debates that the Security Council has
organized in the past few months. We welcome the effort
demonstrated by the Council in bringing this issue up for
debate in order to generate new ideas and visions of how
to prevent conflicts and increase the awareness of
prevention.

Conflict prevention is a complex concept that
encompasses short-term operational and long-term
structural measures. The former include early warning
mechanisms, preventive diplomacy, preventive
deployment and preventive disarmament whereas the
latter include peace-building measures that go deep to the
roots of conflicts.

The United Nations Charter provides a number of
tools that can and should be used in conflict prevention.
We need to build on them and further develop them.
Existing methods, such as those enumerated in Article 33
of the Charter, should be strengthened and complemented.
A ladder of prevention would facilitate identifying
suitable preventive measures to be taken at each stage of
an evolving conflict. The idea of a ladder of prevention
is partly, but not exclusively, based on the principle of
proportionality; that is, that preventive measures should be
taken in proportion to the level of conflict.

The European Union is strongly committed to the
primary role of the Security Council in the maintenance
and promotion of international peace and security. The
Security Council should actively direct its attention to
areas of potential conflict, including the regular holding
of forward looking discussions, and in this regard
maintain a high degree of readiness to take preventive
action. Certain preventive measures - like the
establishment of demilitarized zones or preventive
disarmament - belong to the traditional inventory of the
means at the disposal of the Council.

After the indisputable success of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the first-ever preventive
deployment mission, there is a wider acceptance of this
tool among the Member States of the United Nations. The

 

recent mission of Council members, which was related to
the crisis in East Timor, was, on the other hand, a good
example of the Council's success in using some of the tools
at its disposal in a swift and decisive manner.

Preventive disarmament is a subject that has received
extensive attention on the part of the European Union. We
have adopted a Joint Action on small arms and light
weapons as a complementary measure to the European
Union programme for preventing and combating illicit
trafficking in conventional arms. To combat the
destabilizing accumulation and spread of small arms and
light weapons is also an integral part of the European
Union's emergency aid, as well as of its reconstruction and
development programmes. The European Union strongly
believes that in the search for a long-term solution to
conflicts - especially in Africa - high priority should be
given to curbing arms supplies and the illicit trafficking of
small arms and light weapons, as well as that of diamonds,
gold and other precious materials that provide finance for
them. On the question of arms, the European Union
encourages the Security Council to consider using its
powers in a more decisive way to impose arms embargoes
at early stages of emerging crises.

The European Union also supports the central role of
the Secretary-General in preventive diplomacy, including
fact-finding missions, good offices and other activities. We
support the Secretary-General's efforts to improve the
United Nations early warning system and to place increased
emphasis on preventive diplomacy. We believe that the
possibilities of the Secretary-General and his Secretariat are
still not fully utilized.

In this context, we wish to recall Article 99 of the
Charter, which provides the Secretary-General the
possibility of bringing to the attention of the Security
Council any matter that in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security. For that
purpose, the European Union considers that the Secretariat' s
capacity needs to be enhanced to enable the Security
Council to conduct regular surveys of potential conflict
areas.

We encourage Member States and regional
organizations increasingly to share early warning
information with the United Nations. The Secretariat should
be made capable of providing the Security Council with an
independent assessment on different regions, including early
warning on emerging crises, as well as proposals for action.
In this process, the Secretariat should make full use of all
available information within the United Nations system.
The ultimate aim would be that fewer and fewer conflicts
reach the point where enforcement action by the Security
Council is required.

The European Union commends the
Secretary-General for highlighting in his report on the
work of the Organization the humanitarian challenge
facing the United Nations. He rightly points out that the
prevention of armed conflict is the highest goal of the
United Nations. His ideas for improving and strengthening
strategies for prevention deserve our attention and
support.

The European Union also fully agrees with the wish
of the Secretary-General, as expressed in his report, that
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peace-making must
not become areas of competition between the United
Nations and regional organizations. It is important that
conflict-prevention be approached in a pragmatic manner.
We therefore fully support the Secretary-General's efforts
to further improve coordination and cooperation with the
regional arrangements. The United Nations and the
regional organizations possess various strengths and
capabilities in the area of conflict prevention. Focus
should be on achieving greater complementarity as
mutually reinforcing institutions, making use of their
comparative advantages.

The European Union plays an active role in the area
of conflict prevention, early warning and crisis
management, in cooperation with the United Nations and
regional organizations. With the entry into force of the
Amsterdam Treaty on 1 May 1999, the European Union
has enhanced recourse to new measures of conflict
prevention. The establishment within the European Union
of the Policy Planning and Early Warning Unit as well as
the appointment of Mr. Javier Solana to the new post of
High Representative will contribute to the European
Union's capabilities. The Policy Planning and Early
Warning Unit should serve as the European Union's focal
point vis-a-vis the United Nations in the area of conflict
prevention. The European Union looks forward to the
next meeting between the United Nations and the regional
organizations in order to explain in detail the changing
role and capacities of the European Union in the field of
crisis management and conflict prevention. The European
Union launched the Stability Pact for South-Eastem
Europe, which was signed in Cologne on 10 June 1999.
Furthermore, the European Union will also contribute to
security and prosperity in Europe through its enlargement.

 

The European Union welcomes the upcoming G-8
Foreign Ministers' meeting on conflict prevention, to be
held in Berlin on 16 and 17 December 1999. This meeting
will seek to further strengthen ongoing efforts to enhance
the role of conflict prevention in international relations.

The European Union is convinced that the best
strategy to maintain peace and security is to address first
and foremost the root causes and the triggers of conflicts.
Long-term structural prevention tries to address the
underlying economic, social and other causes of conflict. It
pursues the creation of equitable access to economic
growth, economic opportunity, social cohesion and
development. It promotes greater respect for human rights,
maintenance of the rule of law and strengthening of
democratic institutions. Today, conflict situations are often
internal in nature and associated with violations of human
rights, in particular those of persons belonging to
minorities. The European Union attaches great importance
to the promotion and protection of human rights for the
prevention of conflicts.

We should develop a more targeted use of the
instruments of development cooperation in addressing the
root causes of violent conflicts and redressing inequalities.
Such activities must build on and strengthen local capacities
and institutions. Development cooperation may have
unwanted effects if deployed in disregard of the overall
political situation. Therefore, regular analysis of the impact
of development and humanitarian assistance policies is
needed. In this connection, the European Union welcomes
the proposal of the Secretary-General exploring the idea of
conflict impact assessments of development policies.

Restoration of security and order as well as the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants into society are also vital. Since arms and
combatants move easily across the border in most conflict
areas, the Security Council should try to formulate
mandates in such a manner that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes could be
addressed in a regional context whenever possible.
The European Union welcomes with appreciation the
increased role and contributions of non-governmental
organizations in conflict prevention.

The European Union emphasizes the important role of
international law in conflict prevention. International
criminal tribunals serve important accountability,
reconciliation and deterrence functions. They also provide
a legitimate process through which individuals are held
accountable for their transgressions, thereby avoiding the
vilification of entire groups.

The European Union has actively supported
measures to ensure accountability for criminal acts under
international law. The adoption of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court was a particularly important
milestone in this respect, and we urge all States to sign
and ratify it as a matter of priority. It is to be hoped that
in the long run the main function of the International
Criminal Court will be that of prevention. Increased
awareness of the Court's ability and determination to try
to punish those responsible for serious violations of
human rights and humanitarian law should effectively
contribute to the prevention of such crimes.

The report of the Secretary-General on Africa of
April 1998 comprised important elements and strategies
for conflict prevention. Unfortunately, the situation in
Africa has yet to improve significantly, and much remains
to be done. The European Union has sought to develop an
active, comprehensive and integrated approach to the
issue of violent conflicts in Africa, based on the 1997
common position and the European Union Council
conclusions on "Conflict prevention and resolution in
Africa". One-third of African countries are at present, or
have recently been, involved in civil wars. The European
Union welcomes the Security Council's strong
commitment to prevent conflicts in the continent and
looks forward to further Council activity in this respect.

The European Union is ready to assist in building
capacity for conflict prevention in Africa, particularly
through the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
subregional organizations. For the European Union,
sustainable development in Africa is the priority. An
enabling political environment conducive to human rights,
good governance and a vibrant civil society are essential
for sustainable development. The European Union is the
world's leading source of development assistance to
Africa. This assistance should also be seen as a long-term
contribution to stability and conflict prevention.

We are all aware of the human suffering and the
humanitarian and economic costs if we fail to prevent
conflicts. Prevention may not be visible and make no
headlines, but it is and will remain the supreme task of
this organization and of the Security Council. Let us shift
focus from acting only when a serious conflict has broken
out to giving appropriate early responses to early warning.

 

