Mr. Annabi: I think the first question related to
the reported lack of progress in obtaining payment of
electricity bills and airport charges. I take that on board
and will revert to it once we receive the technical
information on this from UNTAET. I know they have
been working on these issues, but I am not in a position
today to give you a precise answer.

Ambassador Doutriaux of France had raised
certain questions.

(Spoke in French)

I would like to say that we did take due note of
the questions raised by the French delegation regarding
the structure and the strength of UNTAET. The
Secretariat will address those questions in the report
that the Security Council has requested the Secretary-
General to submit at the end of July. For the time
being, I only wish to say that some of our bitter
experiences of the last decade have taught us that it
would not be prudent to take the risk of jeopardizing
the considerable investments made by the international
community in East Timor by prematurely reducing the
troop level of UNTAET.
The recommendations in the Secretary-General's
report of 2 May are based on a strict analysis of the
potential threat that could set back the preparation
process for the independence of East Timor. The
Secretary-General is firmly convinced that any
premature reduction in troop level must be avoided. He
will nonetheless continue, in consultation with our
Timorese partners, to follow closely, the evolution of
the security situation, on the understanding that he
would not hesitate to propose to the Council in due
course any reduction that he might find realistic and
reasonable.

Ambassador Doutriaux also asked whether the
security assessment mission would take place this
month. As stated in the report, the Security Coordinator
has taken the decision to dispatch this assessment
mission, and we still hope that it will be able to take
place in the near future.

(spoke in English)

One question was whether refugees in camps in
West Timor would be able to vote. The electoral
regulation adopted by UNTAET on this is very clear.
East Timorese who wish to register and vote in the
elections of 30 August will have to come to East Timor
to register and then to vote. But measures have been
taken to ensure that registration stations and polling
booths will be located close to the border with West
Timor so that refugees who wish to vote would be
given that possibility. UNTAET does not believe,
however, that for obvious reasons it will be possible to
organize the vote in West Timor.

I was also asked to provide more information on
the integrated mission task force. This task force was
established about a month ago. It has been meeting
regularly here at Headquarters. As the Council knows,
on the ground UNTAET has also established a working
group that will interact with the task force, and a senior
official has been appointed to go and support the work
of the working group. He will shuttle between the task
force and the working group in East Timor to ensure
that the detailed planning on the ground and the policy
decisions that will have to be made here in consultation
with the agencies and departments concerned are in
sync.

This task force includes a core group drawn from
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank, and
holds larger meetings as required so as to enable other
agencies that can contribute to the planning of the post-
independence phase to make their own contribution.

I was asked whether I could elaborate on the
reasons for the decline in the return of refugees
between March and April. It is true that there were
very few returns in April. The fact is that, as the
Secretary-General's report indicates, the situation in
the camps is still not conducive to the return of
refugees, and the intimidation and disinformation that
have taken place are still having an effect on the
refugee population in the camps. Of course, they are
also still subject to the influence of militias that have
not been disarmed or demobilized, as requested under
Security Council resolution 1319 (2000).

I do, however, have a piece of good news in this
regard; it only reached us over lunch, which is why I
did not include it in my briefing this morning. As our
colleague from Indonesia said, during talks held in
Denpasar, UNTAET and the Indonesian Government
reached agreement on the resumption of pension
payments to former Indonesian State employees
residing in East Timor. This was characterized by a
member of the UNTAET delegation as a breakthrough.
We hope that this agreement will now be promptly
implemented because it could, of course, encourage
refugee return.

A second development, which could also play a
role in encouraging refugee return, is the agreement to
include a reference to a planned compensation fund for
former State employees in the consolidated appeal for
West Timor refugees, which is expected to be launched
jointly by Indonesia and the United Nations in July.
This fund could also provide an inducement for the
return of refugees to East Timor.

I was also asked to provide information on the
role of United Nations Volunteers. We do, indeed, have
a large number of United Nations Volunteers in East
Timor; as of the end of April, the exact number was
664. They are playing an important role in the
preparations for the elections for the Constituent
Assembly, in particular by assisting in civic education
and civil registration. In fact, when I visited East Timor
in March, some of the registration stations were being
entirely manned by them. And, of course, they will also
assist in the other phases of the electoral process. So
we use them whenever we can in our operations,
because they are obviously a cost-effective resource.

I think the last question was from the
Ambassador of Sweden, speaking on behalf of the
European Union, who suggested that further efforts
should be made to increase capacity-building in
governance, including in the districts. I fully agree that
there is a lot of work to be done there. We should
remember, however, that East Timor has been less
fortunate than some other territories seeking
independence, and that until recently very little
attention had been paid to the training of East Timorese
experts and administrators.

UNTAET is doing its best, but of course it takes
time to create a generation of managers and
administrators; it does not happen overnight. UNTAET
will continue to consider this as an essential priority as
it develops its plans and strategy for the post-
independence period, in close consultation with
Xanana Gusmao and Jose Ramos-Horta and their
colleagues. In fact, when we met this morning before
the Council meeting, they were stressing the fact that in
their View there will be a significant and substantial
continuing need for international expertise after
independence, in View of the severe lack of qualified
administrators.

