Major General Obi: I am the Force Commander
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.

I would like to say that the reforms introduced so
far have had a very positive impact on our operations
in the field in a number of ways. I would like to start
with the issue of the quality of troops that was raised
here today. We need a very high quality of troops in the
field to be able to execute our mandate.

One of the reforms deals with that subject, and to
that effect infantry units are standardized in terms of
personnel and equipment. That has made it easier for a
force commander to appreciate what is available to
him. He is able to assess what personnel are available
to him and to task them appropriately.

In terms of the quality of troops, I also want to
say that the introduction of pre-deployment training
and pre-induction inspections of equipment has helped
in ensuring that we have a higher quality of troops,
which has also helped in our mandate implementation.

The aspect of integration is one of those areas
that have been well emphasized in recent reforms. My
Mission, the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, has
been integrated, and to that extent we have been
enabled to work jointly with the civilian, military and
police pillars and the United Nations country team. A
case in point is the protection of civilians strategy,
which takes into account the fact that the protection of
civilians is not just a military responsibility, but
involves all. Here, we have been able to incorporate
our efforts through training, the development of
concepts, the sharing of information, and the creation
of joint operations centres and joint movement centres.
These are all developments that have been found to be
very useful in the field and have greatly assisted us.
During the recent crises in Kordofan and Abyei, we put
them widely into practice. All pillars shared
information, met very actively in crisis management
teams, and were largely able, collectively, to address
the challenges that faced us.
These reforms have been useful to us in the field,
in addition to getting us together in meetings of force
commanders - as in the case of the Entebbe meeting,
which was referred to earlier - to exchange
information. That is also a new development that we
have found to be very useful.

