Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are gratified that the
presidency of the Council has recognized the
importance of the issue of children and armed conflict
by placing it on its agenda early in the year. We are
honoured that you, Madam, the Foreign Minister of
Chile, are presiding over this morning's meeting.

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund for their important
briefings.

The issue of children and armed conflict has been
the subject of a number Security Council resolutions.
In its most recent resolution on the subject, resolution
1460 (2003), the Security Council calls on, among
others, the parties to armed conflict to provide
information about steps taken to end the recruitment
and use of child soldiers and develop action plans to
end child soldier use.

We therefore support the call of the Secretary-
General that we must now move towards what he has
called an era of application of international standards
and norms for the protection of children in armed
conflict.

In this connection, there needs to be within the
United Nations system - where the roles of relevant
United Nations entities are clearly defined - an
effective framework for the protection of children
involved in armed conflict. Spelling out responsibilities
and tasks will be an important step in ensuring that the
critical response areas are covered and that duties are
not duplicated. The proposals of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict on the
development of a monitoring network of organs and
bodies in the United Nations serve as a good starting
point for identifying and assigning responsibilities
based on their competencies and expertise. For its part,
the Council should be able to determine its vital
enforcement role in the network in a manner that is
supportive of the work of other bodies that also have a
mandate with regard to the situation of children in
armed conflict. In carrying out its role, the Council
should set priorities for action and make sure that its
work is focused, particularly on areas where results
might be tangible and immediately achievable.

An example of a focused task is ensuring that
child protection standards are consistently implemented
in peacekeeping missions. The Council could also
provide guidance in prioritizing countries and conflict
areas that would need donor support for long-term
community reintegration and rehabilitation. Experience
on the ground has shown that when there are not
enough resources to sustain disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, the
incidence of reprisal is increased and gains in
improving the situation of children are wasted because
of the lack or inadequacy of follow-through efforts.

The Council should give emphasis to conflict
prevention by recognizing the root factors of conflict,
in particular the lack of development. In many
communities, children involved in armed conflict
usually come from areas where basic social services
are inadequate. The experience of the Philippines in
addressing the development aspects of conflict has
been encouraging. Our Comprehensive Programme
Framework for Children involved in Armed Conflict,
which regards children as zones of peace, includes, as a
major component, the integrated delivery of social
services such as food security, livelihood programmes,
education and health care in order to combat poverty
and reduce the incidence of recruitment and
exploitation of children in conflict areas. In this
respect, the Security Council can be instrumental,
through its peacekeeping missions, in ensuring a safe
environment that is conducive to the unimpeded and
effective delivery of basic social services in conflict
areas.

We support the Secretary-General's suggestion on
the need systematically to incorporate children's issues
into all peace negotiations and peace accords, including
conducting a dialogue on child soldiers with parties in
conflict.

Drawing again on our own experience, the
Philippine Government has benefited from integrating
the interests of children in its "Six Paths to Peace",
which serves as the general framework for the
implementation of the peace process with groups in
conflict. Path Five of this framework addresses
concerns arising from continuing armed hostilities,
namely the rehabilitation needs of war-affected
families and communities, and the role of children and
youth in peace-building.

Our Office of the Presidential Adviser on the
Peace Process and the Philippine Council for the
Welfare of Children provide technical input on various
conflict- resolution approaches that prevent and
address the occurrence of the exploitation of children
and youth in armed conflict.

Any step that the Council decides to take in
addressing the situation of children in armed conflict
should be based on reliable data and information. A
follow-up system and commitments by all parties
regarding steps they are taking to end the recruitment
and use of child soldiers could be instituted. It is
critical that information be gathered systematically and
analysed effectively to enable the Council to assess the
level of compliance by parties with their obligation to
protect children. A database on all violations should
strengthen and build on previous measures taken by the
Council, and a monitoring process or system along the
lines advocated by Brazil could be established for that
purpose.

As the film has shown, children are not only our
hope for the future; they are also the reality of the
present. There are opportunities within the Council's
mandate to ensure an environment that protects
children and helps them realize their right to live a
normal life. The non-governmental organization
community has contributed greatly and has expressed
its readiness further to assist in this regard. Now is the
time to move towards concrete plans of action for
children.

