Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, allow me to express my sincerest gratitude to
the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), respectively, for their comprehensive briefings
today.

Al-Qaida and its associated individuals and entities
remain a very clear and serious threat to international
peace and security despite a certain weakening of its
core and its central organization. We are observing
with great concern the emergence of new entities
associated with Al-Qaida and its terrorist ideas, which
are carrying out various dangerous activities around
the world. In addition, they are using new methods,
such as information technology of all types, to carry
out terrorist activities through innovative tactics, using
very low-cost and easily available materials. Al-Qaida
therefore continues to threaten peace and security in
the Middle East. There is no doubt that the conflicts
that are ravaging certain States of the region provide
environments conducive to the activity of terrorist
organizations and entities. The clearest proof of that
is the emergence of such terrorist organizations as the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria and Jabhat-al-Nusrah.
The Al-Qaida Committee added the latter organization
to its sanctions list about a week ago.

In that context, we think that it is extremely
important for the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning Counter-Terrorism to continue to work
tirelessly in the Middle East and in other regions of the
world where terrorism is emerging.

Today Al-Qaida and its associated individuals and
entities pose threats to international peace and security,
and the international community has to confront those

threats through a practical methodology consisting
of a number of elements. They include, in particular,
fostering international and regional cooperation among
States; improving the exchange of relevant information,
expertise and good practices; and assisting States in
implementing sanctions regimes and in participating
in the process of inscription on and deletion from lists
on a case-by-case basis at the national and regional
level. The role of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida Committee should be
strengthened. We would like to confirm the importance
of the Team's recommendation regarding the need to
provide biometric data on individuals on the Al-Qaida
sanctions list. Cooperation with the Office of the
Ombudsperson, which plays a very important and
transparent role, should also be strengthened

Jordan appreciates the important role played by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate in terms of capacity-building, raising
awareness about the offices in charge of countering
terrorism in various States, and coordinating visits to
States. We would like to reiterate in that regard how
important it is for the Committee and its Executive
Directorate to coordinate technical assistance with
Member States in accordance with their needs and on
the basis of the constantly evolving security situation
that we are witnessing. We call on the Executive
Directorate to develop a strategy for a periodic review
of the assistance provided to Member States so that the
members of the Committee are duly informed of it.

Not much time has passed since the Council's
open debate under the leadership of His Excellency
Mr. Yun Byung-se, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Korea, to mark the tenth anniversary of
the Council's adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) (see S/PV.7169). During that debate, a number of proposals
and ideas were presented to strengthen the work of the
1540 Committee. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank you, Mr. President, and the entire delegation of
the Republic ofKorea, for your efforts in the work ofthe
Committee. We appreciate the role of the Committee
and of the Group of Experts in ensuring that all States
are represented in the global reports, in establishing a
network of contact points, in raising awareness and in
facilitating the provision of assistance by contributing
States to recipient States.

Lastly, my delegation would like to say how
important it is for the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
cooperate with Member States and how important it is
to strengthen national, regional and international efforts
to confront the scourge that threatens the peace and
security of people around the world. Jordan would like
to reiterate that it will continue to play its leading role
in fighting terrorism by adopting necessary measures,
developing effective national legislation, sharing its
expertise in combatting terrorism with other countries
of its region and around the world, strengthening
cooperation with the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and other relevant bodies of the United Nations,
and continuing to support international initiatives aimed
at fostering the values of understanding, cooperation
and rejection of terrorism and intellectual extremism,
such as through "A Common Word Between Us and
You" and World Understanding Week.

