Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Annabi, for his briefing. The development
of the situation in Kosovo during the month that has
elapsed since our most recent discussion of the subject
here has unfortunately emphasized that key provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999) remain unfulfilled. The
security situation for the non-Albanian population is
continuing to deteriorate. Neither military nor civilian
international presences have been able to do anything
about that. The problem of returning hundreds of
thousands of refugees and displaced persons to the
region has not been resolved.

We were interested to read an article in The New
York Times on 3 July that referred to a comment by the
former deputy head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. McNamara, to the effect that from the very outset
the leadership of that United Nations Mission did not
make any effective efforts to put and end to the
violence and that it tolerated intolerant and vengeful
behaviour. All the warnings to the extremist leaders
have remained merely words; they have not been
followed up with any specific actions. Mr. McNamara
correctly pointed out that the scale of the violence
against the minorities shows how systematic it is.

From the outset of UNMIK's activities, no action
was taken to put an end to what has now turned into a
culture of impunity, so that ethnically based crimes go
unpunished under the auspices of international
presences. Mr. McNamara's analysis corresponds with
the assessment in the report of Amnesty International
published last month, and notes the passivity of certain
divisions of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in the face of
ethnic violence. This evaluation concurs to a large
extent with our analysis of the situation in Kosovo, and
given these conditions, Russia has clearly stated that it
cannot support the holding of municipal elections in
Kosovo this year.

We are not opposed to the holding of such
elections in principle, but we cannot close our eyes to
the fact that thus far not even the minimum necessary
conditions have been created to enable them to be truly
free, fair and democratic and thereby to serve as a basis
for further progress in the peace process in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999). Such conditions can be
created only if security and safety is assured for all the
inhabitants of Kosovo and if there is freedom of
movement for all, an open and free political
environment and the safe return of refugees and
displaced persons, and if guarantees for freedom of
assembly, freedom of association and freedom of
speech are provided.

These are obvious facts. A detailed list of the
universal criteria for conditions for the holding of
elections - any elections - is to be found in the
document of the second Meeting of the Conference on
the Human Dimension of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which was held in
Copenhagen 10 years ago. It is very likely that such
criteria are well known to all those who are preparing
for the elections in Kosovo. Furthermore, paragraphs 7
and 8 of that OSCE document were included as an
annex forming an integral part of the Rambouillet
documents that refer to elections in Kosovo. We note,
therefore, that the pre-electoral situation in that region
is not in conformity with all of these requirements, first
and foremost from the point of view of genuine safety
and security for the non-Albanian population. A similar
conclusion was reached recently by Human Rights
Watch.

There is no machinery to date which can
guarantee that the voices of the non-Albanian
inhabitants of Kosovo will be heard, or ensure that they
will be represented in the local organs of power. Not
only would the non-participation of hundreds of
thousands of such people in the elections distort both
the ethnic and political picture in Kosovo, but this in
turn would have a destabilizing effect on the situation
in the region, including outside Kosovo.

We are convinced that under current conditions
we cannot force through the holding of elections,
because we would thereby block all the efforts being
made to create a generally democratic and multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo. The policy being pursued to hold
elections at all costs may simply lead to the
legalization of the structures of the Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA), which, under the cover of the Kosovo
Protection Corps, continues to indulge in lawlessness. I
would also like to state that, in View of the possible
consequences, the possible destabilization of the
situation in the region that might result from the
holding of the elections, we believe that the matter
cannot be resolved by the leaders of UNMIK alone.
UNMIK is directly linked to peace and security in the
region and, therefore, the matter should be given
serious consideration by the Security Council.

We are greatly concerned about the new facts that
are being revealed about the violations of resolution
1244 (1999). Mr. Annabi told us that huge stocks of
weapons are still being discovered. We know about
that. It is revealing that, after the discovery of such
weapons - which, as Mr. Annabi said, show every
sign of being KLA weapons - the leaders of the
Albanian separatists organized demonstrations and
meetings to protest their confiscation. At those
meetings they even demanded that the weapons be
returned to the Albanians and that KFOR end its search
for weapons. We would like to know exactly what the
leaders of UNMIK and KFOR said in response to these
demonstrations. In any case, we can confirm that there
has been no real disarmament of the KLA.

Previous speakers have already mentioned that
the actions of Hashim Thaci, who started the boycott of
the Interim Administrative Council when the Kosovo
Serbs were returning to it, did not serve the cause of
reaching a settlement. We know that Hashim Thaci also
gave Mr. Kouchner an ultimatum in the form of a
statement consisting of 10 paragraphs setting out
conditions for his return to the Interim Administrative
Council. Such conditions include revising the
agreements between the Serbs and UNMIK and more
active involvement of KLA ex-combatants in local
police forces, among others. We would be interested to
know how Mr. Kouchner responded to that ultimatum.
We wish to recall that we still have not received any
appropriate replies to the concerns we expressed
previously in connection with violations of resolution
1244 (1999). We know well what the questions were,
but no replies have been received so far. The questions
relate to the identity cards published by UNMIK,
where it said "Kosovo" under "citizenship"; to the fact
that diplomatic offices are being opened in Kosovo and
are being visited by representatives of other countries
without notice being given to the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia; and to many other
facts.

UNMIK continues to attempt to amend the status
of the Slatin airport in Pristina. The UNMIK leadership
is trying to unilaterally amend the text of the military-
technical agreement of 3 June 1999, in violation of the
Helsinki Agreement. We have mentioned this
frequently, but the attempts continue. No one has
explained to us yet why the provisions of resolution
1244 (1999) have not been fulfilled, regarding the
return of agreed-upon contingents of Yugoslav
servicemen and policemen, why an agreement has not
been reached with Belgrade on the status of foreign
missions in Kosovo and why proper cooperation has
not been arranged with the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We believe that a rather
belated step to correct this situation might be to start
work in the joint consultative committee, which was
referred to today by Mr. Annabi.

In this room one month ago, our delegation drew
attention to a specific document which confirms that
among the leaders of the Kosovo Protection Corps
there are people with a criminal past, who have been
involved in murder and provocation, of whom UNMIK
and KFOR are aware. However, no response has been
received in connection with these facts. Recently, we
learned through non-governmental organizations that
Kosovo has turned into a major staging point for drug
smuggling into Europe. However, we have seen
nothing in the Secretariat reports on this topic. We
request the Secretariat to inform the Security Council
whether or not it knows anything about drug trafficking
through Kosovo.

In conclusion, Kosovo is, of course, big politics.
But this should not be big politics for just one person,
but the general policy for all members of the Security
Council and of the United Nations. We have a
consensus resolution, resolution 1244 (1999), which
incorporates this policy on the behalf of the
international community, but it is not being
implemented and is even being violated in many key
aspects. Russia will continue to seek the remedy of this
situation so that the Kosovo settlement plan, which was
unanimously approved by the Security Council, will be
fully and comprehensively implemented.

