Mr. Spatafora (Italy): At the outset, I also wish
to express my very sincere appreciation for the
presence here of the Secretary-General and for his
thoughts and assessments. I think that it is a very
important sign of the commitment of the United
Nations as part of the Quartet. I also thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his very comprehensive,
as always, briefing that gives us the feeling of where
we are.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered shortly by the Presidency of the
European Union. Let me just add a few remarks.

We strongly support the effort that President
Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert have undertaken to
move the bilateral negotiations forward despite the
difficulties of a fragile political context and the highly
volatile situation on the ground. I think that the
questions that the Secretary-General asked truly
capture what should be in all of our minds - If not
now, when? If not this, what? I think that these are the
questions that the players should keep in mind at all
times.

As has already been mentioned by the Secretary-
General, negotiations are the only way to achieve
peace. In this regard, we emphasize once more the
importance of the facilitating role played by the Arab
States, and we welcome as well the support given by
the Arab League to the good offices carried out by
President Saleh of Yemen to reactivate the
indispensable inter-Palestinian dialogue.

Looking at the situation from the ground - and I
think that more and more we have to look at it from
that perspective - we believe that it is increasingly
urgent to show the first dividend of the negotiations to
the public opinions of the two parties and of the
countries in the region. It is indispensable that
measures be adopted rapidly to improve the lives of the
Palestinian people by easing restrictions on their
movements and removing checkpoints in the West
Bank.

It is essential that conditions be created to
reinvigorate the Palestinian economy on the basis of
the Palestinian Reform and Development Plan adopted
by the Fayyad Government. To this end, we support the
efforts of the Quartet representative, Tony Blair, and
urge all donors to concretize the financial pledges they
announced at the Paris Conference.

We also believe that the Palestinian Government
efforts to strengthen its public security apparatus
should be supported. Italy therefore supports the

German initiative to convene a conference on rule of
law and intends to contribute to the consolidation of
the operative capacity of the Palestinian civil police
through the European Union Coordinating Office for
Palestinian Police Support and urges other countries to
do the same.

In this framework, Italy is particularly concerned
about the Israeli Government position to continue
building in East Jerusalem. We wish to reiterate that
the building of settlements in occupied Palestinian
territories, including in East Jerusalem, is illegal under
international law. The continuation of settlement
activity in the occupied territory is currently a threat to
the bilateral negotiations. It seriously weakens the
credibility of the Palestinian leadership in the View of
its public opinion while strengthening arguments of the
extremists and enemies of peace.

Finally, we express support for the monitoring
role being played by the United States, in particular the
convening on 14 March of the first trilateral meeting
provided for by the Annapolis Conference. It is
important for those meetings to become an instrument
available to the parties to give greater depth to the
dialogue.

Now, just a few remarks on Lebanon. As are
others, we, too, are deeply concerned by the lack of
signs of progress towards a solution to the political
crisis. Together with the European Union, we support
the mediation initiative of the Arab League and the
efforts of its Secretary-General. We hope that the
upcoming Damascus summit will mark a turning point
in the crisis.

It is important, above all, to avoid any further
deterioration of the security situation, which could lead
to a very dangerous escalation of violence. The
Lebanon crisis has to be resolved first and foremost
through a mature assumption of responsibility by the
Lebanese political forces. We are convinced,
nevertheless, that action has to be taken at the regional
level in an expanded strategy that takes into account
the multiple actors involved, along with their
aspirations.

In this context, we are pleased with the progress
made in the establishment of a special tribunal on the
Hariri assassination and the financial support received
thus far and the prospect of the tribunal actually
beginning operating.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of the
continued presence of United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) for the stability of Lebanon. We
encourage the Lebanese armed forces and the Israeli
Defense Forces to consult with UNIFIL to find
solutions to the problems on the ground and to
continue efforts for the demarcation of the Blue Line.

We took note with special attention of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/135)
and its recommendations which we support, in
particular on what concerns a new mission of the
Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team.

