Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank His
Excellency President Mkapa, Chair of the Secretary-
General's Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, and
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for their insightful
briefings. I would also like to extend my appreciation
to the Honourable Mutrif Siddiq, State Minister for
Humanitarian Affairs of the Republic of the Sudan, and
the Honourable Pagan Amum, Minister of Peace and
Comprehensive Peace Agreement Implementation of
the Government of Southern Sudan, for their
statements.

Japan, at the outset, welcomes the fact that the
registration process for the Southern Sudan referendum
was concluded peacefully in the country. We also
highly value the commitments by the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) parties to conduct the
Southern Sudan referendum on 9 January next year as
planned and to respect its results regardless of the
outcome.

The international community is closely watching
developments in the Sudan. However, the most
important element is political will and commitment on
the part of the parties concerned, and I trust that the
Sudanese parties can and will maintain their roles in
that regard. It is encouraging that the African Union
(AU) and subregional organizations are making
significant contributions as well.

Japan also appreciates the work of President
Mkapa and President Mbeki, Chair of the AU High-
Level Implementation Panel, in support of the efforts
of the CPA parties.

To alleviate possible concerns and anxiety among
the people in the South, the population should be
informed in advance regarding the entire process and
expected time period between voting, counting and
announcement of the final results. It is also advisable
that the Panel on the Referenda consult beforehand
with the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
(SSRC), the CPA parties, President Mbeki, the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and other
referendum observers concerning arrangements after
the voting has been completed. Japan is ready to assist
in the conduct of a free and fair referendum by
dispatching its referendum monitors at the end of this
month.

Japan welcomes the intensive high-level
consultations between the CPA parties to discuss the
Abyei issue and other post-referendum issues,
including citizenship and natural resources. We urge
both parties to accelerate those discussions in order to
resolve pending issues.

It is essential to maintain the good relationship
between North and South beyond the interim period of
the CPA in order to uphold stability in the Sudan. To
that end, the international community should continue
to assist both parties. For its part, Japan has decided to
make a new disbursement of approximately $70 million
for humanitarian assistance.

Concerning Darfur, Japan reiterates its call for
Darfuri armed groups, such as the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) and the Sudan Liberation Movement
(SLM) Abdul Wahid faction, to participate in the
negotiations under the auspices of the Doha peace
process and engage constructively on behalf of the
people of Darfur. We are concerned by recent
incidents, which have generated further displacement
of internally displaced persons. It is our hope that that
will not affect North-South relations. The security
situation in Darfur and along the border are matters of
great concern. We encourage UNMIS and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to
maintain their firm commitment to the protection of
civilians.

