Judge Meron: Today marks my final appearance
before the Security Council as President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. It has been a profound privilege to serve in
this role since the founding of the institution, and it
is an honour for me to provide my last briefing to the
Council on the progress of the work of the Mechanism.
(spoke in French)

Before doing so, I would like to congratulate
His Excellency Mr. Adorn, Ambassador of the Cete
d'lvoire, on his country's accession to the presidency
of the Security Council and wish him every success in
that role.

(Spoke in English)

I would also like to take this opportunity to convey
my deep appreciation for the considerable attention and
commitment shown by the members of the Council's
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
both now, under Peru's expert leadership, and during the
many years that I have been appearing before the Council.
The support and engagement of the Working Group has
been invaluable to the success of the Mechanism and,
before that, of the International Criminal Tribunals
for Rwanda and for the former Yugoslavia. Finally, as
always, I must underscore my tremendous gratitude
for all of the assistance provided to the Mechanism by
the Office of Legal Affairs, as well as to the Under-
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares,
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
Mr. Stephen Mathias, and their dedicated teams.

Over the past six months, notwithstanding a
challenging budgetary situation and the myriad
operational consequences engendered thereby, the
Mechanism continued to make significant strides in
the conduct and completion of the mandate entrusted
to it by the Council. From the provision of vital
assistance to national jurisdictions to the methodical
preservation of materials in the archives, and from the
sustained protection afforded to vulnerable victims
and witnesses to the enforcement of sentences across
two continents, the Mechanism and its staff continued
to carry out key residual functions inherited from its
predecessor Tribunals with steadfast professionalism.
In that context, I wish to pay special tribute to the
Mechanism's Registrar, Mr. Olufemi Elias, for his
leadership, abiding integrity and excellent stewardship
of our institution during this challenging period.

The Mechanism reached several important
milestones during the reporting period. After in-depth
internal and external consultations, the Mechanism
adopted the Rules of Detention to govern detention
matters both in Arusha and The Hague. Those Rules,
together with the related regulations, came into effect
last week. Alongside the recent amendments to the Rules
of Procedure and Evidence, and the continual review
and revision of other policies pertaining to a wide range
of judicial and non-judicial activities, the adoption
of the Rules of Detention reflects the Mechanism's
unceasing attention to finding ways to improve its
methods of work and serve as a model for courts in
other jurisdictions. The Mechanism's activities in that
respect benefited greatly from the engagement and
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services during the course of the evaluation of the
Mechanism, which was completed last spring, as well
as in the context of regular audits.

In another significant milestone, the Mechanism
held its first judicial hearing at the new, custom-built
courtroom in Arusha in September. That hearing, which
saw an initial appearance by the five individuals accused
in the new contempt case Prosecutor v. Maximilien
Turinabo et al., went very smoothly - testament to
both the exceptional efforts of Mr. Elias and his team
and the invaluable cooperation of the Government
of Rwanda in carrying out the arrest and transfer of
those accused. That development is also an important
demonstration of the Mechanism's readiness for when
the remaining fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda are apprehended.

I had hoped to stand before the Council here today
and announce another significant milestone, this time
in the case Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadeie, as the
projection had been to deliver the judgment in that case
this very month - significantly earlier than previously
forecast. As the Council may be aware, however,
changes were made to the composition of the Appeals
Chamber benches in both the Karadeic case and the case
of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic, following motions for
the disqualification of certain Judges, including myself.

I regret that I am no longer in a position to see
the Karadeie case through to its conclusion, as had
been my aim. Nonetheless, as set forth in my decision
to withdraw from the bench in that case, and while I
would have continued to adjudicate with an impartial
mind had I remained on the case, I considered it to be
in the interest of justice that I withdraw in order to not
allow the then-pending disqualification proceedings to
impede the progress of the appeals in the case. I am
pleased to inform the Council that, notwithstanding
the changes in the bench composition, it is expected
that the appeal judgment in the Karadeic' case will be
delivered in the first quarter of 2019, just a short time
later than previously projected.

In the Mladie case, meanwhile, the briefing recently
concluded. The changes in the bench composition in
that case are not expected to delay the rendering of
the judgment, which, prior to the briefing process,
had been projected for completion by the end of 2020.
Proceedings in the review case Prosecutor v. Augustin
Ngirabatware took an unanticipated turn during the
reporting period, with the postponement of the hearing
that had been scheduled for September. The hearing
was postponed at Mr. Ngirabatware's request, in the
light of the material disclosed following the arrest of
the five accused in the Turinabo et a]. case and was
recently been rescheduled. A variety of pre-trial
matters are also being litigated in the new Turinabo et
a]. case before a single Judge, who just last week issued
a decision declining to refer the case for trial within a
national jurisdiction.

In another contempt case - the case Prosecutor
v. Petar Jojie and Vjerica Radeta - a single Judge
granted such a referral within a national jurisdiction
and an appeal on that ruling is currently pending before
the Appeals Chamber. In the meantime, the retrial of
the Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanisic and Franko Simatovie
case is proceeding apace, as is the work that the
Mechanism Judges carry out on a variety of smaller,
ad hoc requests pertaining to everything from the
protection ofvulnerable victims and witnesses to access
to confidential materials. In that context, I would like to
underscore my deep gratitude to my fellow Judges for
their dedication to our work and institution. I likewise
wish to express my thanks to the Council for its efforts
to ensure that the current vacancies on the Mechanism's
judicial roster will be filled expeditiously.

As I have spent the waning weeks of my presidency
consulting with my successor and taking all possible
steps to ensure a smooth transition to the presidency of
my friend and colleague, Judge Carmel Agius, I have
also had the occasion to pause and reflect on all that
has been achieved during the nearly seven years that I
have served as this institution's President. I would not
be human ifI did not have certain regrets in that regard.
I regret, of course, that the Karadeic' appeal judgment
will not be delivered during my tenure as President, and
that the disqualification decision in the Mladic' case
departed from established jurisprudence.

I also regret that a suitable and sustainable solution
for the resettlement of the acquitted and released persons
in Arusha has not been found, notwithstanding mine
and my colleagues" best efforts and the engagement of
the members of the Council on this issue. The Council's
continued focus and the cooperation of key Member
States are essential if this problem is to be resolved
once and for all.

I likewise regret that, notwithstanding the best of
intentions and goodwill, we have yet to fully achieve
the harmonization of practices and procedures across
the Mechanism's two branches. Our aim, from the
beginning, was to have a single, unified institution on
two continents. While that goal has been achieved in a
great many respects, challenges still persist and may
continue for some time.

It is, in many ways, inevitable that some judicial
rulings are met with negative reactions, particularly
where those rulings pertain to controversial issues.
I have always been, and always will be, guided by
the law and by evidence in reaching my judicial
rulings - nothing more and nothing less. Nonetheless,
I regret that some of my rulings on matters such as
early release have caused pain or concern for victims
and their communities. In that respect, I have reflected
at length on the issues raised in the Security Council
plenary meeting last June (see S/PV.8278) and I have
taken concrete steps to address the concerns reflected
in resolution 2422 (2018) - such as by inviting certain
convicted persons to undertake to abide by certain
conditions if granted early release - while ensuring
fundamental fairness and continued adherence to the
Mechanism's governing legal framework.

For me, it remains a profound regret that a different
and better resolution of the situation of my former
colleague Judge Aydin Sefa Akay was not found. At a
time when the world is facing deeply troubling trends
related to the undermining of independent judiciaries
and the weakening of the rule of law, we at the United
Nations simply cannot afford to be anything less than
exemplary when it comes to our own handling of
interference with judicial independence and actions
undertaken in contravention of United Nations
immunities. At the very least, it is imperative that, going
forward, fair and transparent processes be developed to
determine whether any proposed non-reappointment of
a Judge accords with the fundamental principles of the
rule of law.

Despite all those regrets, I am also exceptionally
proud of what has been achieved at and by the
Mechanism over the past almost seven years. It was
during my tenure as President that the Mechanism came
into being; the Rules of Procedure and Evidence were
first adopted; the Judges sworn in; and the branches
in Arusha and The Hague first opened. Systems and
policies to support the Judges as they carried out their
judicial work remotely were put in place and repeatedly
revised and refined over the years, reflecting our
continued focus on improvement, efficiency and
economy. A broader legal and regulatory framework
was established for the Mechanism, which was
also 4 and continues to be * refined and augmented
as needed. Moreover, my fellow Judges and I adopted
a groundbreaking Code of Professional Conduct for
Judges - something our predecessors had never
done before - and we proceeded to revise the Code
to provide a disciplinary process: a reflection of the
importance of accountability in all aspects of our work.

During my tenure, in full cooperation with
colleagues at the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), responsibility for
judicial activities - as well as non-judicial residual
functions - was transferred from those Tribunals
and carried out smoothly and to the highest standards
at the Mechanism. The Mechanism took the steps
needed to stand on its own, without the assistance of
its predecessors, and to realize its own administrative
capacity, spanning a wide range of functions and
tasks. In the meantime, hundreds upon hundreds of
judicial rulings were issued, addressing a wide range
of requests, and every effort was taken to ensure that
judicial work was conducted in a timely and cost-
effective manner, in keeping with the Council's vision
for the institution. Indeed, we have shown that the new
model by which Judges work remotely can function
efficiently and economically and in full compliance
with due process requirements.

That is not all - thanks to the exceptional
generosity of the Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania and engagement with local companies 4 the
Mechanism was able to construct a new, minimalist
facility in Arusha, consistent with the institution's
mandate to be small and efficient. We have started
important traditions at those new premises, hosting
a judicial colloquium for national, regional and
international Judges and visits by a wide range of
officials seeking to learn from our practices, as well
as inaugurating an annual event designed to bring
international and regional organizations and the
local community in Arusha together. We have also
maintained and made accessible one of the leading law
libraries in the region.

We have given back in important ways at The Hague
branch as well, both at our historic premises there
and through collaboration with victims' associations
and the new ICTY Information Centre in Sarajevo.
During a recent visit to the former Yugoslavia, I met
with senior Government officials in Croatia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia, and I was pleased by the
cooperation received on different fronts, including
in particular the positive indications given in both
Croatia and Serbia with regard to the establishment
of information centres in those countries as well. Of
course, at both branches we continue to make important
strides in making thejudicial records and key precedents
of our predecessor Tribunals accessible.

All the while, my colleagues and I have made
it a priority to build an exemplary United Nations
institution and a model of what an international criminal
judicial institution can and should be. Our remarkable
body of staff, drawn from approximately 70 countries
around the world, has repeatedly surpassed the
Secretary-General's gender parity goals. Through their
professionalism and ingenuity, their resourcefulness
and resilience, the staff have been invaluable when it
comes to making the Mechanism what it is today.

In that context, I wish to salute in particular
Ms. Gabrielle McIntyre, Chef de Cabinet and Principal
Legal Adviser at the Mechanism since its founding
and the Chef de Cabinet to the Presidents of the
ICTY for more than a decade. As a senior official of
the ICTY since 2004, she played a pivotal role in the
conceptualization and creation of the Mechanism,
and she has proven to be an invaluable colleague and
leader at the Mechanism throughout the institution's
existence. I am deeply indebted to her and her Deputy
Chef de Cabinet, Ms. Willow Crystal, as well as to all
of the excellent staff of the Mechanism, who have made
the institution what it is today.

As I bring my remarks to a close, I hope the Council
will allow me one final moment of personal reflection.
I may be among the last individuals to appear before
the Council who survived the Holocaust. I do not speak
lightly or often of this time in my life - a period during

which many of my loved ones perished - but I wish
to remember it today because it was the horrors of the
Holocaust, and of the Second World War more broadly,
that led us to where we are now. It was the experience of
the scourge of war and the untold sorrow it wrought that
led the peoples of the world to unite in a ringing call
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, human
dignity and the value of justice and the rule of law
through the establishment of the United Nations. It was
that experience that led to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which marked its seventieth anniversary
only yesterday, and it was, in many ways, the echoes of
all that that led to the establishment of the ICTY and the
ICTR - the pioneers of international criminal justice
in the modern era.

Today, in speaking of the work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, we often
make reference to the importance of incorporating
lessons learned. But the Mechanism itself, as it
carries forward the invaluable legacies of the ad hoc
Tribunals, is a symbol of the lessons learned by past
generations. It is a symbol of what we hold dear: respect
for the rule of law, fundamental fairness and justice and
adherence to the highest principles and our obligations
arising thereunder.

It is a reminder of the thread of human events
that connects our work today with those dark days of
unimaginable cruelty and chaos from the Second World
War. It is a reminder that none of us may stand idly by
while genocide and other violations of international law
are committed, or while their commission is denied. It
is a reminder today of the chorus of generations - from
the Poland of my childhood to the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, to so many other places around the
world - that, when faced with appalling atrocities,
proclaimed "never again". We must heed those lessons,
lest we be doomed to repeat them. The leadership of all
those present here today, and the Council as a whole,
is essential in that regard, as my generation passes on
the torch.

For the support that the members of the Security
Council have offered me throughout my presidencies of
the Mechanism and, before that, the ICTY, and for the
support that the Council has provided and will continue
to provide to the Mechanism itself, I am humbly and
deeply grateful.

