Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me to
welcome the Foreign Ministers of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Belgium to this meeting.
We also welcome the Ambassador of Rwanda, who has
joined us.

We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), which
will assist MONUC in being proactive in its duties, in
particular the protection of civilians in the eastern
Democratic Republic. It is important that MONUC
succeed, because without it we risk losing all the gains
we have made, not only in the eastern Congo but
throughout the country.
7

It is also important to emphasize that the solution
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is political,
and therefore the Goma and Nairobi process remain the
only architecture for addressing the challenges before
us. We urge the countries of the region to continue to
support the peace and national reconciliation process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to speed up
the implementation of the Pact on Security, Stability
and Development in the Great Lakes Region, signed in
Nairobi on 15 December 2006 with a view to creating
conditions for lasting peace and stability in the region.

Finally, since this is our last meeting in the
Council, we wish to express our thanks for the support
and assistance we have received over the past two
years from all Council members and the Secretariat.
However, we cannot forget that we leave not having
succeeded in addressing the long-standing conflicts on
the Council's agenda.

We regret that the Council has again failed to
come to the assistance of the Somali people, who will
remain at the mercy of all the armed groups that have
been terrorizing and murdering them over the past 16
years. Besides agreeing on piracy, we in the Council
still debated whether assisting the Somali people in
their country was in line with our own national
interests in that area. In the end, of course, it was the
Somali people who were losers.

Also, the people of Palestine, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, face an uncertain future. In 60 years this
Council has not been able to act in a very firm manner.
We hope that that issue that will continue to engage the
Council in the coming year.

Finally, we also wish to recall, among the issues
that we are leaving, the Western Sahara, where the
Council continues to be unable to actively support the
self-determination of the Sahraoui people.

So my only hope is that the incoming members of
the Council will find it necessary to continue to fight
on these issues, whether they be Congo, Somalia,
Palestine or Western Sahara, for the sake of the
suffering people in those parts of the world and of the
credibility of this Council.

