Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, allow me
to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July. I would like also to express appreciation
for your personal role and Germany's prime role in
dealing with Afghanistan in the Council.

I would like to extend my warmest welcome to
my good friend, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura, back to the
Council. I thank him for his kind remarks and
compliments, for his comprehensive briefing and for
his introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/381).

As the world enters a post-bin Laden era,
Afghanistan, the greatest victim of terrorism, is today
at a critical juncture in its quest for peace and stability.
Consistent with the outcome of the NATO Lisbon
Summit, we have begun the transition process. In the
coming days, we will implement the first stage of this
process in seven Afghan provinces: Kabul, Panjshir,
Bamiyan, the municipalities of Herat in Herat
province, Mazar-e-Sharif in Balkh province, Mehtar
Lam in Laghman province and Lashkar Gah in
Helmand province.

Transition is a rousing call for Afghans to take
the lead in national ownership and leadership and for
the Government of Afghanistan to assume its sovereign
responsibilities. From our point of view, transition is a
carefully formulated comprehensive strategy that
presupposes not only a gradual transfer of security
responsibilities to Afghan authorities until the end of
2014, but also a conscientious drawdown of
international forces, the accelerated training of the
Afghan Army and Police, the strengthening of
governance, a new regional agenda for multifaceted
cooperation, and the prospect of securing a renewed
strategic partnership with the United States and NATO.

The Afghan Government continues its crucial
efforts to ensure that the transition process is smooth
and viable. However, there should be no doubt that, if
the transition process is to succeed and remain
sustainable, certain preconditions must be met. First
and foremost, we look to our international partners to
expedite the training and equipping of our security
forces and to provide them with the necessary enablers.

Last month, United States President Obama
announced the gradual drawdown of United States
forces from Afghanistan. We welcome the decision and
consider it to be in accordance with the recent
emerging consensus between Afghanistan and the
international community to move from a primarily
military engagement to a more solid and enduring
partnership beyond 2014. President Obama's
announcement is a testament, first, to the steady ability
of Afghan security forces and, secondly, to the changed
momentum of the war, despite the recent vicious
attacks by the Taliban.

Contrary to some interpretations, we do not see
the drawdown of international forces as an end game
or, as some have put it, the beginning of international
disengagement from Afghanistan. In the past 10 years,
much blood and sweat have been shed and many
sacrifices made in order to realize our common
objective of lasting peace and security in the country
and the region.

The recent display of a promotional psychodrama
of so-called sophisticated attacks, such as the one
carried out last week in the Kabul Intercontinental
Hotel or the slaughter of a dozen civilians in a hospital
in Logar province is a conspicuously well-orchestrated
attempt by the enemies of Afghanistan, designed to
incite fear among the people, to hinder international
support for Afghanistan, and to convince a war-weary
audience in some countries that the war is unwinnable.

Moreover, the recent campaign seeks to sabotage
the future of peace talks and undermine the prospect of
reconciliation. Those who provide terrorists and
extremists with money, arms and strategic guidance are
equally responsible for the continued killing and brutal
butchery of innocent civilians in Afghanistan. It is
therefore imperative to stress the necessity of
eliminating the sanctuaries that continue to produce
and prepare the ruthless killers and agents of the
unending destruction of Afghanistan.

Acts of terror, however, will not shake our
determination to secure peace and stability in
Afghanistan. We are pleased to see that an environment
conducive to constructive outreach and dialogue with
members of the armed opposition is now in place. The
reconciliation process will be pursued as a priority,
consistent with the understanding that there is no
purely military solution and that the transition requires
an inclusive settlement. Reconciliation aims to bring
peace, prosperity and unity to the country. It is not
about ceding any territorial control or accommodating
any representation outside the authority of the Afghan
Government. The High Peace Council is engaged in
discussions with the Taliban and key actors in the
region to end the violence and achieve a lasting peace.
This is an effort in which all sectors of society,
including women, are involved.

In addition, we are beginning to focus on the
regional dimensions of the reconciliation process. We
again underscore Pakistan's significant role in
achieving peace and reconciliation, and in this context
we emphasize the importance of constructive
collaboration between our two countries. We must take
the necessary confidence-building measures for that
collaboration to continue. The recent armed violations
of Afghanistan's eastern border through hundreds of
instances of shelling and artillery fire in Kunar and
Nangarhar provinces, which killed dozens of people,
including women and children, have been the cause of
serious alarm and concern for the people and
Government of Afghanistan, and run the risk of
undermining the spirit of cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. We urge that such attacks
cease immediately.

The Security Council's recent decision to
separate the Taliban sanctions regime from that of
Al-Qaida was an astute move in support of our peace
and reconciliation initiative. It gives new impetus to
our Afghan-led reconciliation process. We also
appreciate the Council's decision to meet our de-listing
requests, and urge increased focus on acceding to our
additional requests, which remain unmet.
The recent eleventh meeting of the International
Contact Group on Afghanistan, held in Kabul with
broad participation from more than 50 countries and
international and regional organizations, focused on

reconciliation, regional cooperation, the transition to
Afghan leadership and ownership, and international
support beyond 2014. The meeting was held as part of
the lead-up to the forthcoming Istanbul Conference on
Afghanistan, aimed at creating a stability compact, and
to the international conference to be held in Bonn later
this year, which will review progress on the transition
goals and seek the long-term support of the
international community in advancing the political
process, including reconciliation and regional
partnership.

A decade of international and regional interaction
in Afghanistan is now leading to the emergence of a
new silk road, defining the shared benefits of regional
cooperation. This year we have engaged in increasingly
concrete cooperation with our neighbours in the region,
expanding the horizons of understanding and the scope
of joint efforts. During President Karzai's visit to
Islamabad last month, a promising future of close
cooperation and the realization of a common vision
with Pakistan was envisaged for peace as well as for
development. That visit was followed by an extensive
discussion with the trilateral framework of the Core
Group of Afghanistan, Pakistan and the United States,
which recently held its third meeting in Kabul.

During the most recent visit of Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh, India offered its support for Afghan-
led reconciliation efforts and announced a significant
increase in its assistance to Afghanistan. We also
continue to conduct numerous exchanges with Iran,
Russia, China, countries of Central and South Asia and
the Arab world. The opportunities that a peaceful and
stable Afghanistan can offer for prosperity and security
in the region are ever more evident. We will continue
our constructive engagement with regional partners to
realize our common goals.

Securing Afghanistan and its future is about
empowering the country, enabling it to stand on its own
feet and take charge of its own destiny. In this regard,
we look forward to the upcoming review of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan as essential to aligning the role of the
United Nations with the evolving needs of transition.
We are convinced that a more harmonized, streamlined
and coordinated United Nations, based on the
Delivering as One approach, is vital to furthering the
efficiency and effectiveness of the Organization in
Afghanistan. We look forward to a lasting partnership
with the United Nations during transition and beyond.

The Government of Afghanistan will continue to
improve governance, enhance its fight against
corruption and strengthen transparency and
accountability in our national institutions. To that end,
we will build on existing measures in order to ensure
that anyone involved in illegal activities will be held
accountable. The Afghan Government's recent
apprehension of two senior executives of Kabul Bank
implicated in financial mismanagement is testimony to
our firm commitment to accountability and the rule of
law. We have presented the Attorney-General's office
with a list of all the accused individuals. A
comprehensive investigation of the Kabul Bank flasco
is under way and should lead to reparation of debts and
the bringing to justice of all the culprits in the case. We
are convinced that the final outcome of the
investigation will respond to the concerns both of the
Afghan people and our international partners.

Ongoing consultations are under way to resolve
the dispute that arose from irregularities occurring
during our parliamentary elections. We are not facing a
constitutional crisis. The Government of Afghanistan is
fully committed to resolving the issue within the
framework of a legal and political solution.

Far too many innocent Afghans have lost their
lives as a result of prolonged violence, insecurity and
fighting. The civilian casualties are not just about
figures and numbers; they are about the loss of the
innocent lives of men, women, children, village elders,
health workers, teachers and aid workers. The Taliban
has been primarily responsible for such killings and
has displayed a total lack of conscience in pulling the
trigger on innocent civilians or those who protect local
people. However, the number of casualties caused by
NATO forces, despite their own repeated calls for a
commitment to protecting civilians, remains
significant. We reiterate our call for an immediate end
to civilian casualties.

As we move forward, we must think beyond
ending the war and towards ensuring sustainable
progress across all sectors: security, governance and
development. Our goal remains a vision of a peaceful,
stable, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. For
that to be achieved, we must build on the gains of the
past and forge a feasible framework of cooperation
with the region and a long-term partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community. The
coming years will be crucial to our joint success.
Together, we will be able to accomplish the task we
began 10 years ago.

