Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): At
the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to hold this debate.
We believe that such a step required political resolve
and professional daring. Document S/2006/507 was a
milestone in improving the working methods of the
Security Council and, above all, in increasing its
transparency. Every good initiative must have someone
promoting it. Without that, even the most promising
ideas can fade away before they produce results. We
would therefore also like to express our gratitude to the
delegation of Japan for its initiative, as well as to
recognize its particular role in improving the working
methods of the Council.

That document is clearly useful from the point of
view of practicality. Since its adoption, we have seen
positive changes in the work of the Council. At the
same time, though, we do see a need and an
opportunity for further improvement in the internal
working methods of the Security Council.

In that regard, my delegation has two practical
proposals. First, we propose providing for, in addition
to what exists, a new format of meetings, one that is
closed to the press and NGOs but is open to
delegations. It is not always possible to inform
delegations of the time and format of a Council
meeting in time for them to prepare written
communications requesting to participate. That new
format would be particularly useful in the case of
urgent meetings, in which, in fact, Member States are
particularly interested. Enabling all interested
delegations to participate without the need for
additional written communications would also remove
the concern of Member States over selective
information with respect to meetings being planned.

Secondly, we propose separating in time open
meetings of the Council and the adoption of decisions
on their outcomes. The current practice of organizing
08-49242
open meetings does not even provide for the formal
opportunity to take into account the viewpoints
expressed during the discussions. Documents on the
outcomes of open meetings are prepared ahead of those
meetings and are adopted immediately, without any
adjustments based on the results of the discussion.
Essentially, States that are not Council members have
the right to address the Council but, in theory, no
opportunity to have any impact on a decision of the
Council. Additional work within the Council, based on
the outcomes of open meetings, could reflect the
results of the discussion and ideas specific to the
initiatives in the documents of the Council; it would
provide genuine, and not just nominal, evidence of the
Council's greater openness.

As was noted in the statement by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, which we fully support, the
issue of the working methods of the Security Council
goes beyond the framework of establishing an internal
working method and steps to work openly. An
important component of the working methods is also
the means to determine the area of responsibility and a
mechanism by which decisions are taken. A key
prerequisite for improving the work of the Council is to
establish within it an atmosphere of self-discipline and
responsibility in terms of defining the competencies of
the Council. That has to do with establishing an
environment, in which Council members agree that
they are simply not entitled to hold a formal or
informal discussion on the situation in a Member State
or on other issues where there is no direct threat to
international peace and security.

Lastly is the avoidance of double standards in
decision-making - regardless of whether it occurs
consciously or not. We need to avoid hasty or
incomplete assessments when we should meticulously
seek the truth and compromise, and we need to avoid
the demonization of opponents. That would certainly
enhance the role of the Council in resolving
international conflicts and would serve to enhance the
effectiveness of its efforts. When working out and
adopting decisions, it is important that they be genuine
and not just words, and that they take into account the
views and concerns of all Member States, be they rank-
and-file members of the General Assembly or
permanent members of the Council, and particularly
Members whose interests are directly affected.
5

Non-permanent Council members play a
particular role in ensuring the most effective, honest
and impartial analysis of pressing international issues.
As was shown by the Council's work during the events
in the hot month of August, it is the action or inaction
of non-permanent Council members as a kind of jury or
independent arbiters, in particular in a situation where
there is no agreement among permanent members, that
is the key to whether the Council will be able fully,
impartially and objectively to carry out its functions or
not.

