Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
also join others in congratulating you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency for
this month. I also wish to thank Mr. Zannier and
General De Kermabon for their comprehensive
briefings and to welcome President Tadic' and Foreign
Minister Hyseni back and thank them for their
statements.

We regret the tragic death of Dr. Mesud
Dzekovie, an ethnic Bosnian pediatrician, and the
injuries to several others that occurred on 2 July in
North Mitrovica related to the opening by the
Government of Kosovo of a citizens' services centre
there. We echo the calls for calm and restraint made by
the Government of Kosovo, and we join in condemning
violence and the threat of violence. We urge all parties
to avoid any escalation of tensions.

As we learn more about the incidents that led to
the loss of life and to injuries, it is becoming clear that
this was an isolated criminal act, not a planned act of
terrorism. We urge local law enforcement authorities,

10-43 669
including those from the Kosovo police and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), to continue to investigate the incident and to
ensure that those who are responsible for criminal acts
are held accountable. We welcome the assistance
offered by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in responding to
the incident.

We frankly do not see that an isolated criminal
act such as the one on 2 July warrants an emergency
meeting of the Security Council. The President of
Serbia has asked for this urgent meeting to discuss the
serious deterioration of the security situation, but if we
are to discuss that situation, we should also discuss the
threats and intimidation against ethnic Serb citizens of
Kosovo, such as Petar Miletie, who was shot on 5 July,
as we heard, and was reportedly accused of being a
traitor by the perpetrator. If we are to condemn
provocations, then we should also condemn the
provocation by a senior Serbian Government official
calling any Kosovo Serb who supports the Kosovo
Government an accomplice to Albanian terrorists.

Let me repeat what President Tadie mentioned in
his statement, something we wholeheartedly agree
with. He said that what everyone needs to do is to
reject the extremist voices who find comfort in the old
ways. In that way, it would be good to hear President
Tadic' also denounce the 5 July incident and the
extremist statement by a member of his Government.

The decision by the Government of Kosovo to
open a citizens" service centre was the right one, and
one that is within its prerogative as an independent and
sovereign State recognized by many in this room and
beyond. Recognizing the delicate balance among
minority communities in the north, the Government of
Kosovo opened the centre in a low-key,
non-provocative and transparent manner. The opening
was also part of a larger strategy, endorsed by all of
Kosovo's communities and by members of the
international community, to extend the benefits of
good, accountable and legitimate government to all of
Kosovo's citizens, including its citizens in the north. It
is our understanding that, in a spirit of transparency,
the Government of Serbia was informed in advance of
the opening of the centre.

It is unfortunate that the efforts of the
Government of Kosovo to assist those most in need in
the north were subsequently disrupted by attempts to
politicize the citizens' services centre and destabilize
the situation in northern Kosovo. We must also
emphasize that any violence and provocative actions
by demonstrators are also unacceptable.

The 2 July incident is representative of the
continuing underlying tensions that exist in the north
and the continuing need to strengthen the rule of law
and protections for all communities there. In that
regard the Kosovo police and EULEX must continue
their work and use the resources at their disposal to
ensure that those who would use violence or the threat
of violence do not succeed in destabilizing the region.

Finally, we urge the Governments of Serbia and
Kosovo to work together as neighbours in order to
foster further regional stability and to prevent further
violence.

