Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (Spoke in Arabic): Since
2011, Egypt has been following with interest the rapidly
evolving developments in the Syrian crisis. From the
very beginning, Egypt has adopted a firm position
in support of the aspirations of the Syrian people to
freedom and democracy, as well as the maintenance of
that State's institutions and territorial integrity. Over
the past years we have been overwhelmed by the extent
of the destruction, killing and displacement that has
befallen the Syrian people. We deeply regret the state
of chaos that Syria has been reduced to, not to mention
the unprecedented spread of terrorist groups in the
Middle East in a manner that threatens the security of
the region and the entire world.

We have also followed with deep regret the
confirmed use of chemical weapons on several
occasions in Syria. While we condemn all forms of
killing and destruction, we especially decry the use of
weapons of mass destruction, which are indiscriminate
in nature and harm innocent civilians. We renew our
condemnation, in the strongest terms, of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria by any party whatsoever.
We support the need to hold accountable any individual,
entity, party or authority whose involvement in that
criminal matter is proven.

Based on that principled position, Egypt supported
the establishment of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
and recently supported the extension of its mandate
for an additional year. That has been our position,
given our extreme interest in bolstering the concept of
accountability and uncovering the facts surrounding
the Syrian crisis. Our support for the Joint Investigative
Mechanism also seeks to contribute to efforts made to
confront the urgent threat that the world has yet to deal
with, namely, the rapid increase in the proliferation,
possession, manufacture and use of chemical weapons
in the Middle East, especially on the part of non-State
entities. We therefore reiterate the need to establish
a system capable of deterring such entities in their
attempts to acquire such weapons or the means of
manufacturing them. It is important to confront the
dangers of the potential transfer of such methods and
weapons between various conflict zones.

We have followed with interest the reports of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism,
including its seventh report (S/2017/904, annex).
We take note of the report's evaluation of several
scenarios that were examined with regard to the Khan
Shaykhun incident based on the means available to the
JIM, keeping in mind the complex conditions in the
field, as well as the fact that the Mechanism began its
investigations only several months after the incident
took place, and it has been unable to visit the actual
site of the incident, which is controlled by the terrorist
group Al-Nusra Front.

I would like to reiterate that we are all aware of
the challenges that investigations in the battlefield face.
Indeed, the Mechanism's mandate was designed with
such challenges in mind. The mandate clearly gave
the Mechanism the mission to identify to the greatest
extent feasible those involved in the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. We therefore welcome the work that
the Mechanism has done within its capabilities. We
still see the importance of the Council searching for the
best way to ensure maximum access to the site of the
incidents by the Mechanism and in a timely manner, and
importantly, in a manner that would secure the highest
degree of neutrality in the investigation and ensure the
security of the Mechanism's personnel.

We reiterate our call to the members of the Council
to work towards bringing their views closer together
through dialogue, so that we can return to the consensus
that prevailed in the Security Council over this matter.
That is especially important since the Syrian crisis has
witnessed rapid developments in the recent period,
which are developments that require us all to support
the political process and the road map adopted by the
Council in resolution 2254 (2015).

