Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
congratulate Poland on having assumed the presidency
of the Security Council and organized this debate
on a very topical issue. We are also grateful for the
briefings delivered by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba; the Executive Director of the
UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore; as well as Ms. Mariatu
Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter Awan.

We also extend our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his latest report (S/2019/509). In that
regard, we share his grave concern at the alarming
increase registered in 2018 in the number of serious
violations of children's rights committed by State
actors in the context of the intensification of armed
conflicts and their changing dynamics. Moreover, we
wish to express our strongest condemnation of the
record levels of murders and maiming of children in
2018, as well as cases of sexual violence and attacks on
schools and hospitals, all ofwhich have had devastating
consequences on children.

Argentina has been an active and strong advocate
ofthe Oslo Safe Schools Declaration since its inception,
in the understanding that education is fundamental for
the development and full enjoyment of human rights.
Continuous access to safe education constitutes an
essential protection mechanism for children and young
people in armed conflicts, helping them to reach their
potential and contributing to the building of stronger
communities. In that regard, we call on all parties to put
an immediate end to grave violations against children,
encourage the implementation of all necessary
measures aimed at preventing such violations, ensure
due accountability for the perpetrators and provide
children with appropriate humanitarian assistance
to meet their needs, rooted in a human rights-based
approach that recognizes children as victims of these
grave violations.

We also wish to highlight and express our support
for the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Virginia Gamba, and that of
the Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former
Child Soldiers, for their important initiative, which
provides us with a renewed and broader understanding
of reintegration, not only in terms of the immediate
provision of humanitarian assistance but also as a long-
term commitment to ensuring that child reintegration
programmes are future-oriented, involve all
stakeholders in society and are focused on the specific
needs of children.

It should be noted that persons with disabilities,
especially children, are among the most marginalized
in any community affected by any crisis. In that regard,
in line with resolution 2475 (2019) on the protection of
persons with disabilities in armed conflict, adopted in
June, we endorse the Secretary-General's call in his
report regarding the importance of reintegration being
focused on the specific needs of children, including
children with disabilities.

To conclude, it is crucial that we consider concrete
actions to fulfil the cross-cutting principle of leaving
no one behind. Argentina reiterates the imperative
need to agree on and implement measures with a
view to increasing the pressure from the international
community on State and non-State actors who commit
violations against children. Such efforts should be
carried out within the framework of absolute respect for
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and refugee law. Only by working towards a
humanitarian approach to development and peace will
we see lasting results in ensuring respect for human
rights and the successful reintegration of all children.

