The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.

On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20l7/672/Rev.1, which contains the text
of a letter dated 8 August from the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo extended
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2293 (2016)
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak in my capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In my briefing this morning, it is my
intention to touch upon three issues. First, I will
highlight the final report (see S/2017/672/Rev.l) of the
Group of Experts, the findings and recommendations
of which the Committee considered during its informal
consultations on 21 July. Secondly, I intend to provide
an overview of the work of the Committee since I last
briefed the Security Council on 11 October 2016 (see S/PV.7788), not only in terms ofthe activities conducted
by the Committee in addressing the complex challenges

facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo today and
over the long-term but also with a view to promoting
synergy among United Nations actors and cooperation
with the region towards the building of peace and
stability in the country. Finally, I will report on the
work that lies ahead, including a number of possible
activities for the Committee in the coming few months.

I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Le'onard She
Okitundu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to welcome
him to this briefing, which comes at a moment when the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is facing tremendous
challenges. The final report of the Group of Experts
of 10 August depicts a complex picture in connection
with those challenges. The Group observed a changing
dynamic of conflict and armed mobilization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as reflected by the
further fragmentation of armed groups operating in a
more decentralized, albeit heavily networked, manner.
Foreign and local armed groups are increasingly
interconnected, which also has an impact on patterns
of violence.

Concerning natural resources, the implementation
of mineral traceability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has considerably reduced instances of
armed groups directly and indirectly benefiting from
the exploitation and trade of tin, tantalum and tungsten.
However, the Group found that the ITRI Ltd Tin Supply
Chain initiative traceability system has shortcomings
in its implementation, thereby enabling different actors
to intentionally or inadvertently facilitate smuggling.
Moreover, the gold sector continues to suffer from the
lack of a traceability system, as artisanally sourced
gold from conflict-affected areas can still be exported
to international markets through smuggling, involving
illicit financial flows. Furthermore, legally issued
certificates are being used in a fraudulent manner
to export gold out of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and efforts must be made in that country, as
well as the transit and recipient countries, to address the
smuggling of gold in carry-on luggage aboard flights.

In the area of human rights and international
humanitarian law, the Group observed that violations
continue to be at significant levels in the the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Group focused on violations,
such as cases of child rape in South Kivu province, the
attack on the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in North Kivu province, and the murder
of two of its members on 12 March in Central Kasai
province. In that context, I would like to recall that, of
the eight recommendations set out in the Group's final
report, the Committee considered, during its informal
consultations on 21 July, four recommendations that
were addressed to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, while the remaining four
recommendations of the Group were addressed to
the Security Council, including one recommendation
related to the investigation into the murder of two
members of the Group of Experts.

I would like to pause here for a moment and
acknowledge the presence in the Chamber today of
Mr. John Sharp and Mrs. Michele Sharp, the parents
of Michael Sharp, as well as Ms. Maria Moresby and
Ms. Elizabeth Moresby, the mother and sister of Zaida
Catalan, the two deceased members of the Group of
Experts. As I mentioned in a statement on 29 March
(see SC/12768-PKO/629), I had the honour to know
Michael and Zaida personally and to work closely with
them in my capacity as the Chair of the Committee.
Despite the numerous risks and challenges they faced,
their profound courage, dedication to their work and
utter devotion to the cause of peace were a source of
inspiration for us all. The tragic loss of Michael and
Zaida is a painful reminder of the volatile environments
in which the members of the United Nations groups and
panels of experts operate in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and elsewhere, which often come at
great personal cost. That loss is also a reminder of the
suffering inflicted upon a great number of innocent
civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
that realizing lasting peace for those who have no voice
remains our ultimate cause.

It is against that backdrop that the Committee
and the Group of Experts have taken an active role
in addressing both the short-term and long-term
challenges facing the country. That has been marked
by a deliberate effort to involve the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and those of the
Great Lakes region to promote synergies among United
Nations actors working on sanctions-related issues
and to encourage collaborative efforts among regional
and international partners, with the aim of forging a
common approach to help achieve peace and stability.

In that context, following my trip to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region in August 2016,
the Committee conducted a number of activities with
the aim of maintaining dialogue with the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo through the
Permanent Mission in New York and Government
officials in Kinshasa with regard to several aspects
related to the Committee's work. For example, on
19 November 2016, the Committee received a briefing
from Ms. Jeanine Mabunda, Presidential Adviser
on Sexual Violence and Child Recruitment of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, following which the
Committee held informal consultations with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The Committee also maintained its commitment to
conduct outreach with representatives of the region. On
30 January, I briefed the regional States in connection
with the Group's mid-term report (see S/2016/1102).
During that meeting, the Committee engaged with the
invited States and listened to their views with regard to
the mid-term report and the recommendations therein.
In the same vein, on 20 March, the Committee held
its ninth formal meeting, which aimed at enhancing
its understanding of the security situation and the
surrounding regional dynamics. The meeting featured
briefings by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General to the Great Lakes Region and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Head of
MONUSCO, as well as statements by the representatives
of the invited regional States, on the progress and
challenges in their cooperation bilaterally or regionally,
including in the context of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, particularly regarding
support for the neutralization of armed groups, as well
as disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or repatriation.

The security situation in the country, and
particularly in the Kasai region, received further
close attention by the Committee when it received a
detailed briefing by MONUSCO on 22 May, following
which a representative of the United Nations Mine
Action Service made a presentation on weapons and
ammunition management in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. With a view to promoting collaboration
and coordination among United Nations and regional
actors, the Committee held its first-ever open briefing on
4 August on the illicit exploitation of natural resources,
with broad participation from the United Nations
membership at large. Speakers included the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great Lakes
Region, the Executive Secretary of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Acting
Coordinator of the Group of Experts, as well as the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and other participants from the region.
As highlighted in numerous reports of the Group
of Experts, the proceeds from the illegal exploitation of
natural resources fuel criminal networks, armed groups
and the ongoing insecurity in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such exploitation
further limits the capacity of the State by facilitating
corruption, weakening State institutions and hindering
economic growth and social development. For example,
although a major producer of gold and one of the largest
diamond producers in the world, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is one of the 47 least-developed
countries according to the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development. Therefore, the fight against
the illicit trafficking of natural resources is critical
to enable the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
move beyond conflict towards peacebuilding and
development. The open-format briefing on 4 August
was intended to take stock ofthe progress at the national
and regional levels, as well as existing challenges and
shortcomings, and to facilitate further improvements
through a collaborative approach involving relevant
regional and international partners.

Looking forward, the coming months will be a
critical period for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that context, the Committee will remain
vigilant and ensure that its work and that of the Group of
Experts contribute to peace and stability in the country.
Towards that goal, I intend to continue collaboration
with the relevant United Nations interlocutors with
a view to obtaining updated information on various
aspects of the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo that are relevant to the Committee's mandate
and promote further synergy in its work.

The Committee also remains committed to
maintaining its dialogue with its interlocutors from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and those in the
wider region in order to promote further collaboration
with the Committee and the Group of Experts. In that
context, the Committee will consider the possibility
of a second mission to the region by the Chair in late
October to visit the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to speak with representatives of the Government
and MONUSCO, as well as key partners in other
regional capitals.

Among the major objectives of my delegation for
that visit would be obtaining first-hand knowledge
of the implementation of the measures pursuant
to resolution 2360 (2017) and of the impact of the
exploitation of natural resources on the situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in line with Security Council emphasis as set out in
paragraphs 19 to 26 of the resolution. The visit would
also provide an opportunity to hold legal consultations
with the Member State concerned in order to ensure
the full implementation of the measures set forth in the
resolution. The visit's findings would hopefully feed
into the Council's review of the measures imposed by
the solution 2360 (2017), as well as future engagement
with the State concerned on the implementation of
the measures.

Following my return to New York from the visit,
I intend to convene a meeting of the Committee with
regional States. During that meeting my aims will be to
provide an overview of the relation of the Group's final
report of 10 August, deliver a briefing on my October
visit to the region and promote a general discussion on
the effectiveness of the sanctions regime and ways by
which to increase its contribution to peace and stability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

(Spoke in Arabic)

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

