Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): Mr. President, allow
me to join other distinguished representatives in
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October, and through you to extend our appreciation to
Ambassador Tafrov of Bulgaria for guiding the work of
the Security Council last month.

Thailand welcomes the convening of this open
debate ofthe Security Council on the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait, which is of utmost concern to the
international community. Whatever decision the
Council may take on Iraq will have direct bearing on
international peace and security and will ultimately
affect all of us. It is therefore vitally important that the
wider United Nations membership is fully engaged in
this process.

In this era of globalization, when crises in one
area will inevitably have an impact in all corners of the
globe, multilateralism and multilateral institutions
remain mankind's best hope for the maintenance of
international peace and security. As the most universal
of all international organizations, the United Nations
symbolizes our trust and faith in multilateralism. It
remains the most appropriate framework for peaceful
resolution of crises through diplomatic means. If the
United Nations is to remain relevant, its Members'
voices must be heard and respected.

I should like to take this opportunity to commend
all concerned parties for making use of this
Organization to try to resolve in a peaceful manner the
escalating crisis with regard to Iraq. In order to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
pave the way for their reduction and eventual
elimination, the multilateral regime must be upheld by
all of us.

In this regard, while we welcome Iraq's
announcement regarding receiving the United Nations
inspectors unconditionally, we strongly urge Iraq to
bear in mind that it has the responsibility and
obligation to comply with all relevant Security Council
resolutions unconditionally and unreservedly. This
includes, inter alia, providing immediate unconditional
and unrestricted access for United Nations inspectors
as required by the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We view as a positive development the recent
fruitful discussions between Iraq and the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) in Vienna and the recent
correspondence between Iraqi authorities and
UNMOVIC and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). We hope that this dialogue will soon
resolve all outstanding matters, thus paving the way for
the return of United Nations inspectors to Iraq.

The present escalation of tensions, if allowed to
continue, can only do more harm than good to the
present situation in the Middle East as well as to
international peace and stability. It will also have dire
consequences for the global economy at a time when
many economies are struggling to recover from
financial crises, if not to overcome recessions. The
reliance of many economies on the Middle East for
trade, investment and supply of natural resources,
including oil, means that any instability or outbreak of
military action in the region could have severe adverse
impacts on the livelihood and well-being of peoples all
over the world. The economic recovery process
pursued by developing countries may be stalled or even
reversed. This is a no-win situation for everyone.

Furthermore, one of the dreadful consequences of
the outbreak of military action is its devastating impact
on innocent people and children. We therefore reiterate
our plea to Iraq to comply unreservedly and
unconditionally with all relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We sincerely hope that the Security Council will
take into account the views expressed at this open
meeting in determining the most appropriate course of
action - one which will resolve all outstanding issues
and all threats to international peace and security in a
peaceful manner.

