Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I wish to begin by
acknowledging the presence of relatives of victims of the
tragedy over Lockerbie. Our delegation wishes to take this
opportunity to express to them our sincere condolences.
Their presence today represents yet another reason for our
awareness of the ethical implications of the work of the
Security Council.

More than nine years have passed since the bombing
of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie. However, the
perpetrators of that horrendous crime continue to elude
justice. This gives rise to serious concern. Every effort must
be made to ensure that justice is done.

This Council has on numerous occasions expressed its
determination to eliminate international terrorism. Slovenia
shares this determination. The plague of international
terrorism continues to be among us, and the Lockerbie case
has been one of the most dreadful manifestations of that.
We hope, therefore, that today's debate will reinvigorate our
common commitment to combat all forms of terrorism. We
should send a renewed and clear message that this Council
will not rest until terrorism is eliminated and until the
perpetrators of terrorist acts are brought to justice.

On 27 February this year the International Court of
Justice issued two Judgments concerning the aerial incident
at Lockerbie. We are aware of the different interpretations
of these Judgments, in which the Court decided on the
preliminary objections in the cases between Libya and the
United States, and Libya and the United Kingdom.

Judgments on preliminary objections generally address
the questions of jurisdiction and admissibility of cases
brought before the International Court. As such they most
often do not represent the final word of the Court; that is
done only once the Court has pronounced its judgment on
the merits. This is also the situation in regard to the two
cases on which the Court pronounced its judgment on
preliminary objections on 27 February this year.

In addition to this very basic observation, it might be
useful today to clarify some of the aspects of the
relationship between the two principal organs of the
United Nations, the Security Council on the one hand and
the International Court of Justice on the other, when they
are engaged in dealing with different aspects of a given
situation. The Charter has envisaged such possibilities,
which sometimes do occur in practice.

In general, such situations occur as a result of the
fact that international issues often have both political and
legal aspects. It is not impossible that the former should
be addressed by the Security Council and the latter by the
International Court of Justice. It must be remembered
that, in its jurisprudence, the Court has never shied away
from a case brought before it merely because it had
political implications. The Court demonstrated an active
approach in such a situation as early as 1949 in the Corfu
Channel case, in the LC]. Reports 1949, page 4. In that
case, however, the Security Council undoubtedly intended
that the whole situation be dealt with by the International
Court, as stated on page 26 in the same volume. In other
words, this was a rather particular and special case.

In most other situations where the Security Council
and the International Court of Justice addressed the same
events, the approach was different. In the United States
diplomatic and consular staff in Tehran case the Court
held that both proceedings could be pursued pari passu:

"it does not seem to have occurred to any member
of the Security Council that there was or could be
anything irregular in simultaneous exercise of their
respective functions by the Court and the Security
Council."

This is a passage from the I. C]. Reports 1980, page 21,
paragraph 40.

More recently, in 1986 the Court addressed the
question of simultaneous proceedings in the contentious
context of the preliminary objections of the United States
of America in the case concerning military and
paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua. In that
Judgment on the preliminary objections, the Court
explained that the Charter confers primary and not
exclusive responsibility upon the Security Council for the
purpose of the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Court then continued,

 

"The Council has functions of political nature assigned
to it whereas the Court exercises purely judicial
functions. Both organs can therefore perform their
separate but complementary functions with respect to
the same events."

This is a quotation from the I.C.J. Reports I 986, pages 434
to 435, paragraph 95.

I quoted these few examples in order to demonstrate
that the situations of parallel pursuit of the separate but
complementary functions of the International Court of
Justice and the Security Council are not new. There is no
conflict of jurisdiction involved. The Charter requires of
those who interpret and implement it to keep this in mind
and refrain from interpretations by which activities of either
of these two principal United Nations organs would
prejudge the exercise of functions of the other. This is of
paramount importance for the functioning of the United
Nations system.

The International Court of Justice acted in conformity
with this separation of powers when, in its Order of 14
April 1992, it rejected the Libyan request for indication of
provisional measures.

Another aspect of the situation discussed today relates
to the operation of sanctions imposed on Libya. By
imposing sanctions against Libya, the Security Council
employed a policy tool which has recently become the
subject of increasing criticism. There is no doubt that
sanctions should only last as long as necessary to achieve
the desired results. Sanctions should be lifted as soon as
possible, which means when the reasons for their
imposition cease to exist. However, as long as this is not
the case, the sanctions regime has to be observed.

One of the reasons sanctions are not popular is that
they hurt innocent people. Any sanctions regime, therefore,
has to provide for alleviation or, if possible, prevention of
the negative humanitarian impact of sanctions.

In the case of Libya, the sanctions Committee has
been involved in ongoing efforts to address the
humanitarian issues arising under the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Committee has authorized specific
exemptions, along with the necessary procedures, for
emergency medical evacuations and pilgrimage flights.
Currently, it is actively involved in the question of
airworthiness of the Libyan aircraft designated for medical
evacuations with the aim of ensuring that Libya has the
means to perform safely and expeditiously the medical
evacuation flights. We expect that the Committee will
continue to consider various humanitarian issues and to
respond promptly to specific and legitimate requests for
exemptions.
We believe that this approach is correct and that it
deserves the support of the Security Council.

