Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and Albania;
the country ofthe Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia,
align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2016/768). I would also
like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto for
his briefing.
Let me start by reiterating our full support for the
continuing important role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and all the United
Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people and in
coordinating the international community's assistance.

Progress in Afghanistan in recent years has been
remarkable but uneven, and requires consolidation
in many areas. The recent political tensions amid the
country's security and economic challenges highlight a
persistent fragility. Political stability and predictability
are essential. Preparations for the Brussels Conference
require confidence that there is a stable political
way forward well beyond October, with a need to
compromise and to make concessions wherever
necessary to ensure a viable and durable solution.
This calls ever more for a long-term perspective
and a realistic approach that acknowledges the huge
challenges ahead of us. It calls for the sustained and
predictable support of the international community,
based on mutual accountability principles.

We are collectively committed and contributing to
the stabilization of the region - in the fight against
terrorism, against the illegal economy and narcotics
production, as well as in trying to alleviate migratory
pressures, which represent an increasingly growing
challenge for neighbours near and far, including Europe.
In this context, allow me to say that we deeply deplore
the high number of civilian casualties in Afghanistan,
which, according to the latest United Nations report, are
at record levels. Improving security remains the single
most important factor for stability and development in
Afghanistan. Therefore, we welcome the commitments
made at the NATO Warsaw Summit in July in support
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.

Looking ahead, we are nowentering the final phase
of organizing, together with the Afghan Government
the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, which
will follow three strands: substantial progress in
Afghan State- and institution-building by effectively
implementing the reforms of the National Unity
Government; international support near or at current
levels up to 2020, and increasing the effectiveness
of aid in support of the new Afghan development
framework; and regional support for a political process
oriented towards stabilization, peace and cross-border
economic cooperation.

We are confident that, by the time of the Brussels
Conference, we will come to a joint vision and
development framework for the coming years, on the
basis of credible implementation plans. Following the
recent meeting of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board in Kabul, the European Union and its member
States welcomed the Afghanistan National Peace and
Development Framework. This is a strategic document
that defines future development priorities and guides
Government and donors' development programming.
Cross-government buy-in, effective implementation
arrangements and timely results of this ambitious
reform programme will determine its success, also in
the eyes of the Afghan population.

The finalization of the new national priority
programmes is one important element in this regard,
as is an agreement on a new annex to the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework that defines
clear progress indicators for the coming years. These
policy documents pave the way for tangible progress in
terms of poverty reduction and the provision of basic
services and public goods. Mutual accountability is the
driving principle. Continued exceptional but gradually
declining financial support over the coming years
will depend on such progress, including the necessary
institution-building to maintain a stable society based
on the rule of law and the consolidation ofAfghanistan's
democratic institutions, as well as a perspective for the
already delayed parliamentary elections.

The fight against corruption remains a critical
challenge, and effective measures leading to actual
results are of paramount importance, as is the
establishment of a reliable rule-of-law framework
which includes civilian policing and a functioning
justice system. They are a precondition for the respect,
protection and promotion of human rights, in particular
women's and children's rights.

On behalf of the European Union and its member
States, I would like also to reiterate that joint
State-building and development efforts in Afghanistan
can be sustained only if they are built on reinforced
regional cooperation. Development and security
are interconnected challenges for Afghanistan's
State-building process and need to be underpinned by
genuine political support at the regional level. This also
includes the increasing humanitarian challenges we face
with the situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Afghanistan and the neighbouring countries,
notably Pakistan and Iran. We need to address together
the growing pressure of migration.
Taking all three strands together, the Afghan reform
agenda, a new development partnership and a new
regional dynamic, a successful Brussels Conference
will send the signal of a renewed and stronger
partnership. A high level of attendance and clear signals
for continued extraordinary support for Afghanistan
will be important to convey a clear message that calls
for tangible progress on the ground; a strong signal for
economic reforms and inclusive growth, job creation
and a much more business-friendly environment; a firm
commitment to political stability; and a new dynamic
towards peace.

Let me conclude by thanking Special Representative
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his outstanding work in the
past two years as Deputy Special Representative and
by congratulating him on his new position. We wish
him all the best for the challenging tasks that lie ahead
of him. We look forward to continued cooperation with
Mr. Yamamoto.

