Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): My
Government supports this resolution, but it does so with
reservations. We do not believe that the sanctions outlined
in this resolution are sufficient to convince the
Government of Sudan to cease its sponsorship of
international terrorism and return to the fold of
responsible, law-abiding nations. My Government
welcomes this Council's concern to combat terrorism.
However, in failing to impose more meaningful sanctions
against Sudan, we risk further insecurity and instability
for the people of eastern Africa, the Middle East and the
Sudan.

 

I must share the concern expressed by Ambassador
Eteffa in his excellent presentation. This resolution raises
questions as to whether the world community is as prepared
as it should be to fight against State-sponsored terrorism
with determination, courage and responsibility.

In adopting resolution 1044 (1996), the Council
recognized Sudan's complicity in supporting and sheltering
those who plotted the attempted assassination of Egyptian
President Mubarak and the Government of Sudan's
sponsorship of terrorism as part of its foreign policy.

Resolution 1044 (1996) required two simple steps
from Sudan for it to begin to return to the good graces of
the international community: to surrender the three
remaining suspects in the Mubarak assassination attempt
and to cease its support for terrorism. The Government of
Sudan has refused to comply with these two simple
requirements, as the Secretary-General makes clear in his
report. Instead, Khartoum has focused its efforts on a
public-relations campaign and on smuggling the three
suspects out of the Sudan. We have noted press reports that
one of the suspects has now turned up in Afghanistan,
making the absolutely unbelievable claim that he has not
been in Sudan in months. His recent arrival in Afghanistan
from Sudan does not change the fact that the Government
of Sudan has the responsibility to ensure his extradition to
Ethiopia.

Let us be clear: If Sudan believes that it can escape its
responsibility simply by sending the three suspects out of
the Sudan, it is wrong. As today's resolution makes clear,
the Government of Sudan, which sheltered these terrorists,
has broad responsibility for seeing that they are returned to
Ethiopia for trial. We will not be satisfied until Sudan has
fulfilled this responsibility.

The claims of the Government of the Sudan that it has
tried to locate the three wanted suspects have no credibility.
Sudanese authorities were aware of the location of the three
before, during and after the assassination attempt, and after
the extradition request from Ethiopia was received. Sudan
has harboured the three suspects, and officials of the
National Islamic Front have protected them.

As shocking as are Sudan's complicity in, and efforts
to cover up, the attack on President Mubarak, they are only
part of a broader pattern of Sudanese support for terrorism,
which equally demands action by the international
community.

Under the policy of the National Islamic Front,
Sudan welcomed a long list of terrorist organizations,
providing a meeting point and training centre for their
violent activities outside of Sudan. Sudan continues to
harbour members of the Abu Nidal organization, the
Lebanese Hezbollah, the Palestine Islamic Jihad, the
Palestinian Islamic Resistance Movement - Hamas -
the Egyptian Al-Gama'a-Islamia, and the Algerian Armed
Islamic Group. These terrorist organizations threaten
Governments in Egypt, Algeria, Israel and elsewhere.

The National Islamic Front also supports Islamic and
other opposition groups from Tunisia, Kenya, Ethiopia,
Eritrea and Uganda, as we heard earlier. All of these
Governments have beseeched Sudan to cease its
sponsorship of violent opposition movements, but without
success, as we heard from the representative of Uganda
earlier in this debate. Uganda and Eritrea have been
forced to sever relations with Khartoum because of the
threat these organizations based in Sudan posed to them.

Sudan's efforts to export terrorism have even
reached the United Nations. Two employees of the
Sudanese Mission to the United Nations were active
accomplices in the plot to assassinate President Mubarak
during a visit to New York. They were also active
accomplices in efforts to blow up the very building that
we are meeting in today. They provided information on
the President's itinerary. These two employees also
offered to provide identification cards and parking passes
so that terrorists could plant a bomb, like the one at the
World Trade Center, in the basement of this building.
These are not just allegations - they are part of the
public, official record of a criminal trial held openly here
in the courts of the City of New York.

To support its terrorist clients, Sudan regularly
abuses the prerogatives of sovereign States by giving out
Sudanese passports, both diplomatic and regular, to help
non-Sudanese terrorists travel freely, as documented in
cases involving Ethiopia, Egypt and Tunisia. It uses
Sudan Airways to transport terrorists and their weapons,
as in the cases of Ethiopia and Tunisia; it makes financial
resources and safe refuges available to terrorists; and it
provides the very weapons terrorists use to inflict their
horror, as in the Mubarak assassination attempt in Addis
Ababa.

All Member States face the international threat of
terrorism. We have all stressed in various forums that we
will fight global terrorism wherever it appears. Our
objective, often repeated by Egypt, Ethiopia and other

 

neighbours of Sudan, is to bring about an end to Sudan's
support of terrorist groups. If we are serious about our
commitment to combat terrorism, we must put our words
and our intentions into meaningful action.

Today's resolution is another step toward true action.
On the positive side, the Council has finally determined that
Sudan's actions in supporting the cowardly terrorist attack
on President Mubarak, and continuing to foster terrorism
around the globe, are indeed a threat to international peace
and security. By imposing initial sanctions, the Council is
telling the Government of Sudan that we will not be content
with mere words.

We favour the steps the Council is taking today, but
we must say again that they are not big enough. We believe
that firmer measures should be taken, not against the people
of Sudan, but against their unresponsive Government.

The Government of Sudan, however, should take no
comfort from the fact that today's measures are not as
strong as they might be. For the Council has promised that
if the Government of Sudan fails to meet our requirements
in the next 60 days, we will seek more meaningful
sanctions. We hope that the Government of Sudan gets the
message, turns over the suspects and stops supporting other
terrorists. If not, we will be back here in two months to do
whatever is necessary to compel Sudan to abide by the
rules of a civilized nation.

