Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I am
also grateful to the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert
Serry, for his comprehensive briefing.

Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic
of Iran and Guinea, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Algined Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

The timing of today's meeting is of the essence,
in view of the critical fact that the nine months of
peace negotiations between Palestine and Israel were
scheduled to be concluded at this time - in fact, today.

It is common knowledge that Indonesia is a steadfast
supporter of the Palestinian people and their quest
for peace through the realization of their dream of an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. In that regard, Indonesia is deeply distressed
that, last week, the Government of Israel decided to
call off the ongoing negotiations. It used as an excuse
the historic agreement among Palestinians to form a
Government of national unity.

Last year, the General Assembly designated
2014 as the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, with the objective of boosting
international support for the right of Palestinians to
self-determination. In that light, it must be evident
to the international community that Palestinian
reconciliation is as much their inalienable right as that
of self-determination.

Indonesia therefore takes this opportunity to
congratulate the Palestinians upon reaching that historic
agreement. We strongly believe that Palestinians' desire
to unite is a right to be encouraged, since it guarantees
that Palestinians can speak as one, and not with separate
voices. In other words, the suggestion that Palestinians
can enjoy a place at the negotiating table with Israel
if they are divided is only a trick aimed at justifying
Israel's unwillingness to continue negotiations.

For years, Indonesia has called on Israel to halt
policies that frustrate the prospects of peace. Those
policies, and not Palestinian unity, constitute the real
problems and challenges for negotiations. Among those
policies is the continued development of settlements.
As was highlighted recently by the Israeli Bureau
of Statistics, there was an astounding 123 per cent
increase in settlement construction in the West Bank
between 2012 and 2013.

Like many other countries, Indonesia has frequently
asserted the illegality of settlement construction
and the danger it poses to negotiations. We have also
frequently drawn attention to the importance for Israel
to demonstrate good faith in the negotiation of the
other core issues, that is, the status of East Jerusalem,
permanent borders, security, refugees and water. To us
and to other members of the international community,
those are far more intractable issues than the choice of
the Palestinians to set aside their divisions.

Let us remember that, for over 60 years, peace
has eluded the Palestinian peoples due to the Israeli
occupation. By deploying the tools of intimidation and
fear, Israel has established the great insecurity that
it now seeks to perpetuate by choosing to abandon
negotiations.
We call on Israel to rethink that option and to
return to the negotiating table, which is the only door
to peace. We again call on Israel to withdraw without
delay from the territories it has occupied since 1967
and to allow the realization of an independent State
of Palestine as demanded by the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, the Quartet road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

Finally, it is also our view that the international
community must continue to assist Palestinians in the
necessary preparation for their eventual statehood. In
that regard, last month, Indonesia and Japan co-chaired
the Second Conference on Cooperation among East
Asian Countries for Palestinian Development. The East
Asian nations and international organizations that took
part in the Conference recommitted themselves to the
development of Palestine, as well as to the ongoing
Middle East peace process, through capacity-building
and by reinvigorating the business environment in
Palestine. We encourage other nations to undertake
similar initiatives and urge those that are already
undertaking such measures to step up their efforts.

