Mr. Al-Hussein: I regret to report my deepening
concern with regard to the increasingly grave human
rights crisis in Burundi. In addition to the rising death
toll, I must alert the Security Council to warning signs
of further escalation, including potentially very serious
regional repercussions. The country is at another crucial
and extremely dangerous tipping point, and I believe
that Member States and the Council can intervene
effectively to prevent the repetition of past horrors.

Within Burundi, and particularly in Bujumbura,
there have been increasing numbers of extrajudicial
killings documented in recent months, including
multiple alleged political assassinations. At least 240
people have been killed since protests began in April,
with bodies dumped on the streets on almost a nightly
basis. There have been hundreds of cases of arbitrary
arrests and detention in the past month alone, targeting
members of the opposition, journalists, human rights
defenders and their families, people attending the
funerals of those who have been killed and inhabitants
of neighbourhoods perceived to be supportive of the
opposition.

I am glad to note that the intervention of my
Office, in cooperation with the Burundian authorities,
resulted in the release of 340 detainees last month.
However, people who express divergent views from
the Government continue to live in a climate ofintense
fear. The abduction and murder just three days ago
of 25-year-old Welly Nzitonda, son of a well-known
human rights defender, Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, is one
very recent and painful example. During an attempt
on his life in August, Mr. Mbonimpa was himself
badly wounded. His son-in-law, another human rights
defender, was killed last month.

Many credible allegations of torture have been
documented, notably at a locality in Bujumbura run
by the national intelligence service. Violations have
also been reported on the part of the national police
and by the heavily armed police unit that was created
in September "to fight against acts of terrorism".
The Imbonerakure militia, associated with the ruling
party, continues to terrorize the population, sometimes
in collaboration with the police, and perpetrates
human rights abuses with total impunity. Specific
neighbourhoods have been locked down by police, with
reports of gun battles. Unidentified, but apparently
well armed and organized, individuals opposed to the
Government are also committing killings.
Fear of the violence and the spectre of more
bloodshed are driving ordinary Burundians out of their
homes. There are now well over 280,000 internally
displaced persons and refugees across the Great Lakes
region. To make matters worse, it is reported that
armed groups are recruiting in some refugee camps in
neighbouring countries and that agents of the Burundi
Government are also present to identify opponents.

Those and other signs of a suddenly escalating
regionalization of the crisis lead me to emphasize that
host countries must ensure that the camps are duly
protected and remain civilian in nature.

President Nkurunziza announced the opening of a
process of national dialogue in September. However, I
regret to report that to date it has fallen short of the
truly inclusive discussion that would effectively put the
country back on a path to peace. Repeated killings of
opposition leaders and human rights defenders and their
families sharply undermine the Government's verbal
commitments to reconciliation, as do recent requests
for the arrests of members of the opposition and human
rights defenders in exile in Europe and a tone of intense
hostility in public statements.

Lastweek,aswejustheardfromtheUnder-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, President Nkurunziza set
an ultimatum for Burundians to hand in all weapons,
warning that those who would not do so would be dealt
with as enemies of the nation. That ultimatum has led
many Burundians to flee their neighbourhoods for fear
of police sweeps and crackdowns. Earlier today, one
policeman and four civilians were reportedly killed in
the Musaga neighbourhood of Bujumbura.

Recent inflammatory remarks by members of the
Government have suggested that this crisis, which has
involved targeting people for their perceived political
affiliations, could increasingly taken on an ethnic
dimension.

The President of the Senate recently ordered
local authorities to identify, "elements which are not
in order", and to report them to the police to be dealt
with. He also called on the police to get ready to "finish
the work". Phrases such as those recall language that
this region has heard before and should not be hearing
again. They could signal the imminence of much worse
and more widespread violence.

The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
recently, and rightly, reaffirmed that anyone who

incited or engaged in acts of mass violence in Burundi
may be subject to prosecution by her Office. I strongly
support her statement.
The crisis in Burundi has been escalating for many
months. The resulting loss of life, economic collapse,
increasing hunger and mass displacement do not
only threaten peace and stability in the country, but
also across the region. The individuals responsible,
regardless of rank, position or political affiliation,
must be held to account. All possible influence must
be brought to bear to halt what may be an imminent
catastrophe.

None of us can forget the waves of killings
that generated such horrific loss of life and mass
displacement in the region two decades ago. I believe
that the strong interventions of many officials and
States in recent days may have great influence. I urge
neighbouring countries in the Great Lakes region
to step up their attempts to promote a credible and
inclusive political dialogue in Burundi and to ensure
that border areas and refugee camps in their respective
national territories are not used by any actors to fuel
the conflict.

I welcome the investigation to be carried out
in Burundi by the African Commission on Human
and Peoples' Rights, as well as the African Union's
efforts to address impunity by placing 100 human
rights observers on the ground. It is essential that the
international community is able to respond swiftly
and decisively if events deteriorate further. I urge
the Burundi Government to sign a memorandum of
understanding with the African Union for its human
rights observers to operate in Burundi, as well as to
allow the African Commission on Human and Peoples'
Rights to do its work and make its report public as soon
as possible.

Moreover, although the efforts of Burundi's
neighbours and regional partners will be essential,
I also believe it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to address a situation of profound concern,
well known for many months, and which could lead to
even greater carnage. I appeal to the Council to keep
Burundi at the top of its agenda and to explore all
possible options to prevent further violence, including
steps to freeze the assets of those who would incite or
who incite or engage in violence, and possible travel
bans. The Council may also wish to consider involving
Chapter VII ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations to stop
the ongoing violence and prevent a regional conflict.

The Government of Burundi should be apprised of
the very serious consequences that will ensue ifit fails
in its duty to protect all Burundians regardless of their
political opinions or other affiliations. I also ask the
Council and all Member States to give financial and
political support to the efforts of the African Union to
conduct human rights investigations in Burundi and to
assist the cause of peace. My Office will be discussing
how best to provide our support to the African
Commission investigation this week.

It is essential that an all-inclusive dialogue take
place among all stakeholders in Burundi in accordance
with the Arusha Agreement, which put an end to 12
years of massacres and warfare. The dialogue should be
led in coordination with the mediation process.

The urgent disarming of the Imbonerakure militia
and all those who illegally possess arms must figure
high on the agenda. Against the longstanding claims by
the Government that armed militias do not exist within
the Imbonerakure, there is indisputable evidence
to the contrary. If the Government has any hope of
reining in the violence, it needs to begin by disarming
the Imbonerakure and ensuring that police and the
national intelligence service members who have been
responsible for human rights violations are brought to
book. It is also vital that all opinion leaders realize that
speech that incites violence must be avoided at all cost.
What is needed is leadership and strong voices calling
for restraint, accountability and real reconciliation.

The current crisis has already undone much of
Burundi's recent political, economic and social progress.
The international community, in particular the Council,
contributed significantly to those gains. But their main
driver was public confidence in the stability and safety
of the country. The Government must urgently take
public and concrete steps to restore such confidence,
which is essential to preventing recourse to violence
and to returning Burundi to the path of peace, national
harmony and development.

