Mr. Gue'henno (spoke in French): Today's debate
on mine action comes at a timely moment: as you, Sir,
preside over the work of the Security Council. Your
country, Angola, has been among the countries most
affected by mines; unfortunately, the presence of
mines, resulting from war, continues today to claim
victims and to hamper economic recovery, the
distribution of humanitarian assistance and
development efforts in a number of provinces.
We think with sympathy of all of your
compatriots who paid a heavy price because of the
scourge posed by mines. Today's debate is particularly
appropriate since a Security Council mission has just
returned from Afghanistan where the United Nations
Mine Action Service - an integral part of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations - manages
the largest mine action programme in the world. The
mission was briefed at the Mine Dog Centre training
facility in Kabul, and learned that in Afghanistan,
7,600 Afghans, 20 international staff and 200 dogs
conduct mine action. It also learned that mine action is
both an immediate humanitarian imperative and a
precondition to reconstruction and development.

Although Afghanistan is one of the most severely
mine-affected countries in the world, the mission
learned that with current levels of funding, all high-
impacted areas can only be cleared by 2007. A number
of former combatants in Afghanistan participating in
the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration
process, led by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, will benefit from mine clearance
training that should enable them to help their countries
and be economically self-sufficient.

In Afghanistan and in Angola, you can see the
full range of mine action activities in progress: mine-
risk education to the populations of affected areas,
assistance to the victims of landmine explosions,
surveying and clearance of mined areas, destruction of
stockpiles, and advocacy efforts with military leaders
to persuade them to abandon the use of mines, in
compliance with the commitments undertaken under
the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Treaty.

This is not the first time that the Security Council
has acknowledged the contribution of mine action to
international efforts to maintain peace and security. In
August 1996, the Council discussed demining in the
context of peacekeeping operations and focused on the
need for internal coordination within the United
Nations system, as well as the need to integrate mine
action components into peacekeeping missions, when
relevant.

Since the 1996 discussion, United Nations mine
action has made remarkable progress. The United
Nations Mine Action Service within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the Children's
Fund (UNICEF) are the lead United Nations actors
undertaking and coordinating mine action initiatives.
UNDP supports national mine-action authorities in
over 20 countries. UNICEF has responsibility for mine-
risk education in 28 countries. And the United Nations
Mine Action Service has overall responsibility for the
coordination of United Nations mine action and the
management of mine-action programmes in seven
peacekeeping or humanitarian emergency contexts. The
United Nations Mine Action Service supports
initiatives in Cyprus through the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), the
Democratic Republic of the Congo through the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), Eritrea through the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE), and south Lebanon through the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), as well as
in Afghanistan, Iraq and Sudan.

Today the Security Council is going one step
further by acknowledging the contribution of mine
action to peacekeeping operations and to efforts to
maintain international peace and security.

(spoke in English)

I would like to offer a few illustrations of how this is
being done in practice.

In the Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea and
south Lebanon, mine survey and clearance operations
are essential for the safe deployment of the
peacekeeping mission, and enable the mandate to be
carried out.

Mine action can help to build confidence during
peace processes. In Cyprus, preparations have started,
with strong support from UNFICYP, with cooperation
from UNDP, to clear minefields from the buffer zone
that divide the island. While the land has potential
productive uses, the clearance programme is largely
appreciated for its political value in helping to remove
a symbol of division. In Sudan, mine action has
brought together the Government and the Sudanese
People's Liberation Movement in a unique cooperation
to clear mines in the Nuba Mountains.

Mine action engages the parties to a conflict in
humanitarian initiatives. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Mine Action Coordination Centre works
closely with peacekeepers to obtain commitments from
the parties to the conflict to refrain from the use of
mines, to destroy stockpiles and to provide information
on minefields.

United Nations mine action helps build peace and
security in more than a dozen other countries or
regions of concern to the Security Council. The United
Nations is supporting mine action in Afghanistan,
Albania, Angola, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi,
Cambodia, Croatia, Georgia, Guinea-Bissau, Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Sudan, and Tajikistan.

Mine action is a dynamic component of
peacekeeping operations and contributes to the way we
plan operations and conduct our work.

The efficient execution of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations' emergency operations
requires early planning involving mine action
specialists. Staff of the United Nations Mine Action
Service recently participated in an early assessment
mission to Liberia in advance of deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).

The Mine Action Service also provides
information on the scope and humanitarian impact of
the problems of landmines, unexploded ordnance and
explosive remnants of war, which is included in all
reports of the Secretary-General on peacekeeping
operations to the Security Council.

Multidimensional peacekeeping operations now
include child protection advisers, gender focal points
and often, mine action coordination centres. Within
DPKO, and in collaboration with other United Nations
partners, we are working to provide cross-cutting
training to these staff, and to their peacekeeping
colleagues, to ensure that their roles are
complementary and mutually supportive. Child
protection advisers and peacekeepers should be aware
of the objectives and content of mine-risk education
efforts, for example. This briefing offers an opportunity
for the Security Council to call upon a range of actors
to undertake specific actions that can greatly enhance
mine action in peacekeeping context. To this end, the
Council may wish to consider and address the
following issues in the course of its discussion this
morning.

First, there is a strong normative framework on
landmines, but an instrument that addresses
unexploded ordnance and other explosive remnants of
war would greatly facilitate post-conflict clearance
efforts. The rights of mine survivors should also be
reflected in the new instrument on the rights of
disabled persons being discussed in the General
Assembly.

Secondly, parties to conflict should be aware of
the important confidence-building role that mine action
can play. The United Nations can ensure that Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, negotiators,
moderators and facilitators of peace processes
systematically receive the United Nations Mine Action
Guidelines for Ceasefire and Peace Agreements. The
Council could urge parties to conflicts to incorporate
mine action into their discussions, whenever relevant.

Thirdly, peacekeeping troops can play an
important role in mine clearance. This has recently
been demonstrated in the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea, where the mine action
coordination centre tasks contractors and force assets
to clear and prove roads in the Temporary Security
Zone where recent mine use by unidentified groups has
undermined the confidence of local inhabitants and
posed an obstacle to the return of internally displaced
people and refugees. The Council should also consider
calling upon troop-contributing countries to train their
peacekeeping troops to demine in accordance with the
International Mine Action Standards (IMAS). The
Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian
Demining has developed IMAS for the United Nations,
and Ambassador Dahinden will tell us more about that.

Fourthly, mine clearance is an expensive
undertaking. We need to ensure that it is systematically
directed at the highest priority tasks. In that respect,
systematic information gathering is essential for
priority setting and cost effectiveness. Peacekeeping
missions can collect information on the scope and
impact of the landmine and unexploded ordnance
problem using the Information Management System for
Mine Action (IMSMA).

With guidance from the United Nations, IMSMA
was developed by the Geneva International Centre and
has now been deployed in some 30 field programmes.
Ambassador Dahinden will also tell us about IMSMA.

Fifthly, mine action can be an important part of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. I have already mentioned the process
under way in Afghanistan. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the mine action coordination centre and
non-governmental organizations are discussing the use
of demobilized soldiers to conduct mine action.

Lastly, let me stress that there is a need for funds.
Member States should be encouraged to provide
adequate and sustained financial assistance for mine
action, and thereby alleviate the suffering of
populations affected by mines, unexploded ordnance
and other explosive remnants of war.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
grateful for the leadership and support the Security
Council has shown for the integration of thematic
concerns into the mandates, staffing proposals and
budgets of peacekeeping operations. I hope that, as a
result of these briefings, Security Council members
will continue to make use of the information on mines
and unexploded ordnance contained in the Secretary-
General's reports to the Council and to fully reflect
mine action concerns in their country-specific
deliberations and resolutions.

