Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Spain for its efforts in the Security Council over the
past two years.

(spoke in English)

Today's open debate on reinforcing the preventive
system to avoid the use of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons by non-State actors, particularly
terrorists is a great opportunity to stress the key
importance of this topic to our common security. We
commend Spain for its strong engagement on resolution
1540 (2004), including by establishing the Group of
Friends of the resolution. The Group has proved to be
an important forum contributing to steering ideas and
soliciting views on the comprehensive review. Slovakia
is proud to be one of its founding members.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. Allow
me to make some remarks in my national capacity.

There is no doubt that the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction is a major global threat
to international peace and security. It should therefore
be our utmost priority to avoid and prevent weapons
of mass destruction falling into the hands of terrorists
and other non-State actors. According to the non-profit
The Investigative Project on Terrorism, the deadly
toll of terrorism around the globe has jumped nearly
eightfold in the past five years. A study has found that
an average of nearly 30,000 people per year have been
killed by terrorists since 2010, when the death toll from
terrorism was about 3,200. The authors of the study
say that the exponential increase shows two troubling
trends: more attacks are taking place and tend to be
deadlier than ever.

Furthermore, while current terrorist attacks have
been horrific, security experts fear the fallout we
could see if any of the terrorist groups were to carry
out a major attack using any type of weapon of mass
destruction. It is possible. We already know that
ambitious, violent groups and individuals - such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida
and its affiliates - are trying to find the materials they
need for an attack using weapons of mass destruction.
Preventing them from doing so is challenging but highly
necessary. It is not just a matter of strong domestic
controls over those technologies. It is a matter of
improved and strengthened international cooperation.

In that regard, I wish to highlight the importance,
centrality and contribution of resolution 1540 (2004).
It has become a significant component of the robust
global security architecture and an effective tool
in tackling the non-proliferation challenges related
to non-State actors. The comprehensive review
process has provided us with the opportunity to work
together towards its enhanced functioning. We highly
welcome the conclusions and recommendations of the
comprehensive review report. It is a firm basis for the
non-proliferation agenda in order to achieve the full
implementation of the resolution. We also welcome
today's unanimous adoption ofresolution 2325 (2016) as
a further solid contribution to global non-proliferation
efforts. Slovakia is proud to be one of the sponsors.

Three words - prevention, awareness and
assistance - are key to our efforts. Based on the
comprehensive review, we see it as essential in the
upcoming period to intensify our efforts to prevent
non-State actors from exploiting new technologies. We
should also reach out to industry and civil society to raise
awareness and create true partnerships in safeguarding
sensitive items. Countries with difficulties in national
implementation and reporting should have access to
adequate and tailored assistance.

I am pleased to inform the Council that Slovakia
has submitted to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) its updated 2016 national
report, together with a detailed, up-to-date matrix.
Both documents reflect the current state of domestic
laws and regulations for the implementation of the
resolution. Since issuing our last national report,
we have introduced a range of legislative, executive
and enforcement measures. Through the adoption of
necessary legislation on dual-use items, we have further
strengthened our national export control system.

In addition, Slovakia also contributes to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through its
participation in multilateral initiatives, such as the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. Within
the Global Initiative framework and in close cooperation
with our United States and Canadian partners and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
January 2017 Slovakia will co-host, in Bratislava, a
legal framework workshop entitled "Vigilant Marmot".
The workshop consists of three goals: first, addressing
challenges in adopting and updating national legal
frameworks for nuclear security; secondly, highlighting
obligations under international legal instruments
against radiological and nuclear terrorism; and
thirdly, considering practical models for implementing
those obligations.

To conclude, let me assure those present that
Slovakia remains fully committed to its disarmament
and non-proliferation obligations and stands ready
to continue to assist the international community in
combating proliferation threats and challenges.

