Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Cote D'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I wish at the outset, Sir, to reiterate the
congratulations of my Government on the election
of your country to the Security Council as a
non-permanent member, as well as on your first month
in the Council and your accession to its presidency. It is
my great pleasure to note that your country now chairs
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004), concnering Cote d'Ivoire. I am delighted by
this appointment and assure you of my country's full
cooperation to ensure the success that the Council
has just conferred upon you. I take this opportunity
to express also our great admiration for Chile and
Ambassador Cristian Barros Melet, who has admirably
chaired the work of the Committee in recent years.

I also wish to convey my sincere gratitude to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Ms. Ai'chatou Mindaoudou, and her team for their
outstanding work in cooperation with the Ivorian
authorities and French forces in C6te d'Ivoire. My
delegation takes note of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/940).

In 2015, political life in C6te d'Ivoire was marked
by the organization of the presidential election. The
election took place on 30 October 2015, and turnout was
51.86 per cent. According to national and international
observers, the vote was free, transparent, fair and
inclusive. Following the count, the candidate Alassane
Ouattara obtained 83.88 per cent of the votes cast and
was immediately congratulated by the other candidates
in a spirit of republicanism and fair play. Thus, the
presidential election in Cote d'Ivoire took place in a very
peaceful and almost cordial political context, reflecting
the resolve of the Ivorian people to turn its back once
and for all on the past in order to focus on progress and
development. This success should be attributed to the
Ivorians themselves, and above all the political class and
the people. It is also the fruit of exemplary cooperation
among the United Nations system, the French forces
and the Ivorian authorities. The Government of Cote
d'Ivoire reiterates its gratitude to the French forces and
to the agencies and forces ofthe United Nations in Cote
d'Ivoire.

At his inauguration, the President of the Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, announced
the main areas of reform of this five-year term and
underscored the attention he will focus in this final
term in office on national reconciliation and the
adoption ofa new constitution to guarantee equality for
all, national cohesion and institutional stability. Putting
his words into action, the President of the Republic has
started initial consultations to that end. In December
2015, in an atmosphere of great openness, he met with
representatives of the traditional chiefs, whose proposals
were very important to him, and he pledged to consider
them very carefully. In the same spirit and at the same
time, he also met with the National Commission for
Reconciliation and Compensation of Victims and with
religious leaders, and commended their contribution
to the smooth running of the presidential election. In
his new year message to the nation, the Head of State
decided to release about 3,100 prisoners, many ofwhom
had been detained following the post-electoral crisis of
2011. He contributed thereby to reducing tension within
the political climate in the country.

The success of the presidential election, like the
social and political context in which it took place,
embodies the dynamic of progress made over recent
years on many fronts, in particular reconciliation, which
I mentioned earlier; the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programme; and reform of
the judicial system and the security sector. The DDR
operation was completed on 30 June 2015, in line with
the stipulated time table. That process resulted in the
collection of 39,279 weapons, including 35,628 assault
rifles, Kalashnikovs and grenades; 3,651 shells and
rockets; and 3,277,000 munitions. The reintegration
programme has to date assisted 57,514 former
combattants, out of 74,068 in the 2012 database. That
is an implementation rate of 94 per cent for this project.

In terms of resource mobilization, I underscore
that, of a total of 84,740,953 CFA francs necessary for
the financing of the DDR process, 20,346,932 CFA
francs have been collected from partners. That is 24 per
cent of the total resources earmarked for C6te d'Ivoire.
Given these remarkable results, the National Authority
for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
has been replaced by a more flexible structure, the
Coordination and Social Reintegration Cell, under the
National Security Council, responsible for assisting
and guiding former combatants.

The reform of the justice sector is also under
way with a View, inter alia, to facilitating access to
justice for all, completing the post-crisis judicial
procedures, combating impunity and ensuring more
effective protection for human rights. On behalf of
my Government, I wish to thank the United States of
America, France and the European Union, which have
stood beside us in this important reform.

Reforms undertaken in the security sector for
the period 2012-2016 have already shown promising
signs of success. Of the 93 reforms that need to be
implemented, 34 were completed by late September
2015, representing an implementation rate is 31.62 per
cent. To date, 44 reforms are being implemented and
12 remain to be started. The security index over a
three-year period decreased from 3.2 to 1.11 in 2015,
enabling C6te d'Ivoire to achieve a satisfactory level
that is likely to guarantee its stability and development.
My Government reiterates its request for the total
lifting of the arms embargo on C6te d'Ivoire in order
to ensure that our defence and security forces can be
properly equipped so as to better monitor our borders,
particularly in the west.

The outstanding progress implemented on the
ground, to which I referred earlier, and the restored
stability lead us to anticipate the time when my country
can be removed from the agenda of the Security Council
under Chapter VII so that, as the President of the
Republic said in his latest message to the nation, we can
return in the very near future to the traditional relations
of a country at peace with our shared Organization.

The announced participation of the so-called
radical opposition in the upcoming legislative elections
confirms once again the return to a peaceful political
climate and that democracy and peace have taken root
in cote d'Ivoire. My Government therefore believes
that the end of 2017, and if necessary 2018, will be
a propitious and perfectly feasible deadline for the
withdrawal of UNOCI. My country is confident that
the United Nations country team, bolstered by its
experience on the ground and its acquired skills, is
perfectly qualified to continue, if necessary, residual
activities. With regard to security and defence matters,
the exemplary cooperation between the Forces
republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire and the international
forces has allowed the Ivorian Army to strengthen its
capabilities and ensure the security of the country.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my gratitude
to the members of the Security Council and to wish
everyone a happy new year in 2016.

