Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Pakistan fully
supports the efforts of the United Nations to achieve
peace and stability in Cote d'Ivoire. We have been a
major contributor to the United Nations operations in
Cote d'Ivoire since 2004.

While the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/377) notes Cote d'Ivoire's continuing progress
on the path to peace, it also underscores the significant
threats that still remain. Those include deep political
divisions; the presence of networks associated with
the former regime whose aim is to destabilize the
Government; mercenaries and former combatants
along the border with Liberia; weapons proliferation;
and slow progress with reconciliation, as well as with
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform. The overall security situation
in Cote d'Ivoire, particularly along the border with
Liberia - a situation that poses a threat to both
countries - is also highlighted.

A technical assessment mission led by the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations visited
C6te d'Ivoire in February to evaluate the need for
adjustments in the structure and strength of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI). In the
light of the persistent challenges and threats identified
by the mission, the Secretary-General has recommended
the progressive reduction of two additional battalions
by May 2015.

We are a little concerned about the accelerated
pace of the drawdown of the military component of
UNOCI. The recommendations of technical assessment
missions and military capability studies, which are
based on threat perceptions, security situations and
future mission requirements, should be given due
weight in Security Council decisions. Cote d'Ivoire is
entering an important phase of its stabilization as the
country approaches presidential elections in 2015. That
requires a cautious approach and careful planning in
order to avoid any setbacks or reversals of the gains
that have been made. Adopting an accelerated military
drawdown may send the wrong signal to those who are
planning to undermine the stability of Cote d'Ivoire.

I underscore Pakistan's continuing commitment to
contributing to peace and stability in C6te d'Ivoire.

