Mr. Zannier: Let me start out by expressing my
heartfelt condolences to the Russian delegation for
the passing away of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin.
Ambassador Churkin, who I knew well from my time
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Kosovo, will be remembered and missed by many
inside and outside this Chamber.

I would like to thank the Ukrainian presidency
of the Security Council for the invitation to address
members during today's open debate. As the Secretary-
General pointed out, ensuring lasting peace and
security in Europe remains a major objective of the
United Nations. But it is also at the core of the mandate
and activities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I am glad to say that
both organizations are united in their shared priority
to address conflict situations in a complementary and
mutually reinforcing manner.

After the end of the Cold War, the promise of a
common and indivisible security space from Vancouver
to Vladivostok, outlined in the Charter of Paris for a
New Europe, as well as in the Istanbul Charter, seemed
within reach. The vision ofa cooperative and rules-based
order on the 01d continent appeared irreversible. Many
across the Euro-Atlantic space looked to the OSCE with
high hopes and great expectations. But the conflicts
that followed the violent break-up of Yugoslavia and the
dissolution of the Soviet Union shattered that emerging
security paradigm. Borders shifted and re-emerged,
dividing peoples and minorities, engendering crisis
and human suffering, sowing mistrust and creating
different threat perceptions. The dire consequences of
those conflicts are still with us today.

Looking back, we must recognize today that the
order that materialized after the end of the Cold War
failed to bring about full stability or balance. Trust
and confidence in East-West relations quickly faded.
Where trust is lacking, it becomes difficult to predict
State behaviour. That is especially true in times when

uncertainty and lack of transparency are intentionally
used as political tools.
The OSCE has been a primary actor in addressing
conflicts in Europe throughout the last two decades.
The organization was transformed in the wake of
the optimism of the early 1990s and evolved again in
response to the ensuing conflicts. It continues to change
today in response to both traditional and emerging
challenges, but the fundamental characteristics of the
OSCE remain the same. It offers a genuinely holistic
view of how different elements of security interact and
must be addressed together. It can provide a bridge
between sides that sometimes have radically different
visions of what security means, and it continues to
invest in efforts to prevent destabilization and conflict,
and to deal with the consequences when they appear.

Throughout its history, the OSCE has played a clear
and active role as a regional arrangement under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In some
cases the relationship with United Nations structures
has been explicit. The OSCE Mission in Kosovo was
linked to resolution 1244 (1999) and was assigned the
lead role in matters relating to institution-building and
human rights, as a distinct but constituent component
in the framework of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. It had a clear
lead in establishing key democratic institutions such
as the Kosovo Judicial Institute, the Central Election
Commission, the Ombudsperson and the Kosovo Police
Service School. And it continues to play an active
role today.

Since the first OSCE field operations were
established, the Organization's role in south-eastern
Europe has adapted and changed in response to
changing needs and persistent challenges. This remains
the region where the OSCE continues to maintain its
largest field presence, which, along with the OSCE
institutions, is operating for stability, dialogue and
security. We have long focused on supporting election
systems in which people have confidence, and on
promoting peaceful inter-ethnic relations.

Today the OSCE also focuses on new areas,
including youth. We need a new generation able to act
as a positive force for change and stability; to question
old, divisive messages; and to call for accountable
and transparent Government and institutions. In
south-eastern Europe, as elsewhere across the OSCE
region, we face increasing threats from violent
extremism, radicalization and terrorism. The challenge
of countering these threats transcends old dividing
lines and national interests. The OSCE will continue
to work with a wide range of partners to support our
participating States in confronting this challenge.

The crisis in and around Ukraine continues to be
a major source of tension and instability in Europe.
Sadly, it has marked the return of geopolitics on the
OSCE agenda, and it is challenging our model of
cooperation. Inter-State relations are now more than
ever before governed by a zero-sum mentality that we
hoped we had left behind. In too many parts of the
OSCE region, we still find conflicts and competition
continuing, re-emerging and developing, both locally
and regionally.

Our swift and flexible response to the unfolding
crisis in and around Ukraine in 2014 is the most visible
example of the OSCE's ability to live up to its Chapter
VIII responsibilities and to take collective action
to address a crisis at both the political level and on
the ground. We established and continue to run the
Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) in Ukraine, that is
larger than any mission we have run before. Although
unarmed and civilian, the Mission is performing
quasi-peacekeeping functions, such as monitoring
and verifying the ceasefire and the withdrawal of
heavy weapons. As such, it has broken new ground
in the area of peace operations. I am pleased to
highlight that the Mission has established productive
working relationships with various United Nations
bodies, including the Security Council. On a number
of occasions, both the Chief Monitor in Ukraine,
Ambassador Apakan, and the OSCE representative in
the Trilateral Contact Group, Ambassador Sajdik, have
briefed the Council.

However, progress towards a peaceful resolution
continues to elude us. Despite the tremendous efforts to
work for peace, recent increases in fighting remind us
of the very real risk of escalation, and we are looking
at the suffering of the populations affected by combat.
The SMM. remains closely involved in supporting
adherence to a ceasefire and the implementation of
the Minsk Agreements. In that connection, I must
say that I am concerned by the recent announcement
concerning Russian recognition of documents issued
by the self-proclaimed republics, as this complicates
implementation of the Minsk agreements.

The SMM. cannot prevent ceasefire violations or
force the withdrawal of weapons that have returned to
the line of contact, with a view to ensuring the security
and freedom of movement it needs to do its job. For
that, we need the political engagement of the various
sides and the international community. We are now
monitoring the recently announced ceasefire, and we
are ready to observe the much-needed withdrawal of
heavy weapons - a key step towards de-escalation.

More generally, we are drawing on lessons
from our current operation in Ukraine to develop a
framework for future missions and crisis response. As
the SMM. moves into areas of work new to the OSCE,
we have also appreciated the expertise and advice of
the United Nations, not least on the use of technology,
including unmanned aerial vehicles. Currently, we are
in negotiations with the Department of Field Support to
conclude an agreement in order to utilize United Nations
system contracts and to purchase from the strategic
deployment stocks in Brindisi. That agreement will
be modelled on similar arrangements with the African
Union, and we intend to conclude it soon.

Although the crisis in and around Ukraine continues
to dominate the OSCE agenda, we should keep in mind
the other protracted conflicts in the OSCE area. The
OSCE has played an active role in their negotiating
processes since the 1990s. We support and facilitate
contacts through institutional support and the work of
representatives of the annual OSCE chairmanship. That
role is bolstered by the inclusive and consensus-based
nature of the OSCE. As we step up efforts to prevent
further crises and facilitate the resolution of protracted
conflicts, the readiness of the parties to conflicts to
take responsibility for resolving them remains key to
breaking out of the current stalemates.

The Nagorno Karabakh conflict has seen a
worrying deterioration on the ground. The hostilities
that erupted in April 2016 contributed to the highest
number of soldiers and civilians killed and wounded in
a single year since the May 1994 ceasefire. The use of
heavy weapons and the clear targeting of villages set a
disturbing precedent. And the risk of further fighting
remains high. The OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs
continue to seek a way to retreat from violence and
work towards a negotiated settlement. So far they have
not been able to secure agreement to implement even
modest confidence-building measures. Their work
keeps a space open for discussions and helps to manage
the conflict, but it is for the parties to choose to use that
opportunity to take a step forward towards peace.

The Transnistrian settlement process may be less
fraught with the risk of violence, but in this too we
need a fresh determination to move forward. Last year
Germany, as Chair of the OSCE, achieved renewed
activity in the 5+2 format. The Berlin Protocol last
June marked an encouraging commitment by the sides
to work for agreements. We need to maintain and build
on this momentum.

Following the conflict in 2008, we have not
managed to return to our presence on the ground in
Georgia. However, the OSCE's track record of strong
relations with the United Nations and its agencies
provides a solid basis for further development of our
relationship. We work closely together with the United
Nations and the European Union as co-chairs of the
Geneva international discussions, and as co-facilitator
of the Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism
meetings in Ergneti. The OSCE also contributes to
confidence-building in the region through targeted
initiatives on the ground.

Secretary-General Guterres has sought to launch
a surge in the diplomacy for peace and to adopt a
comprehensive approach in conflict prevention that
marries peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights. I strongly support his initiative
and look forward to working with him to achieve that.
Effective conflict prevention and resolution require
building strong coalitions, not only among international
organizations, but also with civil society and the
private sector. The inclusion of women in all stages
of the conflict cycle is key. The OSCE has developed
structures and policies to help its membership
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to ensure that
women form a natural part of its peace-building efforts.
We appreciate Secretary-General Guterres' interest
in mediation and share his view of it as a priority. In
particular, I look forward to his launch of the mediation
initiative to enhance capacities both in the field and at
Headquarters. We have pursued the same goals, within
our modest resources, and I look forward to further
developing cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in this area.

The OSCE has already established a joint strategic
work plan with the Department of Political Affairs,
including an exchange of experts from our mediation
roster and the United Nations Standby Team of Senior
Mediation Advisers. There will certainly be lessons we
can learn and share from the experiences of the United
Nations and OSCE as we try to close the gap between
early warning and early action.

The OSCE will continue to nurture and bolster
this valuable relationship with the United Nations by
making full use of the potential of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, which continues to be
underutilized. During my tenure as OSCE Secretary
General, I have strived to operationalize United Nations-
OSCE cooperation, not only in mediation, conflict
prevention and resolution, but also in other equally
important areas, such as the fight against transnational
threats or in the economic and environmental sphere.
The establishment of the United Nations Liaison Office
for Peace and Security in Vienna is a tangible outcome
of these efforts.

Looking ahead, I would like to encourage the
Secretary-General to pursue the practice of retreats with
heads of regional organizations. In this connection, we
could look into ways to establish a follow-up mechanism
to exchange best practices and promote cooperation
among regions in the field of conflict prevention and
resolution. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak
today and look forward to an interactive discussion.

