Mrs. Mahouve Same (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I should also like to thank Ms. Bertini for her
thorough briefing on the activities of the World Food
Programme (WFP) throughout the world, particularly
in Afghanistan.

Cameroon pays vibrant tribute to Ms. Bertini for
the noble and commendable work she has done in the
context of her mandate as Executive Director of the
World Food Programme (WFP). My delegation also
joins others in singing her praises.

Twenty years of continuous conflict have made
Afghanistan one of the world's main sources of
refugees and displaced persons. Today, more than 8
million Afghans need assistance to survive. Almost 20
per cent of the neediest are children under the age of
five. Since 11 September, more than 135,000 Afghans
have fled to Pakistan in search of a haven of peace and
security. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has established
refugee camps in Pakistan and Iran. The WFP currently
feeds more than 1 million Afghans in their own
country.

As everyone knows, the crisis in Afghanistan has
also affected populations that were not directly touched
by the fighting in the northern part of that country. The
public infrastructure and organizations that provided
most basic services have collapsed. Given the
exacerbation of the humanitarian crisis, and in the
context of coordinating and harmonizing the various
humanitarian actors, we are pleased to note the
multidimensional activities of the WFP, the importance
of which has been proven. We point in particular to the
provision of emergency assistance to displaced persons
and to the assistance given to many poor citizens by the
women's bakeries of Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif, which
provide some of the rare job opportunities available to
women in Afghanistan, as Ms. Bertini noted this
morning. We also welcome the WFP's interest in
defending basic rights, in particular those of women,
who, until recently, were not allowed to work outside
the health sector. Education for girls is among a
country's most lucrative investments, since it is the key
to women's autonomy.

The delegation of Cameroon welcomes the
national food aid programme recently launched by the
WFP for Afghan school children. The objective of that
programme - which aims not only at providing food
aid to the school children of that country, but also at
encouraging them to attend school - is most
commendable. We should also point out that the
programme also provides nutritional incentives to
teachers and to those who help to rebuild schools.

As regards the security of humanitarian
personnel, there is good reason to welcome the efforts
of the WFP to integrate security matters into its
training and planning activities.

The staff of the WFP works in difficult and
dangerous conditions. We must therefore pay tribute to
all those who, in gruelling and sometimes life-
threatening conditions, are striving to help those in
need.

With regard to inter-agency cooperation in the
field, my delegation welcomes the close cooperation
between the WFP, the United Nations Children's Fund,
UNHCR and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. This cooperation is a practical
demonstration of the concept of a United Nations
logistical centre. We must recall that humanitarian
interventions have become increasingly complex and
represent major challenges, especially when they
involve the massive and sudden displacement of
people. In that context, the protection of refugees and
displaced persons is increasingly a question of
partnership.

Finally, I express Cameroon's concern over the
problem of guaranteeing access to humanitarian
assistance and the responsibilities of States therein.
Although it is primarily the responsibility of States to
ensure that refugees, displaced persons and other
vulnerable people affected by conflict are protected, as
the Secretary-General so clearly stressed in his report
on protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees in
document S/l998/883, refugees, displaced persons and
other victims of conflict are entitled under international
law to enjoy the protection of international assistance
when national authorities cannot provide such
protection. However, if that right is to have any
meaning to those who supposedly enjoy it, the
recipients must have effective access to the providers
of protection and assistance. In that respect, my
country appeals to all Member States to respect the
recognized provisions of international humanitarian
law and to facilitate the work of aid agencies striving
to reach vulnerable populations and to help to restore
safe conditions for refugees and displaced persons.

I cannot conclude without once again
congratulating Ms. Bertini on behalf of the
Cameroonian Government and offering her our best
wishes for the rest of her career.

