Mr. Dinh (Viet Nam): Terrorism continues to be
one of the greatest challenges to international peace
and security, human life and dignity. As evidenced
by practical and academic studies, there exists a
context-specific connection between terrorism and
organized crime.

At the level of pragmatic collaboration, terrorists
raise funds through illicit drug trafficking, the illicit
trade in natural and environmental resources and
money-laundering, and obtain logistical support from
trafficking in firearms, whereas organized crime
weakens State capacity and governance and contributes
to increasing the space within which terrorists operate.

At a higher level of convergence, both groups are
increasingly recruiting from the same groups of people
and have even begun to merge in terms of personnel,
resources and logistical and operational activities.
That worrying trend cannot be overlooked and the
international community should develop a sustained
and comprehensive approach to preventing and fighting
the scourge of terrorism and organized crime. In this
regard, we welcome the initiative of Peru to convene
this open debate and wish to stress the following points.

First, the nexus between international terrorism
and organized crime has been acknowledged with
concern by the Security Council in several resolutions,
most notably resolution 2195 (2014). The United
Nations Convention on Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols, as well as other relevant
international agreements, have also set the standard for
international cooperation to combat organized crime.
In that respect, it is essential that Member States'
obligations under Council resolutions and relevant
conventions be implemented in a comprehensive
and innovative manner. In some cases, the resources
allocated to fighting organized crime remain modest
in comparison with those allocated to fighting
terrorism. Given this combined threat, it is high time
that efforts were stepped up to raise awareness and
apply technologies in collecting and comparing data
on the two phenomena with the aim of monitoring and
severing their interactions.

Secondly, we stress the importance of Member
States strengthening their capacity to secure their
borders against and investigate and prosecute terrorists
and transnational organized criminals working with
them. We would like to emphasize that one of the most
effective means of fighting this combined threat should
involve addressing the conditions conducive to terrorism
and criminal activities. We should strive to address
poverty, social inequality and discrimination and
accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. At the same time, we cannot
overemphasize the need for exchange of information
and intelligence and the sharing of experiences and best
practices among law and border enforcement agencies.
Any effort to combat international terrorism and
transnational organized crime must be in accordance
with the principles of international law, as enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, including the
principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and non-interference in domestic affairs.

Thirdly, at the United Nations level, we call on
the Security Council, the General Assembly and
relevant United Nations agencies to further strengthen
inter-agency cooperation in leading international
efforts. The assistance provided by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in
capacity-building and training is an important resource
for Member States to draw on.

Viet Nam condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of their motivation, whenever
and by whomsoever committed. We have spared no effort
in bringing our laws and policies into conformity with
the relevant obligations under Council resolutions and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its applicable Protocols. We have
been working closely with international agencies, such
as INTERPOL and UNODC, in countering terrorist
financing and money-laundering. In the framework of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
we have taken commendable measures to implement the
ASEAN Convention Against Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, adopted in 2015, and
the ASEAN Comprehensive Plan of Action on Counter-
Terrorism of 2017.

To conclude, let me reiterate our commitment
to working closely with the United Nations counter-
terrorism bodies and international and regional
partners to address the combined threat of terrorism and
organized crime to international peace and security.

