Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I thank you, Sir,
for convening today's debate. I congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency, and would also like
to take this opportunity to congratulate Uganda on its
presidency last month.

At the outset, I should also like to acknowledge
the efforts of the United Kingdom, including its work
this year with France on peacekeeping reform. I should
also like to thank Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Malcorra for
their statements today, for their patient presence here
with us during this debate, and for their ongoing efforts
to keep Member States informed on the progress of
initiatives to date. Finally, I should like to congratulate
the United States on its very important announcement
today that it will be paying its outstanding
peacekeeping dues.

We welcome the initiative represented in the New
Horizon non-paper. Given the constraints on time, we
will highlight just a few key points that we would like
to make in that regard.

Political support through the life cycle of a
United Nations peacekeeping mission is critical to its
overall success. There needs to be more sustained
consideration by the Council of missions during all
stages of their development, not only when a mission is

due to appear on the Security Council's agenda. In this
regard, and was as acknowledged earlier today in the
statements of Japan, New Zealand and Canada, we
agree that there is advantage in the contributions of
informal mission-specific coalitions of engaged
stakeholders. Such informal support groups can
provide valuable assistance in mobilizing political
support and resources. We think that this is a welcome
step and provides a constructive opportunity to gather
input from a wide range of stakeholders, including
troop- and police-contributing countries, on a
particular mission.

Our own membership in the core group on Timor-
Leste has enabled us to observe the benefits that wider
cooperation on a particular mission can provide,
particularly one that is integrated and involves several
non-United Nations components. The core group has
been pivotal in ensuring that Member States supporting
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
have been able to provide input into the development
of the Mission mandate, thereby ensuring their
sustained political support during the different
evolutions of the mission cycle. The leadership by
South Africa and Japan as co-Chairs of the core group
has very much assisted the group to function well.

When we create or renew peacekeeping missions,
the Security Council needs to ensure that those
missions' mandates are both credible and achievable.
This requires a clear understanding within the Council
regarding the implications of mandated tasks with
regard to resources and possible outcomes. One
particular area where this requires significant
improvement is mandating tasks on the protection of
civilians, as Under-Secretary-General Le Roy
highlighted earlier today.
The Council has been effective in including the
protection of civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. However, it is critical that we now ensure
these mandates are effectively applied in the field.
Some missions have started to develop the means to do
this, such as through the use of joint protection teams
in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or the initiative by
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur on the protection of civilians. We welcome
these developments, but stress that further work must
be done to capture the lessons that are being learned in
these missions. We need to ensure that these lessons
are shared and included in the development of training

and guidelines to assist all peacekeepers to implement
these mandates in the field.

The successful achievement of peacekeeping
mission mandates also requires the timely provision of
essential resources. Any lack of responsiveness can put
those mandates at risk. We therefore welcome the work
of the Department of Field Support in developing a
support strategy that has the potential to modernize and
globalize United Nations peacekeeping support
structures, thereby improving the protection of
Member States' personnel and resources.

We also recognize the importance of the related
issue of planning. Australia therefore welcomes the
progress achieved thus far on strengthening integrated
mission planning and hopes to see further progress
occur. We also support the development by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of guidelines
on civil-military coordination.

Australia believes that it is only through
concerted effort and input from all parties who have an
interest in United Nations peacekeeping that we will
truly be able to address the challenges that continue to
face it. Australia looks forward to working with the
Secretariat, the Security Council and other Member
States on further discussing and making progress on
some of the recommendations contained in the New
Horizon non-paper.

In closing, I would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge once again the service of those men and
women deployed to peace operations around the world.

