Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
and the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/969).
It provideds a comprehensive summary of the actions
many of us have taken to protect cultural heritage
sites since the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017) and,
perhaps more importantly, of what more we can all do
to prevent any further destruction.

In recent years, with the explosion of conflicts
across much of the Middle East and Africa, terrorists
have endeavoured to destroy not only the ways in
which we choose to live today, but also our heritage
and the records of how humankind existed in the past.
This attempt to annihilate cultures that are not their
own - whether through genocide, ethnic cleansing
or war crimes - all too often goes hand in hand with
the destruction of cultural heritage and identity. As we
have seen in Palmyra, in Nimrud and Timbuktu, these
brutal groups do not limit themselves to demolition,
but also profit in trading artefacts that should belong
to all and not to selfish individuals. With this trade,
they fund more of their activities, be they attempts to
expand their territories, inflict terror abroad or disperse
their propaganda.

That is why we particularly welcome the
International Criminal Court's sentencing of an
individual for directing attacks against religious and
historic buildings in Timbuktu, as discussed in the
Secretary-General's report, and we encourage the
Court to prosecute all individuals who contribute
towards this crime to serve as a deterrent to those who
may be inclined to similar actions in the future. We also
welcome the education and awareness-raising projects
listed in the Secretary-General's report. I would like to
commend Italy for its leadership on cultural protection.
In addition to unified international action through legal
and judicial instruments, this kind of practical action is
essential to support those countries most at risk.

May I join others in congratulating Ms. Audrey
Azoulay on her election as Director-General of
UNESCO and in welcoming her today. We believe that
UNESCO has a meaningful role to play in this area.
We encourage the new Director-General to review
UNESCO activity with a view to focusing resources
on programmes and projects that will have the greatest
impact and the demonstrable value for money.

To secure progress, public funding needs to be
matched by investment from philanthropists and the
private sector. I commend those trusts and foundations
that are already supporting work in this area. We need
more organizations to follow their lead and work in
partnership with national Governments, multilateral
agencies and civil society to protect our shared heritage
for the benefit of humankind.

Allow me to take a few moments to discuss the
United Kingdom's national actions in this area. Since
the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017), we have ratified
the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and
acceded to both of its Protocols. This demonstrates the
importance we place on responding forcefully to the
destruction of cultural heritage by terrorists, looters
and other malign forces.

Our enforcement agencies are continuing their
efforts to prevent elicit artefacts from entering or
leaving the United Kingdom. Considering the size of
the United Kingdom's antiques market, we hope this
will continue to have a significant impact. We have
also established a cultural protection fund, initially of
$40 million, which is already helping to protect and
conserve heritage at risk in conflict areas and providing
the skills and expertise that are sorely needed to ensure
that our shared heritage is safe for future generations.

This will also play an important role in post-
conflict situations and support reconciliation between
communities and nations. We know that heritage sites
that receive proper protection can produce economic,
as well as social benefits, for example through
sustainable tourism. Our cultural protection fund is
already supporting projects in Afghanistan, Lebanon,
Egypt, the Sudan, Yemen and Turkey, but we are keen
to support other projects across the Middle East and
North Africa, so we are exploring the scope to extend
the programme to other regions where cultural heritage
is at risk.

As the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
world heritage sites and other iconic monuments and
artefacts have been subjected to wilful destruction.
We should and must do all that we can to prevent a
recurrence of such acts. Civilization, education and our
shared cultural heritage will prevail over destruction,
barbarism and the division of terrorists.

