Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
We join the other Security Council members in
thanking Mr. Prendergast for the detailed and complete
briefing he gave us on developments in the situation in
Somalia. I also wish to thank Mr. Olhaye, the
Permanent Representative of Djibouti, for the detailed
information he shared with us regarding the progress
made in the implementation of the peace process. I
wish to pay a tribute on this occasion to President
Guelleh for his commendable initiative and efforts to
convene the Somalia National Peace Conference.

I would like to reiterate my country's
commitment to a peaceful settlement of the Somali
crisis, which must take into consideration the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Somalia,
thereby promoting national reconciliation in that
country. A political solution to the crisis on the basis of
the broadest possible participation of all components of
Somali society is, in our opinion, a prerequisite for the
success of all efforts under way. The restoration of
peace and stability in Somalia also requires the
financial and technical support of States and
international organizations for the Djibouti
Government's efforts.

The holding of the Somalia National Peace
Conference at Arta in Djibouti represents important
progress towards a definitive and comprehensive
solution in the framework of the peace process. Above
and beyond the Conference itself, that meeting reflects
the determination and commitment of the Somali
people to moving forward and to participating in
reconstruction and the establishment of a national
transitional authority.

In this regard, we appeal to the parties that have
not yet joined the peace process to avoid hampering the
participation of those who wish to participate in it. We
believe that all Somalis must take this opportunity to
participate in restoring lasting stability and security to
Somalia, which for decades has experienced only
destabilization and where at least one entire generation
has not had the opportunity to lead a normal life in
safety and with the hope of being able to plan its long-
term future.

My country, being African and Arab, has worked
tirelessly for Somalia to become reconciled with itself
and for the Somalis, who are entitled to live in peace,
to become aware of their common destiny, which has
been and remains impossible to shape outside the
framework of a common national identity.

There is no need to emphasize that everyone
shares the disquiet felt by all Somalis when they hear it
said that a given crisis, whether in Africa or elsewhere,
can be compared to Somalia because of the derogatory
connotations of the name of that country - which is in
fact full of goodwill and inhabited by a noble people
with a great history and high hopes. Seeing the image
of that fraternal country used as a media leitmotif is
painful to us in Tunisia, throughout the Arab world, in
Africa and elsewhere, because we know that the
Somali people do not deserve to be held up as a bad
example.

As Chairman of the Security Council Committee
on Somalia sanctions I have, with the valuable
assistance and support of all other members of the
Committee, revived the Committee's meeting with a
view to creating the best conditions for strict respect
for the arms embargo. Our approach in the Committee
cannot and must not be perceived as punitive; quite the
contrary, we see it - and all members will agree - as
a way to make an effective contribution to ensuring
that the language of weapons, which has for long years
only fuelled the cycle of violence and discord in
Somalia, will yield to negotiation and to dialogue,
which alone can make possible a national solution in
Somalia and lasting reconciliation among Somalis.

In our work in that Committee, we have involved
all States members of the United Nations, of the
Organization of African Unity, of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and of the League of Arab
States to help ensure that the embargo is observed and that
it yields the results expected of it. It is in that framework
that the Committee intends to send a mission to the region
in order to secure the broadest possible participation by the
parties concerned. The Secretariat is now making
arrangements for the mission.

