Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
During the recent period the situation in Sierra Leone has
remained relatively stable, and the Lome Peace
Agreement is on the whole being implemented. However,
as Mr. Annabi pointed out, there are still numerous
destabilizing factors within the country, and the situation
remains fragile. We are particularly concerned about
recent words and deeds of the Revolutionary United Front
and of Mr. Sankoh, and about the possible effects of these
words and deeds on the peace process. We are deeply
disquieted by the fact that the humanitarian situation
remains grim and by the frequency of human rights
violations. We hope that the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants will be undertaken in
a timely and effective manner.

The Chinese delegation pays tribute to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) for their
outstanding work in maintaining stability and promoting
the peace process in Sierra Leone over such a long period
of time. We also note the observation of the Secretary-
General, contained in his letter of 23 December 1999, that
due to changed circumstances, ECOMOG will no longer
be able to continue its vital mission in Sierra Leone; in
particular it will no longer be able to provide security in
Freetown and at the international airport at Lungi or to
protect the Government of Sierra Leone.

China has always advocated timely and practical
action by the Council in support of the peace process in
Sierra Leone. In View of the present situation and the
request of the Government of Sierra Leone, we fully
endorse the recommendation contained in the Secretary-
General's report: to expand the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and broaden its mandate.

After several rounds of consultations, the draft
resolution to be voted upon now basically reflects the
views of all sides in a comprehensive and balanced
manner. Therefore, we support this draft resolution.

We are also gratified to note that the first phase of
the deployment of UNAMSIL is being speeded up, and

 

we appreciate the efforts of the Secretariat in this regard.
At the same time, it is our hope that after the adoption
today of the draft resolution by the Security Council, the
Secretariat will move quickly to implement it, so that
reinforcements will soon be in place to expeditiously carry
out the transfer from ECOMOG and so that UNAMSIL can
take up its duties pursuant to the provisions of the
resolution as soon as possible.

