Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to warmly thank Argentina for organizing
this debate on an amibitious set of topics, and the
two speakers - Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and
Ms. Kimberly Prost, Ombudsperson of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities - whose mandates and interaction with
the Council are among those that best reflect recent
developments within the Security Council in the
direction of greater transparency, accountability and
consideration of issues related to human rights.

We are of the view, in 2014, that the Prosecutor
and the Ombudsperson have become integral parts
of the institutional landscape of the Council, yet we
must recall that this is a very recent development. I
wish to touch on three points: the results of our work
within the framework of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions;
the need for the Council to drag itself into the twenty-
first century, an era of accountability, by setting up a
follow-up mechanism for its relations with the ICC; and
updating the sanctions regimes.

First, concerning methods of work, I would like
to begin by commending the assessment made by
the Argentine chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions regarding methods and substance. Those
are not mere words. The Security Council is master of
its procedures, yet it must not cease to work towards
greater effectiveness in its tasks. From that point of
View, the Working Group under the chairmanship of
Argentina has fulfilled its role over the past two years.

In 2013, we welcomed the adoption of two
presidential notes regarding dialogue with troop-
contributing countries (S/2013/630), on the one hand,
and interaction with Council non-member States
(S/2013/515), on the other. This year, presidential notes
S/2014/268, on the penholders of resolutions and other
documents of the Council, and S/2014/393, on the
chairmanship of subsidiary bodies, are steps in the
right direction. I recall that all members of the Council
are called upon to shoulder their responsibilities. We
support opening up the Council to speakers who can
inform us of mass crimes, such as Mr. Adama Dieng,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide.

We support the efforts of the Argentine presidency
regarding multilingualism. Among the members
of the Security Council, if I am counting correctly,
there are at least eight of us expressing ourselves in a
language other than English. That is a strong symbol
of the diversity of the Council, which reflects the very
diversity of the States Members of the United Nations.
We count on the ongoing, sustained, strengthened
and stepped-up commitment and the support of the
Secretariat to take all the necessary measures to ensure
that multilingualism, which is our common wealth,
remains a reality. I recall that there are two working
languages for the Secretariat and six official languages
at the United Nations.

The importance we attach to the issue of working
methods does not mean that we can sidestep bold
reforms of the Council so as to ensure that it better
reflects, in a fairer way, the realities of today's
world, while strengthening its ability to fully assume
its responsibilities in terms of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Secondly, on issues of international criminal
justice, I endorse all the observations made by
Prosecutor Bensouda. We commend Argentina and
the members of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, who introduced this topic as one
of method. They were right to do so. We have entered
into what the Secretary-General has referred to as an
era of accountability, in which the Council, with its
role of maintaining peace, coexists alongside a system
of international criminal justice, centred around the
International Criminal Court - a permanent, universal
body complementing national courts.

We interact on a daily basis. The Council, with
its role in preventing crises, ensures the fight against
impunity, which is one of the basic missions of the
Court. At the level of conflict settlement, the Court
must not wait for armed conflicts to end before opening
investigations. At the post-conflict level, the Council
seeks to strengthen national jurisdictions to enable
them to take over from the ICC in prosecuting the
most serious crimes, in keeping with the principle of
complementarity enshrined in the Rome Statue. That
interaction between the Council and the ICC must of
course lead us to revise our working methods and to
strengthen the Council's follow-up of decisions related
to the ICC, including on essential issues, such as arrests.
We support an effective follow-up mechanism, which
could be a subsidiary body of the Council.

Thirdly, we must consider the timeliness and
effectiveness of the sanctions regime. Sanctions, as
we all know, are an essential tool for the Security
Council in carrying out its responsibilities in terms
of maintaining international peace and security, and
we should welcome the improvements made in recent
years with this tool. Sanctions are now targeted and
procedural safeguards have been put in place. We attach
great importance, in particular, to the use of sanctions
within the framework of combating terrorism. We have
seen that recently with the imposition of sanctions
under Al-Qaida regime against two entities and more
than a dozen individuals involved in supplying foreign
fighters. If the fight against Al-Qaida, and now Daesh,
is to progress, we must clearly remain vigilant in regard
to the implementation of those sanctions.

It is also crucial to respect the fundamental
freedoms of individuals inscribed on the sanctions list
and to ensure that sanctions regimes include appropriate
procedural safeguards. It behooves us to note thatjust as
each crisis is unique, each sanctions regime is different,
and the needs in terms of procedural safeguards are
also different. In 2006, France launched the initiative of
creating a focal point that would enable individuals and
entities inscribed on the Committees' lists to request
delisting. The adoption of resolution 1904 (2009)
allowed us to go further with the creation of the post of
Ombudsperon to clarify all information provided by the
petitioners, which is an essential aid to the Committee in
the framework of its decision-making. The subsequent
resolutions have improved procedural safeguards by
strengthening the role of the Ombudsperson. I take
this opportunity to commend the outstanding quality
of work carried out by the Ombudsperson within the
framework of the Al-Qaida Committee. She enjoys
France's full confidence.

In conclusion, I wish to return to a priority issue
for French authorities. Three times, the Syrian crisis
has highlighted an impasse in which the Security
Council has found itself when faced with the excessive
use of the right of veto. Two years ago, the President of
Republic, Mr. Francois Hollande, spoke to the General
Assembly (see A/67/PV.4) of the need to establish a
code of conduct for permanent members of the Council
to limit the right of veto. During the ministerial week
of the General Assembly, the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Laurent Fabius, and his Mexican
counterpart convened their peers to discuss our project
to persuade the five permanent members of the Security
Council to collectively and voluntarily suspend their
use of the veto when a situation of mass crimes was
under consideration. We need to reflect together on
the nature and content of that project, but we will not
abandon it. The other permanent members need to
commit themselves.

The Security Council must seize the opportunity
to make an in-depth review of the way it functions to
meet the challenges of the twenty-first century. The
world is changing. Threats are evolving. We must be
the willing actors of that change. We must demonstrate
upon the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of our
Organization that we are capable of innovation to be
both more effective and more fair.

