Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): Mr. President, We
join other delegations in thanking you and your delegation
for having taken the initiative to convene this important
meeting.

The Netherlands delegation welcomes the Joint
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is encouraging
to see that despite the many difficulties that still exist
among the entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Presidency has come to the Council today as one.

We also welcome the New York Declaration, which
Members of the Joint Presidency have issued on the
occasion of their appearance before the Security Council.
We interpret their joint presence in this Chamber as a
testimony to their commitment to the enhancement of the
functioning of the common institutions. Only with
properly functioning common institutions will Bosnia and
Herzegovina be able to deal with the tasks that lie ahead.

The Netherlands regards the return of minority
refugees to their places of residence as the core of the
Dayton Agreements. The spontaneous return of minority
refugees, which is just now gaining momentum, is a sign
of hope and should not only be welcomed but also be
financially supported. In this regard, we welcome the
efforts of the High Representative to persuade the
European Commission and other donors to continue
providing flexible funds for this purpose.

However, if the Bosnian authorities at the national,
cantonal and local level do not provide the facilities to
make the return process possible, our common goal will
not be attained. This involves creating a minimum of
goodwill and tolerance by implementing confidence-
building measures, such as receiving delegations of
potential returnees, but it also concerns the creation of
legal conditions and the provision of financial means to
solve practical matters.

Improvement on this score is needed, as was
illustrated by the fact that the new property law was
adopted only after instructions had been issued by the
High Representative. Another example is inadequate
budgeting for return projects while institutions that could
generate revenue - for example, a State border
service - are slow in getting off the ground. In this
connection, we have noted and welcomed the reference to
the State border service in the New York Declaration.

Delays in taking the necessary measures also occur
in the field of privatization, almost always as a result of
political quarrels among the communities. One example
is the case of the Privatization Bureau in Mostar, which
refuses to review privatization decisions taken hastily
during the war, for fear that irregularities might come to
light. Because of this attitude, the World Bank's

 

adjustment loan for the private sector destined for the
Federation narrowly escaped being blocked.

The Bosnian leadership must not resign itself to these
shortcomings. We expect it to muster all its courage and to
set an example for all the subsidiary levels of government
in the State by embarking on genuine cooperation for the
benefit of all the inhabitants of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

