Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to
express our appreciation to the Swedish presidency
for convening this important debate, in line with
Sweden's principled defence of international law and
the protection it provides, especially for those who
are most vulnerable, including refugees and migrants
and the children among them. I thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2018/465), and am grateful
to the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF for
their valuable briefings and the representative of
civil society from Colombia for her powerful speech.
The State of Palestine also welcomes the Council's
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2427 (2018).
The protection of civilians has been seen as a top
priority since the Second World War. More than 70 years
later, it is therefore difficult to explain the gap that has
persisted between States' clear legal obligations and
their failure to ensure accountability, which continues
to render civilians, including children, extremely
vulnerable in situations of armed conflict around
the world. Prevention, protection and accountability
are indispensable for saving future generations from
the scourge of war. The State of Palestine stresses
the importance of ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law, as well as for human rights and
refugee law, as they are central to the protection of
children and all civilians in armed conflict, including
those suffering under foreign occupation. We underline
the importance of international criminal law for holding
the perpetrators of crimes accountable, providing justice
to victims and preventing any recurrence of crimes.

Having acceded to the core conventions relating
to human rights and international humanitarian law,
and to the International Criminal Court, the State of
Palestine has also acceded to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We have
also endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and support
the joint statement made today in that regard. We call
for the universal acceptance and implementation of all
the relevant legal instruments.

Children must be protected from killing and
maiming, recruitment, arrest, detention and ill
treatment. Deliberate attacks on schools and closures
of educational institutions, as well as denials of
humanitarian access, must cease. The children of
Palestine have been enduring all of these ills for
decades with a striking lack of protection, despite
the laws intended to protect all children and our
repeated calls for the protection of the Palestinian
civilian population. At a time when everyone stresses
the importance of psychosocial support to children
suffering from the consequences of armed conflicts,
Palestinian children are about to be deprived of such
support, owing to the defunding of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). The Israeli occupying forces'
intentional targeting of peaceful protesters in the Gaza
Strip, including children, and the forced transfer of
civilians in Abu Nuwar and Khan Al-Ahmar, which
affects Palestinian children most of all, are only the
most recent examples in that regard. We hope that the
upcoming report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to General Assembly resolution ES-10/20, on the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population, will
include practical recommendations to assure protection
for our people, including children. Palestine emphasizes
that all these well-documented Israeli crimes plead
clearly for including Israel and its settlers on the list of
parties committing grave violations affecting children
in situations of armed conflict. The failure to include
them seriously affects the list's credibility and makes it
vulnerable to criticisms that it is politicized.

The Secretary-General's report should have made
specific reference to Israel's prolonged military and
colonial occupation and its ongoing blockade of the
Gaza Strip as the foundation for its widespread and
systematic violations of the Charter of the United
Nations, international humanitarian law and human
rights, including rules aimed at protecting children.
The absence of such explicit references fails to reflect
the reality on the ground and undermines the efforts to
address the root causes of the conflict and the ongoing
mass violations of the rights of the Palestinian people.
We also call on the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict to publicly denounce the crimes
committed against Palestinian children. We believe that
an expression of this kind would have been important
during Israel's violent repression of peaceful protests
in the Gaza Strip, in which 19 Palestinian children have
been killed to date.

We do, however, fully recognize the critical role
that the United Nations plays in Palestine, and we would
like to express our appreciation for it, particularly to
UNRWA, which is going through one of the most severe
crises in its history. We want to appeal once again for
urgent support to the Agency so that it can continue
fulfilling its vital mandate, including for the provision
of education, which all agree is central to ensuring
children's protection, well-being and development. As
the painful situation in Palestine demonstrates, only
by ending impunity for violations and crimes against
children can we preserve their lives, their rights and the
future they embody.

