Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the assumption
by the United Kingdom of the stewardship of the
Council for the month of December and to wish you
every success in that endeavour. You may count on my
delegation's unreserved support. Our congratulations
also go to Ambassador Andrey Denisov of the Russian
Federation for his outstanding presidency in
November.

Furthermore, I wish to express my delegation's
commendation to you, Sir, for convening this meeting,
following the visit by the Security Council to the Great
Lakes region of Africa last month. Allow me also
address my sincere appreciation to Ambassador Jean
Marc de La Sabliere for his very successful leadership
of the mission and for the comprehensive report on the
Council's mission (S/2005/716).

Security Council missions to Africa have
provided an unmatched opportunity to discuss with the
leaders of the countries visited progress achieved and
ways forward in finding durable solutions to
longstanding peace and security challenges on our
continent.

During its visit last month to the Great Lakes
region, the Security Council had another opportunity to
witness positive political developments in Burundi and
reaffirm the Council's determination to accompany the

transition of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
towards its peaceful conclusion through a transparent
and democratic electoral process, which is to be
concluded on 30 June 2006.

While my delegation appreciates the Security
Council's efforts to lend continuous support to political
processes aimed at ending the conflict crises that have
so destructively affected the countries of our region
during the past decade, it is our belief that the Council
should adopt a more conclusive approach towards the
underpinnings of the perpetuation of instability in the
Great Lakes region so as to achieve sustainable peace
and prosperity.

It has been more than obvious that peace
processes in the region have been consistently
undermined by the unrestricted military activities of
the negative forces operating on the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, from where they
have been carrying out deadly armed attacks in
neighbouring countries and regularly committing
untold atrocities against innocent civilian populations.
As far as Rwanda is concerned, it is needless to remind
this body that the instability along our border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during the past
decade - created by the uninterrupted and unhindered
military activities of the ex-Forces armees rwandaises
(FAR)/Interahamwe - could not be addressed in an
appropriate manner, despite the numerous appeals
made by my Government to the international
community to work out solutions to put an end to that
continued threat.

Surprisingly, the Council has, time and again,
taken the position that those negative forces had to
disarm voluntarily. My Government's reservations as
to the efficiency of such an approach have been
vindicated by the paltry results achieved so far in
causing the negative forces to effectively disarm. Their
leadership has, all along, been adamant in its refusal to
respond to the multiple - albeit lenient - appeals
from the Council, while fiercely obstructing those who
have attempted to disarm and go home. That approach
has resulted in the political and military consolidation
of the negative forces and in unwelcome and recurrent
tensions among the countries within the region.

My delegation wishes to place on record our
satisfaction with the Security Council's recent position
that the voluntary disarmament of negative forces has
reached its limits and that it can no longer be
advocated as an efficient way to dismantle the
networks of armed groups, as expressed in the
presidential statement issued on 4 October 2005
(S/PRST/2005/46) and emphasized during the
Council's most recent visit to the Great Lakes region.

Beyond that very important new stand, however,
there is a need for decisive and speedy action to follow
if we are to turn that mere will into a tangible outcome.
Past experiences in that regard have proved that failure
to match political will with resolute action has served
to strengthen the negative forces' resolve to carry out
their initial destructive plans. The Ituri course of action
taken by the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has
instead proved that sustained pressure, combined with
forceful measures, can help to annihilate these
networks of spoilers. My Government is convinced that
that such an approach could have the same outcome if
it is extended to and intensified in the areas where the
ex-FAR/Interahamwe are deployed.

Here, I should recall that, in their meeting in
Kampala on 21 October 2005, the Foreign Ministers of
the countries of the Tripartite Plus One Joint
Commission unanimously called upon the Security
Council to consider giving MONUC a more robust
mandate so that it could embark on forceful
disarmament of the negative forces. A letter was jointly
conveyed to the President of the Council transmitting
specific language to legitimize that aim. That joint
endeavour created a momentum that needs to be fully
sustained by the Council, including by devising more
solid strategies to deal with the issue of disarming the
negative forces once and for all.

My delegation looks forward to the draft
resolution currently being considered by the Security
Council as an unprecedented breakthrough in that
regard. We anticipate that it will be specifically and
unequivocally devoted to resolving the question of the
disarmament of the negative forces. In that respect, my
delegation wishes to take this opportunity to call upon
the Council to diligently consider the proposals made
by the representatives of the Tripartite Plus One Joint
Commission countries so as to come up with a truly
strong and purposeful draft resolution. The countries in
our region are more than ever resolved to work
together to find a durable solution to the question of
the disarmament, repatriation and reintegration of their
nationals held hostage by the hard-liners leading these
armed groups. A purposeful and action-oriented draft
resolution would greatly complement that regional
momentum. I wish to reiterate that Rwanda, for its
part, has set up all the necessary arrangements for the
reception and reintegration of those who would be
returning to their countries. I wish to take this
opportunity to express our most sincere gratitude to
those in the international donor community who have
been providing, and are still willing to provide,
assistance in that connection.

I cannot conclude my remarks without referring
to the list recently published by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I should like to state that that list falls short in
terms of comprehensiveness. It cites two individuals
from the leadership of the Forces democratiques pour
le liberation du Rwanda. We understand that those two
individuals are part of a much larger group, which has
been constantly acting in violation of the measures
provided for in resolution 1596 (2005). We hope that
the draft resolution under consideration will help to
address that concern and that it will impose the
contemplated measures not on a limited number of
individuals, but on the armed groups or entities to
which they belong. That would be one concrete
measure that could contribute efficiently to their
disarmament.

In conclusion, the added value of the Security
Council's visits to the Great Lakes region is certainly
self-evident. Allow me to underline, however, that their
relevance would be greatly enhanced if they helped to
generate real momentum for the resolution of problems
facing our region. The disarmament of negative forces
is a key problem. It is my Government's strong view
that this year's visit will have value to the extent that it
assists in coming up with effective and workable
measures to put an end to the actions of the negative
forces, including the ex-FAR/Interahamwe. We look
forward to next year's visit as devoted to celebrating
the success achieved in that respect and to an exchange
of views regarding other constructive agendas.

