Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): On
31 July, the Security Council adopted resolution 1696
(2006) which made mandatory the suspension required
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of
enrichment-related and reprocessing activities in Iran.
The Council called upon Iran, without further delay, to
take the steps required by the IAEA Board of
Governors to act in accordance with the provision of
the Additional Protocol and to implement all
transparency measures as the IAEA may request.

The resolution set a deadline of 31 August for
Iranian compliance. Iran's response was to step up its
sensitive activities and offer to export the technologies
it developed to other countries. The IAEA reported in
November that Iran continued to provide insufficient
transparency to help the Agency resolved outstanding
issues and remove uncertainties.

In sum, Iran has simply thumbed its nose at the
Council and defied international law. Bearing in mind
the Council's primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and in

this regard taking with utmost seriousness the threat
from the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
the Council unequivocally expressed its intention in
resolution 1696 (2006) to adopt measures under Article
41 of the Charter of the United Nations in the event of
Iranian non-compliance.

And that is what we have done today. We have
adopted resolution 1737 (2006) under Chapter VII of
the Charter, and in this we reiterate and expand the
Council's mandatory suspension of Iran's proliferation-
sensitive activities. We have also established an
embargo aimed at preventing Iran from importing the
items and material that will sustain its proliferation-
sensitive activities.

In addition to taking steps to inhibit Iran's
proliferation-sensitive activities, the Council has
introduced a set of measures intended to persuade Iran
to stop pursuing activities of concern. This resolution
underlines the seriousness of the situation, including
the international community's lack of confidence about
the direction of Iran's policies.

But, importantly, the door is not closed for Iran.
The United Kingdom, France and Germany, with the
European Union High Representative, Javier Solana,
have led negotiations with Iran. We remain committed
to seeking a diplomatic, negotiated solution with Iran,
based on cooperation. A new relationship between the
European Union and Iran is on the table, but it must be
with an Iran which eschews nuclear weapons.

In resolution 1737 (2006), the Council makes
clear that Iran's suspension of enrichment and
reprocessing activities will permit negotiations to
resume and intensify, this time with the United States,
Russia and China engaged alongside France, Germany
and the United Kingdom.

For this reason, in the pursuit of a negotiated
agreement to resolve the situation, it is vital that all
States implement the resolution as fully and
comprehensively as possible. This means taking
immediate action, including by adopting the necessary
legislation to pave the way for rapid and robust
implementation. Without that, we cannot expect the
Council to be able to meet its objectives.

In the event that Iran does not change course, the
Council has committed itself in this resolution to the
adoption of further measures. Iran, therefore, faces a
choice. The vote today illustrates the gravity of that
choice and the seriousness with which we, as a
Council, view Iran's behaviour.

We hope Iran will heed the decision of the
Council and return to negotiation to resolve the nuclear
dossier. This, in turn, would open the way for the
European Union and Iran to develop a new and wider
relationship to our mutual benefit and to the benefit of
international peace and security.

