Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her briefing on the eighteenth report of her Office. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan for his briefing.

Before giving our comments on the report, I would
once again like to emphasize here that Togo is not yet
a State party to the Rome Statute of the ICC. We also
reaffirm the position of the African Union regarding
the status of sitting Heads of State and Government in
relation to the ICC.

The report before us presents the challenges
weighing on the hope for progress with respect to
the judicial activities, ongoing investigations and
cooperation with States in the fight against impunity
that is being conducted by the International Criminal
Court with regard to the situation in Darfur.

As to the judicial activities, and especially the case
of Mr. Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain, Togo, as it
has reiterated in its statements on the last three reports
of the Prosecutor, hopes to see a development of ICC
case law to facilitate cooperation of the Prosecutor
and States with the defence in order to mitigate the
consequences of security problems encountered by the
defence in accessing evidence for holding a hearing
on the merits. We fear that the continuation of that
situation will cause further delays of the start date of
the trial scheduled for 5 May 2014, to the detriment of
the right of the accused to be tried without undue delay
and contrary to the expectations of victims for speedy
justice. While it is true that there is no definition of
a reasonable timetable in international law, and that
everything depends on the complexity and the history
of each case, objective indicators allow us to assert
that a postponement of the start date could lead to an
unjustifiable delay.

As to cooperation between the United Nations, the
Security Council and ICC States, we regret the lack of
Council follow-up on cases that it has referred to the
Court. As Togo has mentioned in prior meetings on
the subject, the Council must improve its cooperation
and communication with the Court by answering or at
least acknowledging that it has received notifications
addressed to it. In addition, Togo hopes that relations
between the ICC and States will strictly respect the
principle of complementarity, which imposes on
those States the primary obligation of pursuing and
judging perpetrators of crime. With respect to ongoing
investigations, my country reiterates its appeal for an
end to intercommunal clashes and violence as well as
persistent violations and abuses of human rights and
humanitarian law involving militias despite the many
calls for them to end.

We would encourage the Prosecutor to continue
monitoring and advancing the investigations of crimes
that continue to be committed. In that regard, we remain
concerned by aerial bombings and indiscriminate
ground attacks against civilians, including women
and children, even in camps for internally displaced
persons, widespread sexual and gender-based violence,
and attacks on human rights advocates, members of civil
society and community chiefs. We are also concerned
by the recruitment of child soldiers and intentional
actions aimed at provoking total or partial destruction
of ethnic groups.

Once again, we express our concern about attacks

and abductions of humanitarian workers and members of
peacekeeping forces, which have cost the lives of brave
soldiers-peacekeepers of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Togo calls upon the
Office of the Prosecutor to advance the investigations
of the killing of African Union soldiers in 2007 and all
other attacks that followed in order to shed light on the
circumstances and identify the perpetrators so that they
can answer for their actions.

In conclusion, we hope that there will be peace
in Darfur as soon as possible. We believe that the
international community must do much more to bring
the parties together, in particular those who deliberately
place themselves outside the Doha Agreement, so they
can make up their minds to undertake to do what is
necessary for the reconciliation and political settlement
that the people of Darfur very much need.
