Mr. Pal (India): We thank Colombia for calling
this open meeting on small arms and we are honoured
that you, Sir, are presiding over it. As Ambassador
Valdivieso's paper makes clear, the focus of this
meeting is wider than that of the Conference last month
on the illicit trade in small arms, but the larger
problems the Council will consider grow from the same
roots.

As the Council said in its presidential statement
in September 1999,

"the prevention of illicit trafficking is of
immediate concern in the global search for ways
and means to curb the wrongful use of small
arms, including their use by terrorists".
(S/PRST /1 999/28)

Perhaps 1 per cent of the global stock of small arms is
illicitly held, but that comes to 5 million weapons.
Conflict diamonds constitute a similar tiny fraction of
the global trade in roughs, but the international
community is trying to put in place a stringent,
verifiable system of controls to make illicit trade much
more difficult. The Council has given that process its
support; indeed, the international effort to identify and
ban conflict diamonds started here, and proscribing the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons must have
at least as high a priority.

Like any other commodity, the trade in small
arms is licit only if both exports and imports go
through official, legal channels. Arms exports by a
Government that violate none of its laws are
nevertheless illicit if the weapons are sent to non-state
actors in another country, bypassing or subverting laws
there. Since terrorists and non-state actors exploit this
loophole, buying arms on the international market
when they are not covertly or illegally supplied by
States that promote terrorism, the international
community must agree - as it was unable to do at the
Conference last month - that the trade in arms must,
as the rest of international trade does, flow only
through channels authorized by both exporting and
importing Governments.

Members of this Council, given its role in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
obviously have a special responsibility, and none more
so than the permanent members, both because they are
the largest arms exporters in the world and because, if
they break the law, they can use the veto to protect
themselves.
Over the last decade, the Council has established
embargoes to cut off the supply of arms to such violent
non-state actors as UNITA, the Revolutionary United
Front and the Taliban. When the Council found that
these were easily bypassed, investigations it authorized
showed how international criminal networks were
being used to sell diamonds and supply arms in Angola
and Sierra Leone. In Afghanistan, the principal exports
of the Taliban are drugs and terrorism, and the arms
embargo is as riddled with holes as the latticework for
which one of its neighbours is famous. We hope that
the monitoring mechanism that the Council set up for
Afghanistan a few days ago will do its work well. If the
arms embargo is still flouted, we expect the Council, as
it has in West Africa, to tackle the problem at its roots
and to take measures against those responsible.

Elsewhere, as the United Nations tries to help
build peace after a conflict, disarmament is often the
first and knottiest challenge its peacekeepers face. Your
working paper, Mr. President, asks what happens to the
small arms collected in a disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration campaign. They must be destroyed,
but that is often the problem easiest to resolve. Many
of those who fight in these internecine conflicts have
grown up with arms; in the world they know, a gun is
the only means, they think, of staying alive. It protects
them and they use it to force others to give them food
and shelter. Unless the United Nations offers them
security and they have other means of livelihood, most
do not give up their arms or give up only a few of
them. This means that the United Nations must send its
peacekeepers so well-armed and equipped that they can
truly offer security to all sections of the local
population and face down those who refuse to give up
their arms. It also means that the international
community must be generous with its support for the
economic programmes of rehabilitation. Without this,
combatants could be driven, by the fear of destitution if
nothing else, to keep their arms.

Over the past 50 years, small arms have become
enormously more lethal, the average assault rifle now
laying down the volume of fire of early machine guns.
They have also become lighter, which means that
children can use them much more easily. Much less
training is needed with weapons that simply spray
bullets over a wide range, and the cost of small arms
has plummeted from the 19805, as some armies have
laid off stocks.

All this explains why small arms in the hands of
ever-younger combatants have been able to sustain
conflicts hugely expensive in terms of lives lost, and
why terrorists have been able to take such a heavy toll
of innocent lives.

Now, however, small arms are about to make
another jump in technology. Some armies are receiving
for field trials small arms that integrate integrated-
circuit and other cutting-edge technologies into an
assault rifle, making them infinitely more destructive.
If the past is a guide, these weapons will turn up in the
hands of non-State actors well before most third-world
armies get them. These are the weapons that soldiers
from developing countries will have to face in the
hands of terrorists or insurgents at home or, when they
go out as Blue Helmets, abroad.

It is more than ever necessary, therefore, to have
the strictest controls put in place on the manufacture
and export of small arms. International instruments
need to be negotiated quickly, and a system or
mechanism needs to be put in place to trace and mark
small arms and to ensure that they are not diverted
from legal channels into the illicit trade. The Council
should give its encouragement to that process.

Both the Conference on the illicit trade in small
arms and the paper prepared by Colombia (S/2001/732, annex) recognize the usefulness of regional
cooperation. However, as with narcotic drugs, with
which illicit small arms and terrorism have a nexus,
countries or regions into which these are smuggled can
only do so much to stop the influx. In the case of
narcotic drugs, the onus is placed on producing regions
to control the problem at the source. The cooperation
of the countries and regions that are the principal
manufacturers and exporters of arms is just as essential
to the control of this other illicit trade. Some of them
have taken steps regionally to stop the illicit trade in
weapons; we welcome that.

We trust that the Security Council will take
effective practical steps carrying forward, or in support
of, the Programme of Action adopted at the Conference
last month that will curb the availability and use of
small arms to foment and sustain conflict and
terrorism.

