I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. As I am the last speaker before the President, I have the luxury to have heard all of the members' statements. Let me begin by once again reiterating that Indonesia's position on the situation in Venezuela has always been clear, consistent and principled. We have had the opportunity to express our position several times. For us, dialogue, reconciliation and negotiation remain the preferred option for the durable resolution of all issues. Having said that, let me make three very brief points. First, the principles of non-interference, sovereignty and territorial integrity, in line with the Charter of the United Nations, should be the starting point in discussing any issues in the framework of the United Nations. That is also the case for the situation in Venezuela. It is imperative to respect those fundamental principles. With that in mind, we appeal to all the parties involved, both in and outside Venezuela, to put serious effort into reducing tensions and not exacerbating the situation. We would like to echo Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo's point that only Venezuelans themselves can resolve the protracted crisis. Secondly, it is important for us, the Security Council, to be united and to take the right action. Within less than one month, the Council has met three times to discuss the situation in Venezuela. Those efforts have so far failed to make any difference for the people and the country. Last time we met, we could not even agree on press elements. Indonesia regrets that we have been unable to achieve unity in the Council on a mechanism for us, as a respected body, to move forward to address the situation of Venezuela, including its already dire humanitarian challenges. Despite our diverging views in the Council, Indonesia still believes that it is possible for us to arrive at a consensus in line with our responsibility and mandate. That brings me to my last point, namely, that any solution for the situation in Venezuela should be focused on an inclusive political dialogue involving all parties. To that end, there is an urgent need to address the large trust deficit in the country. We therefore call on all parties to accept the good offices offered by the Secretary- General and again urge restraint against any action that could result in further deterioration of the already fragile situation on the ground. In this time of coronavirus disease, responding to the humanitarian needs of the most vulnerable Venezuelans, including refugees and migrants, during the pandemic is imperative. However, if we really care about the people of Venezuela - as I believe we do - the first step is to demonstrate a united front in the Council and find common ground. We have continuously expressed the need to have a united front, but it is a pity that we have not done so, as we heard in the many divisive statements this afternoon. This is the time for us to put aside our differences and ensure that we will be part of the solution and not part of the problem. We still have the obligation to find ways and means to assist Venezuela and its people in finding a peaceful solution to their current challenges. Let us show the people of Venezuela that we stand with them and will not leave them in despair.
