Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all,
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for having
convened this important meeting on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, at a very crucial
stage of the peace process in that country. I wish also
to express my delegation's appreciation to the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hedi Annabi, for his timely, useful and very
comprehensive briefing.

As previous speakers rightly noted, the prospects
for a successful outcome of the concerted efforts to
achieve peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have never been as promising as they are
today. Some positive steps have been taken by the
parties to reinvigorate the political dialogue, to ensure
the implementation of the ceasefire, to enhance the
inter-Congolese dialogue and to advance the
disengagement and redeployment of forces.

Unfortunately, we cannot state that the peace
process has yet reached a point of no return and has
become irreversible. The recalcitrance of certain
parties and their attempts to preserve the status quo are
clear indications of the existing difficulties threatening
the peace process.

The precarious situation is still connected with
many political, military and social problems, whose
solution, in turn, is dependent on the willingness of the
sides to implement their commitments under the
Lusaka Peace Agreement. In that regard, it is extremely
important for the parties concerned to realize that only
a comprehensive solution to the problems,
accompanied by their readiness for constructive
dialogue and compromise, can bring about real results
leading to a meaningful settlement of the conflict.

It is with that idea in mind that we welcome the
outcome of the long-awaited preparatory meeting on
the inter-Congolese dialogue held at Gaborone
recently. We share the general assessment that the
results of that meeting exceeded the expectations. In
that respect, I want to pay tribute to Sir Ketumile
Masire and his team for their hard work and efforts to
convene the meeting and make it a success.

It is important that the representatives of the
Congolese Government, rebels, unarmed opposition
and civil society managed to reach a compromise
agreement on a number of issues concerning the
holding of the inter-Congolese dialogue - one of the
key elements of the Lusaka Agreement. We find this
very encouraging for the whole peace process. Also
promising is the fact that various Congolese
representatives have agreed to meet together in October
in Addis Ababa and to discuss the outstanding issues.
We encourage them to preserve the spirit of Gaborone
during the time left before the actual beginning of the
inter-Congolese dialogue and to refrain from any
actions that could undermine the progress achieved
thus far.

Moreover, progress in the inter-Congolese
dialogue should be accompanied by progress in the
implementation of other aspects of the Lusaka accord,
namely the withdrawal of all foreign forces from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement of armed groups.
Appropriate measures in that regard constitute
fundamental criteria for a lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region as
a whole.

As for the issue of armed groups, whose attacks
and violent actions have threatened the peace efforts,
we think that there is an urgent need for a visionary
strategy with a view, in particular, to establishing an
effective ceasefire throughout the whole Congolese
territory, and to remobilizing all parties in the
implementation of their obligations in accordance with
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

We continue to be deeply concerned over the
delay in the demilitarization of Kisangani, which today
remains among the major obstacles to the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Following Rwanda and Uganda, the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie (RCD-Goma) must now
abide by that commitment without further delay. We
call again on all those who have influence over the
RCD-Goma to convey that demand and to finally
achieve this decisive step in the peace process.

My delegation strongly believes that the Security
Council should make a clear commitment, in line with
its policy, to consider expanding the size of United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), so that the mission
can carry out in full the tasks assigned to it as well as
additional tasks. We are certain that there is a practical
need for the Council to demonstrate a credible
presence, determination and commitment in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have seen in
Sierra Leone the difference that a credible United
Nations presence can make.

We again call upon all the parties to leave behind
needless ambitions and to engage in the realization of
the Lusaka accord. We believe that only the pursuit of
dialogue and effective cooperation to strengthen the
climate of trust among the parties will make it possible
to overcome their reluctance and doubts concerning
one another. It is therefore with satisfaction and hope
that we look forward to the continuation of contacts
and dialogue among the leaders of the region.

Finally, I would like to stress once again that, in
order to be effective, any peace process must be
accompanied by economic assistance. In that context,
we welcome the launching of the economic dimension
of MONUC, with the resumption of navigation on the
Congo river. My delegation reiterates the appeal made
to the donor community to establish local projects of
rapid impact, so as to improve the daily lives of the
Congolese.

