Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to present
to the Security Council the report of the Secretary-
General on South Sudan (S/2106/341) and to provide an
update on the most recent developments.

In general, the situation is very worrying, but we
must note that, in the past 48 hours, there have been
some positive developments, beginning with the return
of Mr. Riek Machar to Juba. It is vital that the political
and security trends currently under way in the country
change quickly ifwe want to see the peace process have
a real chance to succeed.

Following the arrival of the Chief of Staff of
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition) yesterday with 195
security personnel, Mr. Machar finally arrived in Juba
today, at 8.45 am. New York time, with his team on a
United Nations aircraft. He should be sworn in as First
Vice-President in the course of today, maybe even as
we speak. I do not have any real-time information on
that point.

The return of the First Vice-President-designate
should mark the beginning of a new chapter for the
country and allow the real transition to begin. It is
crucial that the parties take this opportunity to show
their genuine determination to move forward with the
peace process. We must pay tribute to the efforts of
Mr. Festus Mogae, Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission (JMEC); Mr. Alpha Ouamar
Konare, African Union High Representative for South
Sudan; the regional and international partners; and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan, Ms. Ellen Loj. All their efforts helped to
reach the compromises needed to get to this decisive
stage in the peace process.

However, two additional steps will be crucial
for beginning the transition: the establishment of
the Transitional Government of National Unity and
the full implementation of the transitional security
arrangements. We hope that, as soon as Mr. Riek
Machar is sworn in, the Government of National
Unity could be quickly formed. The second phase,
the return to Juba of security personnel of the
opposition, will then be finalized and allow for the
rapid operationalization of the Joint Operations Centre,
which is responsible for coordinating the movements
of security personnel in the capital and those of the
Joint Integrated Police, together with the support of the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) and other international partners. Although
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism (CTSAMM) has checked the
number of military personnel and weaponry available
to Government forces at the six positions they are
authorized to take in Juba, the CTSAMM. has not been
able to inspect the sites located 25 kilometres from the
capital, nor has it been able to verify the SPLM. military
personnel and weapons that have been redeployed.

(Spoke in English)

The security situation in South Sudan remains
precarious, with intermittent fighting witnessed in
several areas of the country. Of particular concern are
the recent clashes between the SPLA and armed groups
in Wau county, in Western Bahr el Ghazal, where it is
mostly SPLA against a group of young people, all of
which has led to killings and further displacement of
civilians. Fighting between the SPLA and the opposition
forces has also been reported over the past few weeks
in Upper state Nile, Unity state and in the Equatorias.

Throughout the reporting period, as Council
members have seen in the monthly notes I send to the
Council, the Government has continued to impose
restrictions on the movement of UNMISS and on that
of humanitarian workers, in violation of the status of
forces agrement. these restrictions - I am thinking
in particular of those on night patrols in Juba - have
severely impacted the ability of the Mission to move and
to protect civilians, as well as the ability of the United
Nations to deliver humanitarian assistance, which is,
more than ever, badly needed. I would urge the Council
to send a strong message to both the Government and
the opposition that it is of the utmost importance that
the Mission and the humanitarian partners be granted
unimpeded freedom of movement so that they can fulfil
their mandates.

Turning now to the violence and the protection-of-
civilians side of UNMISS in Malakal on 17 and
18 February, the preliminary investigation confirmed
that at least 25 internally displaced persons had been
killed and over 140 injured. That was a very grave
incident indeed. In view of that, the Secretariat
convened an independent board of inquiry to look
into the response of the Mission to the crisis. Also,
the Secretary-General decided to establish a special
investigation to look into all the factors that contributed
to the violence and determine who was responsible.
The special investigation will be led by Mr. Abiodun
Bashua and is just about to start its work. The Council
will be briefed on the outcome of both investigations
within a month or thereabouts.

I have already mentioned that, unfortunately,
the humanitarian situation continues to worsen. It
is worsening in scale, in scope and in urgency. After
almost two and a half years of conflict and economic
decline, more than half of the South Sudanese population
are now in need of humanitarian assistance. The so-
called coping mechanisms of the people are exhausted
and, for far too many, survival is a minute-to-minute
challenge. Furthermore, the rainy season is about to
start, and that will create even more risk, both of severe
food insecurity and of disease. That is potentially
deadly. I therefore think I should urge the Council to
demand from the parties and from all armed actors
that they immediately uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

Human rights also remain of grave concern in the
country because civilians continue to be systematically
targeted on an ethnic basis, and their homes and
livelihoods continue to be destroyed. As the High
Commissioner for Human Rights reported, the scale
of atrocities committed even after the signing of the
Peace Agreement is unacceptable. We know that there
has been no accountability for those who commit such
egregious violations. Dissent is not tolerated. Free
speech is penalized and, despite the Government's
claim to the contrary, there is a real and deliberate
environment of intimidation.

The Transitional Government, once it is set up,
will have to start work from day one to address many
issues, first and foremost the issues of governance,
financial misappropriation and the rule of law. As we
know, the current decrease in oil prices has pushed
South Sudan to the brink of economic collapse, if not
total collapse itself. Even if the parties fully implement
the Peace Agreement, the economic challenges cannot
be overcome without major reforms and significant
international assistance.

We should not forget that there are other conflict
drivers, such as the creation of the 28 new states.
Those drivers should be addressed in accordance
with the decision of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) summit and the position of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission.
Unilateral implementation of that presidential order
would be detrimental to the peace efforts. It would also,
by the way, require significant resources that South
Sudan simply does not have. Governing 28 states is
much more costly than governing just 10. I would urge
the Security Council, in coordination with the African
Union, to engage the President of South Sudan on this
issue, with the aim of halting the implementation of the
order until the issue has been discussed and mutually
resolved within the Transitional Government.
Finally, the most vulnerable of the South Sudanese
have suffered the most in the conflict, and they continue
to do so. Without justice and reconciliation, the healing
of those wounds - the fresher ones and the older ones
alike - will not be possible, particularly if the issue
of impunity is not addressed. There is a need for all
parties to unite on this issue and agree on national
reconciliation and transitional justice, including the
establishment of the Hybrid Court, in accordance
with the calendar. It also involves the rebuilding of the
national justice system.

In sum, the peace process in South Sudan is
extremely fragile. It will require a concerted and
sustained effort at every level - national, regional and
international. I can only call again on the Council to
work closely with IGAD and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union to mobilize all the support
that is required for President Mogae, the Chairperson
of the J MEC, and President Konare, the African Union
High Representative for South Sudan, to generate both
the incentives and the disincentives so that the current
dynamics on the ground can change. Without significant
political leverage generated by concerted international
and regional efforts, they will not succeed.

