Mr. Al-Shara (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month.

Let me take advantage of my presence in New York
for the fifty-first session of the General Assembly to set out
in detail the position of my country, Syria. The Security
Council is meeting in the wake of the events that took place
in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Syria is a direct party to the peace process. It has
affirmed and reaffirmed that its option for peace is a
strategic one. My country played a major role in the Madrid
Conference and in opening the way for a comprehensive
peace process, for the first time in the history of the Arab-
Israeli conflict.

I could say that the international efforts made to hold
the Madrid Conference, the discussions and deliberations
that preceded the Conference to enable all to reach
agreement on the basis and rules for that Conference, and
the agreement by Syria in particular at that time to take
part, led for the first time to talk of peace in the area after
a decades-long conflict.

The opening of an entrance to the tunnel, which led
to this bloodshed, symbolizes closing the door to peace.
Wrong are those who believe that the issue is the opening
of an entrance to tourists so that they do not have to walk
as far; wrong are those who believe that this was the
reason the tunnel entrance was opened.

As I have said, and as many in our region and in the
world - those who follow the peace process - know,
the new Israeli Government came to power with a
strategy that has absolutely nothing to do with peace. It
is perfectly obvious, from the first day it assumed power
until the day when the entrance to the tunnel was opened,
that the Israeli Government, regrettably, does not have a
strategy for peace. The Israeli policy aims at burying the
peace process by various means.

Those who have followed the statements,
declarations and practices of the Israeli Government since
it took power approximately 100 days ago know that the
Israeli Government does not miss a chance to tell
everyone that it tries to change the rules of the game for
the peace process and that it is committed to intransigent
positions that reject the principle of land for peace. It
declares unequivocally that it will not withdraw from
occupied Arab territories, that it will not withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan or from East Jerusalem, and
that it wishes to resume and encourage settlement of the
West Bank, Gaza and the Golan. The Israeli Government
does not care much for the accords, agreements or
commitments reached in earlier negotiations, during the
term of the previous Israeli Cabinet.

The events that have unfolded over the past two
days clearly reflect the tragedy of the Palestinian people.
They reflect the fact that this people will not surrender.
They will not be an easy victim of the occupation and the
settlement policy. No matter how many attempts are made
to derail the peace process or to diminish its role, the
Palestinian people will accept nothing less than their
legitimate right to self-determination and to the restoration
of all their occupied territories to the boundaries of 4 June
1967.

We in Syria will not give up our strategic option for
peace. We will accept nothing less than a full withdrawal
from the Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967. We believe
 

that the Israeli Government is trying to renege on
commitments and pledges made by the previous Israeli
Government. In our opinion and in world opinion, these
commitments and pledges represent a fundamental basis for
the resumption of negotiations on all tracks. If the Israeli
Government is not going to commit itself to the
implementation of commitments and pledges made by the
previous Government, it is basically telling us and the
whole world that we should not believe that it will enter
into any new commitment or respect any old one, in
accordance with resolutions of international legality and
legitimacy and the terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference.

How can any Arab party resume peace negotiations
without such commitments and pledges? And in an
atmosphere such as the one in which we live today, fraught
with danger, we cannot help feeling that we are returning
to the law of the jungle, rather than living in a world of
respect for international law, international legitimacy and
the resolutions of the Security Council.

I regret that I have had to go into such detail, but I
must also tell the Council that what is happening now must
be a warning to us all that the peace process faces a real
threat. The peace process is dying. The peace process might
be buried and we might not have another such opportunity
as we have had to implement a comprehensive, just peace
in the Middle East.

Arrogance and intransigence do not make peace. Israel
today is acting with unprecedented intransigence and
arrogance. Israelis believe that the Arabs are helpless and
that, with its old means of force and power, with all its
weapons of mass destruction, foremost among which are
the nuclear option and a huge arsenal of advanced
weaponry, Israel does not have to comply with international
law, Security Council resolutions nor even the principles of
international legality.

The Security Council, which is charged with
maintaining international peace and security, is called upon
today more than ever before to adopt whatever decision it
considers necessary and appropriate to revive the peace
process and put it back on track. It is called upon to
condemn the bloody practices of the Israeli authorities in
the occupied Palestinian territories. It is called upon to put
an end to these events of bloodshed, these painful and
tragic events.

Consequently, regarding the question of the tunnel, the
prelude to evil, we believe that, important as it is, we
should not confine ourselves to discussing that particular
question. Rather, this Council should adopt the
appropriate resolution to rescue the moribund peace
process, the area and the region from more violence and
tension that benefit no one.

In conclusion, I would like to apologize for going
into such detail, but I would like to state that all Arab
countries, in a single voice and at two conferences -
first at the summit conference and then at the Foreign
Ministers' conference - have all said that peace is a
strategic option for the Arabs, but that it is unacceptable
that it not be a strategic option for Israel. It would be a
real catastrophe and a real tragedy if it were not.

The European summit conference that took place in
Florence and the industrial summit that took place in
Lyons reaffirmed the basis for the peace process and the
principles of that process, which are based on Security
Council resolutions and the principle of "land for peace".
It is high time that Israel realized that it will not be able
both to achieve peace and keep the occupied territories.
It must choose. And that choice is for Israel to return the
occupied territories taken by force to their rightful owners
and to respect its commitment so that we can re-open the
road of the peace process. That choice is desired not only
by the people of the area, but by the whole world.

