Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
fully associates itself with the statement to be made
shortly by the Ambassador of Spain on behalf of the
European Union.

France spoke about the exceptional seriousness of
the situation in the Middle East during the two public
debates held by the Security Council during the past 10
days. In order to be succinct, I shall not go into detail
about the substance of those statements. But they
remain entirely current, unfortunately.

The military operations undertaken by the Israeli
army against Palestinian towns and villages in the West
Bank are continuing and, in fact, have intensified,
despite the adoption of Security Council resolutions
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). As underscored by the
Council in the President's statement to the press last
night, the military operations have been marked by
numerous violations of humanitarian law. Those
operations have produced numerous civilian victims
and threaten the survival of the Palestinian Authority.
This is unacceptable. France appeals to both parties to
fully implement resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002), now and without further delay. France rejects
any sequential or conditional reading of those
resolutions. Israel must withdraw now from the
Palestinian towns and villages that have been
reoccupied. It is also essential that the Palestinian
Authority make the necessary gestures to bring about a
definitive cessation of terrorist attacks.

I believe that there are three points that deserve to
be underscored in the present tragic circumstances. The
first pertains to the humanitarian consequences of
Israeli military incursions into the West Bank, which
are extremely serious. It is unacceptable that medical
assistance is not able to reach the injured and the
Palestinian population. It is also unacceptable for
consuls-general not to have access to their nationals.
Israel must immediately take the necessary measures to
come into full compliance with international
humanitarian law as defined in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, in particular as regards civilian
populations and foreign nationals. The right of consular
access to citizens of third States must be guaranteed.
Finally, through its highest authorities, France has
expressed its distress about the situation around the
Church of the Nativity, in Bethlehem. All Holy Sites
must be fully respected, whether Christian, Jewish or
Islamic.

My second point is that the actions of the
Security Council must be clearly defined and
coordinated with the efforts of the "quartet" in the
field.

France appeals to the parties to cooperate fully
with all the members of the "quartet", and in particular
with the United States Secretary of State, in order to
bring about an immediate joint ceasefire and an
immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces from the
reoccupied Palestinian cities. It is essential that the
ceasefire be coupled with the resumption without delay
of negotiations on a final political settlement of the
conflict. The objective of such a settlement is set out in
Security Council resolution 1397 (2002): the peaceful
coexistence of two independent States, Israel and
Palestine, within secure and recognized borders.

Such a ceasefire will not be durable without at
least two conditions: that it be accompanied by the
resumption of a genuine political process, and that it be
guaranteed by the international community's continued
engagement with the parties. We cannot leave them to
their deadly confrontation. In France's view, the
deployment of international observers or monitors
charged with helping the parties respect their mutual
commitments has long seemed a necessity in the
interests of both the Palestinians and the Israelis. That
idea seems to be on track today, including on the Israeli
side, judging from Ambassador Lancry's statement to
the Council this morning. We must work together
towards that end.

My third point is that the situation in the
Palestinian territories is increasing tension in the entire
region, in particular between Lebanon and Israel.
France is extremely concerned by the continued
exchanges of fire from both sides of the Blue Line.
Today the situation is threatening to degenerate. Faced
with the risk of escalation, France calls on the parties
to demonstrate their sense of responsibility in a
concrete way. The parties must refrain from any
provocation or disproportionate reaction.
The Security Council, in its resolutions 1397
(2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), has set out the
path to be followed. The efforts of all must contribute
to the effective implementation of those resolutions
without delay. There is no military solution. Peace
requires the end of confrontation and the resumption of
negotiations.

