Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Tanin for his update on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

I also want to recognize the participation of
Minister Dacie and Ambassador Citaku here today.

We congratulate Kosovo on holding successful
democratic elections in June, which international
observers confirm were free, fair and peaceful,
with only isolated irregularities related to voter
participation. This is a clear demonstration of Kosovo's
democratic maturation. Of note, there was significant
turnout in predominantly Kosovo Serb municipalities,
highlighting the progress made in integrating Kosovo
Serbs into Kosovo's democratic process.

The United States appreciates the United Nations
efforts over the past two decades to help Kosovo build
multi-ethnic democratic institutions that uphold the rule
of law and respect human rights. We also appreciate and
support the vital role of the European Union (EU) as
facilitator of the Brussels dialogue. We call on leaders
in both Belgrade and Pristina to continue taking the
needed steps to revitalize these talks, to fully implement
the dialogue agreements and to normalize relations.
Following the elections, Kosovo's leaders must now
cooperate and form a Government without delay.

The United States is ready to work with Kosovo's
newly elected representatives on our shared agenda,
including advancing Kosovo's Euro-Atlantic
integration by normalizing relations with Serbia via
the EU-led dialogue process, resolving Kosovo's
border with Montenegro to unlock visa-free travel to
the EU, undertaking reforms to strengthen democratic
governance and the rule of law and foster economic
growth, and promoting a multi-ethnic, peaceful and
stable Kosovo. As we partner with the Government
of Kosovo, civil society organizations and relevant
local institutions in this effort, we are pleased that
Kosovo's citizens in both the public and private
sectors have demonstrated their capacity to work with
partners in the international community to address
remaining challenges.

UNMIK represents a United Nations peacekeeping
success story, but the Mission has long outlived its
reason for existing, as we have said before in the
Chamber. Given Kosovo's steady and consistent
progress and maturity over the years, the United States
reiterates its ongoing call to the Security Council to
wind down and end the Mission. We are long overdue
in taking this step. As a first step, the reporting period
for should be expanded to every six months or longer.
We also recommend that the Secretary-General provide
in his next report an assessment of where budget and
staff reductions can be made, with a focus on reducing
redundancy, since the Government of Kosovo has long
ago demonstrated its clear competency and capacity
to govern.

In line with our responsibility to ensure that all
United Nations missions are responsive and relevant
to the situation on the ground, the Council must take
an honest look at Kosovo and recognize Kosovo's
significant progress and development. It is hard to
justify continuing to support the Mission when we see
more urgent and pressing needs for United Nations
peacekeeping in other parts of the world. This much is
very clear. We have achieved our goals in Kosovo and it
is time to wrap UNMIK up.

Lastly, we affirm our support for Kosovo's efforts
to develop into a prosperous and peaceful, multi-ethnic
democracy, and we continue to strongly support full
international recognition of Kosovo and Kosovo's
membership in all relevant international organizations,
including the United Nations and INTERPOL. We
encourage United Nations Member States that have not
yet done so to join the more than 110 United Nations
Members that have already recognized Kosovo as an
independent State.

