Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence and for his statement.

My delegation reiterates its extreme concern at
the escalation of violence in southern Israel and the
Gaza Strip. As the President of the French Republic
declared three days ago after his meeting with the head
of the Palestinian Authority, France reiterates its strong
condemnation of the provocations that led to this
situation, as well as the disproportionate use of force,
and calls for an immediate halt in the launching of
rockets into Israel as well as the Israeli bombardment
of Gaza.

France deplores the significant civilian losses and
expresses its condolence to the innocent victims and
their families. France reiterates its position that
international humanitarian law must be fully respected
by all parties in all circumstances, as must the
obligations based on that law with respect to the
uninterrupted flow of humanitarian goods to the
population and free access for international and
humanitarian organizations. France recalls the
importance of the opening of border crossings, in
accordance with the Agreement on Movement and
Access.

There can be no military solution to this situation.
Everything must be done to find a political solution.
The commitment of the international community is
essential, in particular through the Security Council. In
this regard, France reiterates the importance of the
unanimous call for an immediate end to the violence
made by the Council on 28 December and of resolution
1850 (2008). We also underline the importance of the
message of the Quartet.

Confronted by the seriousness of ongoing events
and the suffering of civilian populations, the priority is
now to bring an end to the chain of violence, to permit
the provision of assistance to the victims without delay
and to ensure a return to a lasting truce and a political
solution. In this regard, France expresses its full
support for the initiative proposed yesterday in Paris by
the European Union, whose main principles I should
like to recall. First, there must be an immediate and

permanent ceasefire: the launching of rockets by
Hamas into Israel must cease unconditionally; Israeli
military action must stop. Also, there must be
immediate humanitarian mobilization to meet the needs
of the population of Gaza. The halting of fighting
should also make possible the lasting opening of all
border crossings. The European Union is prepared to
resume its assistance role at Gaza border crossings,
which must remain open. Thirdly, peace negotiations
must be resumed and intensified. Continued
negotiations between the Palestinian Authority and the
Israeli Government, in accordance with Security
Council resolutions, are the only solution to this
conflict.

The French authorities are mobilized and remain
in contact with the Israeli Government and the
Palestinian Authority, as well as with our European
Union partners, the other members of the Security
Council, the League of Arab States and the Secretary-
General in order to consider means to bring an end to
the violence as quickly as possible, to effect the best
response to the humanitarian situation and to resume
without delay the search for a lasting political solution.
To that end, the President of the French Republic will
travel to the region in the coming days and the
European Union will send a ministerial mission.

