Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I should like in turn
to thank the Prosecutor for her report on the situation in
Libya and for her briefing today. The United Kingdom
remains a strong supporter of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). We thank the Prosecutor and her Office
for the detailed work described in the report.

Security and justice sector reform are critical
if Libya is to facilitate the rebuilding of State
institutions and the return to stability. We, along with
our international partners, will continue to work with
Libya to provide it with the support it needs to meet the
challenges that it faces.

We welcome ongoing efforts to investigate and
bring to justice all those members of the former regime
who are guilty of abuses and to press forward with
implementation of the recommendations made in the
latest Human Rights Council resolution adopted on
21 March. It is important, however, that all those who
committed crimes be brought to justice. We encourage
the Libyan authorities to abandon plans to provide
revolutionaries who committed war crimes and crimes
against humanity with amnesty from punishment
for their crimes. We call on them to investigate and
prosecute all individuals implicated in such abuses.
Addressing security and transitional justice remains the
immediate challenge for the Libyan Government. We
are providing assistance to Libya by sending a justice
adviser to contribute to prison - and justice-sector
reform projects. We stand ready to give further aid
to Libyan-led efforts to build up accountable and
transparent security and justice institutions, improve
security and strengthen the rule of law.

We fully support the ongoing investigations
concerning gender-based crimes, with a particular focus
on those outside Libya, and those relating to allegations
about the situation in Tawergha. Those efforts continue
to play an important part in challenging impunity and
ensuring accountability for those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the most serious crimes.

We welcome the level of cooperation that the
Libyan Government has undertaken with the ICC
in relation to the arrest warrants issued against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. Libya's
continued cooperation with the ICC is essential. We note
that there are now admissibility challenges submitted
by the Libyan authorities regarding both cases, and that
the Prosecutor's investigations into them are suspended
pending a ruling from the ICC judges. We continue to
encourage the ICC and the Libyan Government to work
together to address matters arising out of the events of
June 2012. More generally, we are pleased that Libya
and the ICC are continuing to engage constructively on
issues relating to the ICC proceedings. It is important
that the detention of both Abdullah Al-Senussi and Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi be conducted in accordance with
international law, that they have access to legal advisers
and that any potential trial held in Libya be consistent
with Libya's international human rights obligations.

The authorities of the United Kingdom have played
a part in the ICC's investigation so far by providing full
support, as and when requested, to the Prosecutor and
her team of investigators. We are a strong, principled
supporter of the ICC and will continue to provide our
full support to the Prosecutor, as and when requested.

