Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too are grateful to Mr. Atul Khare,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, for his presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (S/2009/504) and for
his analysis of the situation in the country. We also
thank, Mr. Jose' Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister
of Timor-Leste, for his comprehensive statement.

This year, the people of Timor-Leste
commemorated the tenth anniversary of the popular
referendum in a situation of stability and security. We
congratulate the people and the leaders of Timor-Leste
on that noteworthy event. During the process of
building a State, Dili was faced with serious challenges
and crises, but, with the effective support of the United
Nations and the international community, the young
State overcame these and many other difficulties.

We note with satisfaction the substantial progress
that has been achieved in overcoming the consequences
of the 2006 crisis. This has provided an opportunity to
advance national dialogue and reconciliation. This
month saw the successful holding of elections for
community authorities, with the assistance of UNMIT.
The time has come to tackle other priority tasks to
strengthen this young independent State: strengthening
State and security institutions; establishing the rule of
law and public order; enhancing the judicial system;
ensuring social and economic development; eradicating
poverty; creating jobs for the population; and
improving the human rights situation. Those objectives
will be achieved only if efforts are pooled and if there
is cooperation among all the country's political forces
and civil society.

Strengthening the national security forces is of
priority importance for restoring stability in Timor-
Leste and constitutes an important indicator of the
independence of that State. We welcome the start of the
process of transferring law and order responsibilities
from UNMIT to the Timorese police. It is significant
that the transfer timetable is being implemented on the
basis of mutually agreed criteria with respect to
readiness rather than on the basis of artificial
deadlines.

Despite the progress that has been achieved in a
number of areas, including with respect to security and
stability - thanks in large part to the United Nations
presence - this is fragile. A potential threat is posed
by social and economic difficulties, impunity, human
rights problems, the weakness of the judicial system
and other emerging risks. Taking that into account, we
share the assessment of the Secretary-General
regarding the utility of maintaining United Nations
Mission levels until the end of the Mission's current
mandate. We await further recommendations on the
reconfiguration of the Mission in the Secretary-
General's next report.

We wish to convey to the head of UNMIT,
Mr. Atul Khare, and to the Mission staff our gratitude
for their professionalism and selfless efforts in
fulfilling their mandate. As we understand it,
Mr. Khare's work in this position is coming to an end,
and we wish to wish him every possible success and
fruitful activities in his future endeavours. We are
convinced that his contributions will again be required
within the United Nations system.

UNMIT's police component includes Russian
police officers. My country will continue to support the
activities of this Mission and its cooperation with the
authorities and people of Timor-Leste.

