Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Miroslav Jenea for his briefing.

The position of Uruguay with regard to the conflict
between Israel and Palestine and, even more important,
on how to reach an agreement that will end it, is well
known, and I will therefore be very brief. Nevertheless,
we must not forego such opportunities to encourage
both parties in the search for peace. I will limit my
comments today to several recent developments that
have an impact on the peace process, and possible
courses of action for the future.

Uruguay is concerned about the lack of progress
in connection with the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, with
its humanitarian, political and security implications in
both countries and throughout the region. Unfortunately,
over the past several months there have been no major
developments with regard to the peace process. We
were hoping to see a quickened pace of action and
more substantial outcomes following the release of the
Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex) and the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), but that has not been the case.

The parties have not thus far taken any measure to
reverse the trends that threaten the two-State solution,
despite the valuable recommendations contained in
the Quartet's report, published more than a year ago.
We look forward to the presentation, next September,
of the third quarterly report on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) by Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov. Although we do not expect major changes
with respect to his briefing made during the open debate
last June (see S/PV.7977), we reiterate our interest that
it be circulated in writing prior to next month's meeting
so that we will be able to analyse the information
provided to us and to provide our impressions following
a very careful reading of the document.

A month ago (see S/PV.8011), we expressed
our condemnation and concern with regard to the
escalation in violence following the terrorist attack on
the esplanade of the mosques in Jerusalem. Fortunately,
some hours afterwards, the Government of Israel left
unimplemented the new security measures that the
Palestinian side viewed as having an impact on the
status quo of the holy sites. As a result, it was possible
to reduce exponentially the violence that had been
afflicting the Palestinian territories for more than
10 days. In that regard, we ask the Israeli and the
Palestinian authorities to make every effort to avoid
unnecessary provocations that increase tension and
violence and that compromise the efforts made by the
international community to try to restart the bilateral
peace negotiations between Israel and Palestine with a
view to achieving the two-State solution.

With regard to Gaza, the situation that has been
eclipsed in the Security Council by the many other
humanitarian disasters facing the region, we remain
concerned about the serious crisis being suffered by the
population due to a cumulative process over many years
marked by the consequences of armed conflicts and
the negligence of regional authorities. The 2 million
Palestinians who reside in Gaza and are subsisting in
very hard conditions - for example, the electricity
crisis in the area - also face the possibility of a new
conflict that may result in a humanitarian disaster and
that may foster extremism in the whole region. We
therefore urgently call on the Palestinian and the Israeli
authorities, as well as the leaders of Hamas, to find a
solution to the various problems that threaten to plunge
Gaza into a downward spiral.

In conclusion, as we have done since 1947, we
reiterate the unwavering commitment of Uruguay to
peace in the Middle East and are concerned by the long-
standing paralysis ofthe process. In order to achieve that
long-awaited objective, the accomplishment of the two-
State solution, the parties must resume direct bilateral
negotiations. That is the only option that would allow for
the peaceful coexistence of Israel and Palestine and the
welfare and safety of their peoples. The international
community continues to clamour for a politically
negotiated settlement, which is the only way out of this
endless and dark tunnel. All mediation and facilitation
efforts on the part of Council members are welcome.
We ask once again that the voice of the international
community be heard and that we be allowed to help. It
should not be forgotten that in the coexistence between
States there is no asset more valuable than peace.
The potential for future cooperation and development
remains intact. Be an example. Be pioneers and
courageously negotiate peace, bringing stability to the
afflicted region of the Middle East.

