Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my thanks to Mr. O'Brien
for his comprehensive briefing to the Security Council.
I thank him in particular for focusing on children today.
Millions of Syrians continue to suffer, whether it be
upon the anvil of the war raging in Syria or because
they were forced to leave their homes with their families
to live in refugee camps. Indeed, among the suffering
are children born in the past few years who have only
known camps as home.

The crisis continues to rage and the Syrian people
continues to suffer, which the reports of the Secretary-
General describe in detail. We see no end on the
horizon. I would like to express our appreciation to
all those working to deliver emergency assistance in
Syria and renew Egypt's call to all parties, Syrian and
international alike, to ease humanitarian access through
facilitating procedures and providing full support to the
United Nations and its partners so that they can safely
reach those in need, particularly in besieged areas.

In the same context, we call on the States designated
to be guarantors of the de-escalation zones under the
memorandum of understanding recently signed in
Astana to make every possible effort to implement
the humanitarian terms of the memorandum. At the
same time, we welcome the diminishing intensity
of confrontations in the areas set up under the
memorandum. We hope this will also be reflected in
improved humanitarian access, while we know full
well that safe and lasting humanitarian access under the
memorandum will be a true humanitarian achievement
on the ground with respect to besieged areas.

Six years have passed since the Syrian crisis began.
First, it was an internal crisis, but it quickly became a
proxy war. Malicious terrorist groups have spread in
a wholly unprecedented way. Syrian land has become
a safe haven for tens of thousands of foreign terrorist
fighters who will continue to threaten the region,
indeed the world, for years to come. It is perhaps
important to stress anew that the danger posed by the
threat of terrorism in Syria is very real; it cannot be
underestimated. This phenomenon did not come about
as a result of conditions on the ground. Rather, it is a

phenomenon supported, financed and armed by parties
with a direct interest in spreading chaos and extremism.
Despite the unprecedented number of parties to military
operations in Syria, and despite the fact that fighting
terrorism is one of the most important objectives of
these operations, the presence ofinterested parties does
not reflect a unified view on how to deal with the threat
or how to stop the financing and support of terrorist
groups, which is a subject that needs to be reviewed.

It is easy to continue delving into the details of the
humanitarian issues before us. It is easy to continue
condemning the fall of civilians and the targeting of
hospitals and schools. It is easy to demand easier
humanitarian access. However, experience shows that
if we stop there, we will not put an end to the tragedy
on the ground in the country. The only way to end
the humanitarian suffering of Syrians is to reach a
comprehensive political settlement in accordance with
the Geneva accord and resolution 2254 (2015) with a
View to preserving Syria's unity and sovereignty on
its land.

Iwould therefore call on all members of the Security
Council - and renew my call on the joint chairmanship
of the International Syria Support Group - to initiate
a frank dialogue on the political process in Syria
and on how to combine the various initiatives into a
comprehensive approach to the crisis that leads to an
end of the humanitarian crisis and serves the aspirations
of the Syrian people to democracy and freedom in a
unified country, one that chokes off terrorism and
its supporters.

