Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Singapore is shocked
and outraged by the recent developments in East Timor.

In 1975, when the issue of East Timor first came
before the United Nations, we abstained during the vote.
As a small country, we felt strongly that United Nations
principles opposing the use of force should be respected.
We had every interest in upholding the integrity of
boundaries and the rule of international law. Nevertheless,
over the last quarter-century Indonesia has de facto been
governing East Timor, and this has been generally
accepted by the world at large.

Thus, when the Indonesian Government suddenly
announced in January 1999 that it was willing to grant
independence to East Timor, if this was what the East
Timorese wanted, many Indonesians were justifiably
concerned. Singapore too was taken aback. Negotiations
on an autonomy package were then in their final stages.
In these negotiations, independence had been treated as an
option to be considered only later. Now independence was
being offered as an alternative to autonomy. Independence
would be a major change in the status of East Timor. If
this step were to be taken without careful preparations, it
could lead to serious problems for the people of the
territory. Furthermore, the move had serious implications
for the unity of Indonesia. Indonesia was undergoing a
difficult political transition. A decision precipitately taken
without broad national consensus - a decision that had
profound implications for the country - was bound to be
controversial. Given all these circumstances, it did not
seem the proper way to settle the fate of 800,000 people
in East Timor.

But all that is behind us. Indonesia having made the
decision, the United Nations, Indonesia and Portugal
worked out a solemn and binding agreement to ascertain
the wishes of the people of East Timor and handle a
possible transition to independence. Popular consultations
were held in accordance with this agreement.

 

We were very pleased that initially this process had
proceeded smoothly. The United Nations and the
Indonesian Government should be commended for the calm
and peaceful way in which the voting was conducted on 30
August 1999. The East Timorese exercised their right to
vote in an orderly and resolute manner. Despite some
allegations of bias and coercion, there is no question that
the result was legitimate and unambiguous and enjoyed
widespread support. It was a good outcome. But after that
the situation rapidly unravelled.

Phase II of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) would have been very difficult even under the
best of circumstances. The danger of Violence and the risk
that the losing side would not accept the results had indeed
been widely anticipated. The authorities should have taken
more effective precautions both to preempt likely problems
and to deal with them. Instead, pro-integrationist militias,
well-armed with modern military weapons, have been
allowed to go on a violent rampage of arson, intimidation
and murder. Hundreds of thousands of innocent East
Timorese civilians have been forced from their homes.
Many have fled to West Timor. Hundreds, if not thousands,
have been brutally murdered, not randomly, but deliberately
in order to intimidate others. Law and order has totally
broken down.

The United Nations presence itself has come under
siege. Unarmed United Nations personnel have been
targeted for intimidation and harassment. Some local people
employed by the United Nations have been killed.

This has set a grave precedent, and if it is not
rectified, mobs and armies in other troubled countries will
imitate it and United Nations personnel in many parts of the
world will be put at risk.

The Indonesian Foreign Minister admitted recently that
rogue elements of the army and police were among those
responsible for the violence. These rogue elements and the
pro-integrationist militia must be stopped.

We are now at a critical point in the effort to resolve
East Timor's problems. The popular consultations have
been completed. The results have been announced to the
world and have become a new political fact which must be
respected. There can be no turning back of the clock. We
have no choice but to press forward towards an independent
East Timor. To do that, the first step is to restore law and
order and to stop the humanitarian disaster that is taking
place. And the United Nations must remain engaged in the
process.

But under the agreements reached, in phase II the
primary responsibility to end the lawlessness and restore
order lies with Indonesia. Indonesia has accepted these
responsibilities. Indonesia must therefore carry out these
responsibilities promptly, vigorously and effectively.

The Indonesian Government has imposed martial law
in East Timor. It is despatching more troops to East
Timor. It has asked for more time to carry out the
necessary measures to restore control and law and order
in East Timor. Singapore appreciates the constraints that
the Indonesian Government faces.

Nevertheless, we urge the Indonesian Government to
act decisively and swiftly to restore stability in East
Timor, so that phase II of UNAMET can be carried out
smoothly and pave the way for a peaceful implementation
of phase III.

The international community has become seized of
the situation in East Timor. Global television and media
coverage have focused the world's attention on the
problem. Several countries have offered to help Indonesia
if the anarchy persists and Indonesia is unable to bring
matters quickly under control. Efforts are under way to
persuade Indonesia to accept international assistance
under United Nations auspices. In this regard we would
like to commend the Security Council and the United
Nations Secretariat for their untiring efforts regarding East
Timor in the face of discouragement and danger. We also
commend the Council's decision to send a five-man
mission to Indonesia and to East Timor to ascertain the
situation and to convey a powerful message on the views
of the Council.

We hope that the Council's response to East Timor's
problems will set the pattern for the Council's response to
future similar tragedies, wherever they may occur. Every
day we learn of tragedies surfacing in Asia, Africa and
Europe. Innocent people are being killed in many corners
of the world. The Council has an obligation to respond
objectively and fairly to tragedies, wherever and whenever
they occur. Selective justice only weakens the United
Nations.

Singapore supports international efforts to end the
violence and to get the independence process back on
track. There is general agreement that any international
assistance to Indonesia to restore order in East Timor
must be clearly authorized by the Security Council and
must have Indonesia's express consent.

 

The only other alternative is for the United Nations to
go on a collision course with the Government of Indonesia.
We trust that no one contemplates such a foolhardy course,
but we also trust that Indonesia will consider these sincere
offers of assistance in the same spirit as they have been
offered - to restore peace in the territory.

While focusing on East Timor, we should not forget
that East Timor's problem is only one aspect of the crisis
in Indonesia's body politic. Indonesia is a large, diverse and
complex country of 210 million people. It is also a
developing country with limited resources. It is in the midst
of a complex political transition. It is facing simultaneous
and serious problems in many parts of its vast territories.
Therefore, we should also be sympathetic to the needs and
concerns of the population of Indonesia.

