Mr. Akram (Pakistan): It was not my intention to
intervene again in our discussion, but I believe that the
regional problems to which Sir Jeremy Greenstock just
referred have intruded and oblige me to respond to my
colleague from India.

My friend from India referred to what he called
the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. The United
Nations recognizes Jammu and Kashmir as disputed
territory. The maps of the United Nations clearly
indicate the line of demarcation - the ceasefire line -
between Indian-occupied Kashmir and Azad Kashmir,
which is free Kashmir. The Security Council
resolutions on Kashmir, calling for a United Nations-
supervised plebiscite to enable the people of Jammu
and Kashmir to exercise their right to self-
determination, remain to be implemented.

At this moment in history, when we have seen a
war waged for the purpose of securing the
implementation of Security Council resolutions, the
people of Jammu and Kashmir and the people of
Pakistan ask the Security Council to adopt a standard
that is uniform and does not discriminate against them,
because they have awaited their freedom and self-
determination for 50 years under Indian occupation. It
is an occupation of several hundred thousand Indian
troops occupying a country the size of Belgium. There
is one Indian soldier for every four Kashmiri males.
And my colleague from India can speak only about acts
of terrorism. It is a pity that he referred to, as he said,
75,000 Indian citizens killed in Kashmir. Those were
Kashmiris - more than 80,000 Kashmiris - killed by
Indian occupation forces. That is well documented, and
my delegation is prepared to circulate those documents
for the information of Council members.

In the context of terrorism, the representative of
India referred to an incident that occurred a few days
ago in Indian-occupied Kashmir in which 24 innocent
people were massacred. Pakistan has vigorously
condemned that terrorist incident. As usual, India has
held one country - to quote my colleague from
India - responsible for the situation. We submit that
this is a case of the pot calling the kettle black. In such
situations, as I said this morning, it is always better to
resort to impartial investigations and to impartial
inquiry before making allegations against another
State, because allegations of that nature can very often
lead to the rise of tensions and to threats to
international peace and security.

We say that there must be an investigation,
because in March 2000, just as President Clinton was
visiting India, 35 Sikh villagers were massacred in
Kashmir. The New Delhi Government blamed - guess
who. But at the time, there was an inquiry conducted
by two independent organizations, called Movement
Against State Repression and the Punjab Human Rights
Organization, and, after a thorough investigation, both
of them concluded that it was Indian forces that had
carried out the massacre. A separate investigation
conducted by an international human rights
organization came to the same conclusion.

India seeks to portray the Kashmiri movement as
a terrorist movement in order to delegitimize the
struggle for freedom and self-determination. That is the
central and core reality in Kashmir. Therefore, Pakistan
has asked that this latest massacre should be
investigated. We have suggested that the investigation
could be carried out by non-governmental
organizations such as Amnesty International. Today,
since my colleague from India has raised this matter in
the Security Council, I should like to ask him if he
would be prepared to accept an independent United
Nations inquiry into this incident. I hope he will
respond positively. If India is convinced that external
forces are responsible for such acts of terrorism, let it
say yes. Pakistan is prepared for such an investigation.
We know that our hands are clean, our conscience is
clear and our cause - for the sake of the freedom of
Kashmir - is just.

