Mr. Ishikane (Japan): At the outset, let me briefly address wider regional issues. We have serious concerns about the recent heightened tensions in the region. The eruption of a new conflict, especially in the Gulf, could have disastrous consequences. We must continue to encourage all concerned to find a solution through negotiations. Japan urges all concerned to make maximum diplomatic efforts in order to a avoid further escalation of the situation. Prime Minister Abe has just returned from his visit to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and the Sultanate of Oman. Japan will continue its diplomatic efforts to ease tensions and achieve peace and stability in the region. Even at this juncture, the Middle East peace process remains a top priority for the international community. Without finding a solution to the issue, lasting peace and stability in the region cannot be realized. Yesterday, we again heard of continued settlement activities, as well as the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures. Japan deeply deplores those activities and again strongly urges the Government of Israel to completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including the implementation of construction plans that undermine the viability of a two-State solution. We are also deeply concerned about continued violence. We strongly condemn terrorism and attacks against innocent civilians, including by rocket, and call upon the parties to take immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence, provocations and incitement. Japan remains committed to supporting a two- State solution. The final status of Jerusalem should be resolved through negotiations based on the relevant Security Council resolutions and known parameters. Japan will remain engaged with both sides and will continue to promote confidence-building measures. As a humble step and building on many years of efforts, later this month Japan will invite 10 young people from both Israel and Palestine to support building confidence among them. The point here is to demonstrate that young people can shed light on the pathway to peace and security by offering hope to future generations. Every three months, we repeat similar depressing statements in the Chamber. We sincerely hope that positive steps will be taken in the coming months, including the holding of general elections in Palestine. Japan will remain actively engaged, both politically and economically, in supporting progress in the peace process, in cooperation with international partners.
