Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, we thank you for organizing this
important meeting of the Council to deal with the
question of sanctions imposed by the United Nations. It
has enabled us to hear interesting statements by the
Ambassador of Germany and the Observer of
Switzerland on the outcome of the Bonn-Berlin and
Interlaken processes, and to hear the State Secretary of
Sweden. We thank them all very much.

This meeting also offers members of the Council
an opportunity to speak once again on the matter of
sanctions. This gradual emergence of a debate in the
Council on sanctions should be encouraged so that we
can maintain an ongoing consideration of ways and
means of making the sanctions tool a measured,
sensible and effective way of maintaining international
peace and security.

As emerged from last year's Council debate and
from numerous discussions in the General Assembly
and other forums, outside the United Nations, this is a
crucial moment for our Organization. We must take a
new look at this tool of sanctions, put at its disposition
by the Charter as a last resort after all methods for the
pacific settlement of disputes provided for under
Chapter VI of the Charter have been exhausted.

United Nations practice, particularly during the
last decade, has shown the need for a number of
changes that, while enhancing the effectiveness of
sanctions, would reduce their impact on civilian
populations a which we have seen can be
devastating - and protect the interests of neighbouring
countries with major economic ties to the targeted
countries.

We feel that these three goals mean that the
United Nations must take a new approach to sanctions,
guided by the principle that sanctions should remain an
integral part of an overall strategy for conflict
settlement and prevention, with all its political,
economic, social and human components, since
sanctions clearly are not an end in themselves.
Attention should be paid to setting a time-limit for
sanctions. In short, an overall vision of the problems
and their solutions is needed.

To deal seriously with the humanitarian
dimension, we must systematically review the impact
of the sanctions contemplated - if they turn out to be
necessary - before their imposition and then
periodically during their application. We also have to
make provisions for the necessary humanitarian
exemptions - food, medical, religious and so on.

As for the impact on third countries, my country
has always highlighted the need to meet their concerns
and deal with the economic problems they face because
of the application of sanctions by the Security Council,
in accordance with Article 50 of the Charter. We must
seek ways to make this goal a reality, because the
implementation of sanctions is the collective
responsibility of the international community as a
whole.

My delegation strongly believes that the Council
must seek to promote a new sanctions practice. To this
end, the Council, which last year set up a working
group to draw up recommendations on the general
issues of sanctions, should not consider the report
submitted by the Working Group after several months'
work under the leadership of Ambassador Chowdhury,
with a view to its adoption. The draft report is not
entirely satisfactory, but it should be carefully studied
and supported by the Council so that we can move
towards its application. Despite its shortcomings, it
provides for important changes with regard to various
aspects of the matter.

