Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General J ean-
Pierre Lacroix and African Union Commissioner Sma'il
Chergui for their detailed briefings.

Two months ago, we voted in favour of resolution
2479 (2019) on the technical rollover of the mandate for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). Russia understood the position
of the African Union, which advocated conducting an
analysis of the situation in the Sudan and developing a
well-thought-out plan for the responsible drawdown of
the hybrid peacekeeping operation. As members will
recall, at that time, we said that we should limit the
extension of the mandate to a month or two. We were
confident that, within that period, the Sudanese would
be able to overcome the difficult domestic political
situation and resume substantive dialogue on the
modalities of UNAMID's exit.

Developments have shown that we were right. We
welcome the signing of a constitutional declaration
on 17 August in Khartoum by the representatives of
the Transitional Military Council and the Forces for
Freedom and Change. That agreement is without a
doubt an important step towards ensuring solid stability
within the country over the long term. We would like
to particularly note the mediation efforts of Ethiopia
and the African Union, including under the Ethiopian
chairmanship, in the negotiations process. That was
a concrete example of the idea that African problems
require African solutions.

We must also pay tribute to the Sudanese people,
who have been able to overcome discord and reach an
agreement against the backdrop of continuing external
pressure. Regrettably, as in the past, we still note that
there are various outside forces that try to exploit the
difficult political situation in the country and tailor the
political developments in Khartoum to their narrow self-
interests. We repeat that resolving the domestic crisis in
the country is a matter for the Sudanese themselves.
The language of ultimatums and blatant inference in the

affairs ofa sovereign State are absolutely unacceptable.
It could all lead to heightened tensions.

With regard to the situation in Darfur, we can see
a significant improvement in the security situation. We
also note that there has been some normalization in the
humanitarian sphere. The general trend in regions that
the Blue Helmets have already left has not changed. We
believe that that again demonstrates that the Security
Council made the right decision when it reduced the
military component of UNAMID and decided on the
withdrawal of the mission in 2020. In September, we
look forward to the special report of the United Nations
and the African Union containing specific proposals
on the UNAMID drawdown. We would like to stress
that we are against any attempts to change the mission's
exit plan. The challenges facing Darfur today are of a
peacebuilding, not a peacekeeping, nature. The time has
come to focus on recovery and economic development
in Darfur and that should now be the priority of the
international community.

In conclusion, I would like to extend our condolences
to the Government and people of the Sudan with regard
to the 62 Sudanese who died at the beginning of July
following the heavy rainfall and flooding. According
to the media, that natural disaster seriously damaged
the country's economy and affected almost 200,000
people. More than 37,000 homes were destroyed. The
international community should come together to
provide assistance to Khartoum in that very difficult
situation. Once again, we urge all efforts to be directed
towards economic support for the Sudan, with a focus
on peacebuilding tasks and the development challenges.

