The President (interpretation from Spanish): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of July, I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
on behalf of the Council to His Excellency Mr. Detlev Graf
Zu Rantzau, Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of June 1995. I am sure that I speak
for all members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Graf Zu Rantzau for the great
diplomatic skill and unfailing courtesy with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Letter dated 25 June 1995 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (8/1995/510)

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council
table; Mr. Nobilo (Croatia) took the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I have
also received a request dated 5 July 1995 from Ambassador
Dragomir Djokic to address the Council. With the consent
of the Council, I propose to invite him to address the
Council in the course of the discussion of the item before
it.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 25 June 1995 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
report by the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia,
concerning the operations of the International
Conference's Mission to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) (S/1995/510).

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1995/537, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the Czech Republic, France,
Germany, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
Members of the Council have also received photocopies
of a letter dated 5 July 1995 from the Charge d'affaires
ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the United Nations and the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, which will be
issued as document S/ 1995/538.

The first speaker on my list is the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His
Excellency Mr. Muhamed Sacirbey, whom I welcome and
whom I invite to make his statement.


