Mr. Frattini (Italy): First of all, I would like to
thank you personally, Mr. President, for having
organized this very important high-level meeting.

Italy reaffirms its full support for the action that
all United Nations bodies take to prevent conflicts
within their respective areas of expertise. The Security
Council must strengthen and improve its mechanism
for interacting with the Secretary-General and with his
representatives and envoys engaged in various Chapter
VI actions to settle international disputes. At the same
time, parameters and modalities have to be identified to
enable mediation to begin at an early stage in order to
prevent disputes from degenerating into open conflicts.

The close relationship between peace and security
on the one hand, and development, human rights and
the rule of law on the other, signifies that the other
United Nations bodies also perform mediation
activities in a broader sense. In that context, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council have a contribution to make, especially in the
definition of general principles. But other bodies, such
as the Peacebuilding Commission and the Human
Rights Council, also have a role to play.

Peacebuilding often requires the inclusion of
important aspects of mediation in a political
stabilization process, namely, the implementation
phase of peace agreements. The special procedures of
the Human Rights Council - rapporteurs, independent
experts, et cetera - can also be deployed to define
aspects such as respect for human rights and free and
fair elections, which are often vital to the success of
mediation efforts. The Secretary-General has a leading
role in that field. That is why Italy supports the
initiative to strengthen the Secretariat's mediation
capacity, in particular through the expansion of the
Department of Political Affairs and the creation of a
Mediation Support Unit within the Department.

The capacities of regional organizations should
be strengthened by promoting the conclusion of
agreements between them and the United Nations. We
would support having the Security Council invite the
mediators appointed by regional organizations to report
on their activities in this forum on a more frequent
basis. As members are well aware, the European Union
was one of the first organizations to work to ensure and
provide effective cooperation with the United Nations.

One particularly effective modality is the
appointment of joint mediators holding mandates from
both the relevant regional organization and the United
Nations. The advantage of such a figure is twofold: he
or she will be more knowledgeable about local realities
and thus better able to influence the negotiating
process; at the same time, because the mediation has
been placed under the aegis of the United Nations, it
comes to represent the international community as a
whole and thus gains in terms of universal
legitimization and political support.
On the basis of the experience that Italy has
gained since the early 1990s - for example, through
our action in Mozambique - we believe that one of
the keys to successful mediation is the active role of
civil society. When strongly rooted in the territory or
interacting effectively with the parties to the conflict,
non-governmental organizations can make a unique
contribution. Forms of concrete interaction, including
on the part of the Security Council, with such
stakeholders can be reinvigorated in the light of
already consolidated experiences.

In the context of civil society's contribution,
close attention should be paid to the role of women, as
Minister de Gucht very rightly said. The Security
Council has often acknowledged that role, pursuant to
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security.

Finally, Italian experience has taught us that
mediation does not stop with the negotiation of a peace
agreement; the agreement must then be implemented.
We could call such activity micro-mediation with the
interested parties. It is pertinent to the action of
peacekeeping contingents, for example, which interact
in the field with the parties concerned on a daily basis.
In this case, it is a question of settling a wide variety of

problems - ranging from humanitarian assistance to
the organization of elections or the protection of
minorities - that often closely affect the issues or

interests at the root of the conflict.

In conclusion, that is why I guarantee the strong
support of Italy for the draft presidential statement that
we are about to adopt.

