Mr. Winid (Poland): I would ask you, Madam
President, to convey our thanks to Secretary of State
John Kerry for organizing this meeting. I would also
like to express thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed
and very useful briefing.

We are seriously concerned about the evolving
crisis in Syria and in Iraq. Extremists are waging a
brutal campaign of terror against the local population,
and especially ethnic and religious minorities, including
Christian minorities. Poland has been involved in the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq since 2003.
In those days, we helped the Iraqi authorities to restore
peace and security in the provinces of Karbala, Babil,
Al-Qadisiyah and An-Najaf. Accordingly, we condemn
the terrorist activity of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) which includes hijackings, torture and
brutal killings.

We also take note of the growing number of
internally displaced persons and refugees. We call for
free access of humanitarian assistance, especially for
the most vulnerable groups, including women, children
and disabled persons. We call on the Iraqi Government
to do its utmost to protect civilians, including members
of all ethnic and religious minorities. Crimes committed
by terrorists in northern Iraq should be investigated
by international criminal mechanisms so that those
responsible for the violations can be held accountable.

The terrorist structure seeking an Islamic
caliphate poses a direct threat to international peace
and security, which demands an urgent response from
the international community. The unprecedented
growth of ISIL and the spread of extremism in all its
manifestations, especially in the form of sectarian
tensions, have negative consequences for the security
and stability of the entire region of the Middle East and
beyond.

We are participating in efforts to help civilians in
need in the region. On 17 August, just two days after
the European Union decided to support Iraq in its fight
against ISIL, the first Polish Hercules transport plane
delivered eight tons of assistance to northern Iraq. We
have also funded facilities for a newly built school
in Erbil for refugee children. The Polish Minister for
Foreign Affairs awarded a number of scholarships for
Iraqi students at our universities. We will of course
continue the delivery of humanitarian aid.

While reaffirming Iraq's independence, unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty, we welcome
the establishment of the new Iraqi Government. We
are certain that it will be a Government of national
reconciliation that represents the interests of all Iraqi
citizens regardless of ethnic and religious divisions.
We pledge our support for the Iraqi people and the
Iraqi authorities and hope they will be able to restore
public order and the rule of law, promote intercultural
and interfaith dialogue and preserve the extremely rich
cultural heritage of Iraq. The international coalition
formed at the meetings in Jeddah and Paris deserves
our recognition and support. We are aware of the fact
that a strategy to combat ISIL cannot limit itself to a
military operation. It requires the preparation of a

plan for a political solution both with regard to Iraq
and to Syria. Our common efforts should help Iraq to
fully reintegrate into the region and the international
community.

