The Secretary-General: I am grateful for
this opportunity to address the Security Council
on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization in countering
terrorist threats.

We face an unprecedented threat from intolerance,
violent extremism and terrorism. It affects every
country, exacerbating conflicts and destabilizing entire
regions, and it is constantly evolving. The new frontier
is cyberterrorism: the use of social media and the dark
web to coordinate attacks, spread propaganda and
recruit new followers.

In response to that unprecedented threat, we are
taking unprecedented action. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and related
Security Council resolutions provide a comprehensive
framework. Pursuing and dismantling terrorist groups
is vital, but it is just one among many measures. We
must complement security measures with prevention
efforts that identify and address the root causes, while
always respecting human rights.

We must build the resilience of societies so that
people and communities reject terrorist narratives that
prey on fear and hopelessness. We must reinforce the
social compact, including the provision ofbasic services
and opportunities, particularly for young people. Most
recruits to terrorist groups are between 17 and 27 years
old. We need to provide paths that offer a sense of hope
and purpose to our young men and women, including
education, training and jobs. We need comprehensive
and inclusive approaches, starting at the grassroots,
where families and communities are on the front lines.

The subjugation of women and girls is something
that many extremist and terrorist groups have
in common, regardless of ideology. That is not a
coincidence; it is foundational to their purpose. Gender
equality and engaging women and girls must be central
to our efforts to prevent and counter terrorism. We also
need to support victims of terrorism, who have the
greatest moral authority and who consistently call for
justice. Among the victims are the children of foreign
terrorist fighters, who will need help to overcome
trauma and stigma as they grow up.

International cooperation is the first priority of
our Counter-Terrorism Strategy. No single country or
organization has all the answers to the cross-border
challenges posed by terrorism and by returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters. Countries need to
cooperate with one another as well as with partners,
including the private sector and civil society, to
successfully address such challenges.

The three organizations that are the subject of
today's ministerial debate are playing an important role
in promoting regional counter-terrorism cooperation
by facilitating the exchange of critical information
and knowledge and the implementation of joint
investigations and operations. The United Nations is
strengthening its institutional links with each of them.

Our partnership has established frameworks
for joint activities, exchanges of information and
collaboration on capacity-building assistance to
Member States, in line with the principles established by
the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact,
which guides all United Nations activities on counter-
terrorism.

I am particularly proud of our engagement,
together with the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, on the regional
Joint Action Plan for the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central
Asia. By developing a joint plan of action, the first
regional initiative of its kind, the parties involved have
shown what they can achieve with collective action,
leadership and political will.

The Joint Plan of Action contributes to
strengthening the capacities of Central Asian Member
States to enhance border security, prevent Violent
extremism conducive to terrorism and foster dialogue
with religious leaders. I would like to commend the
important work of the Interparliamentary Assembly of
Member Nations of the Commonwealth of Independent
States to harmonize the counter-terrorism legislation of
its members. Parliamentary engagement is critical in
creating comprehensive approaches that are effectively
resourced and anchored in human rights and the rule
of law.

Terrorism is fundamentally the denial and
destruction of human rights, and terrorist groups share
an agenda that is authoritarian, intolerant and frequently
misogynistic. Our efforts to counter terrorist ideology
must be founded on respect for the dignity and human
rights of all.

The counter-terrorism cooperation between the
United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
is deepening as it covers a growing range of issues. I
look forward to our continued cooperation as we work
together to end the threat of terrorism and build a more
secure and prosperous future for all.

