Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Allow me, at the
outset, to join others who have spoken before me to
congratulate you, Sir, and your country, Guinea, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. Many people have mistakenly called my office
to air their views on this issue, since my country's
name ends like yours. I have had to direct them to you.
I wish you well during your tenure. I would also like,
through you, to congratulate Germany on presiding
ably over the work of the Council last month.

When all is said and done, and indeed when this
debate has ended, the effects of the Council's final
decision in this matter will have far-reaching global
consequences because all of our countries, large and
small, will be affected in one way or another.

This matter does not affect only the Middle East
and the immediate region, but the whole world.
Already its consequences are being manifested at many
global levels. Not only are such manifestations
reflected in global opinions expressed, but also in the
incidents of violence that continue to take place in
many parts of the world.

But resolution by this Council of the issue before
us cannot be left in abeyance. Further delays will only
compound an already simmering, but impending,
volatile situation.

We have heard the progress reports of both Mr.
Blix and Mr. ElBaradei. To both gentlemen and their
teams we should express our deepest gratitude for their
diligence in the difficult tasks that they have had to
undertake under trying circumstances. While their
work has achieved much so far, it is fair to note that
their efforts could be made far easier, quicker and more
effective if there were more willingness to comply with
the provisions of resolution 1441 (2002) and, indeed,
numerous other resolutions of the Council, which
remain current and valid. There is no doubt that more
can be done by Iraq to comply with the Council's
resolutions in order to diffuse the extremely tense
situation with which the whole world is presently
confronted.

As many have advocated, war should be the last
resort, in the event that all else has failed. Many of our
nations have seen the aftermath of war and conflicts.
While the degrees of destruction may vary, the
common denominator ultimately is the ensuing human
suffering. Inevitably, that suffering is felt by all sides
of the conflict.

War should be avoided at all costs. Sustainable
peace with extreme vigilance by us all should be the
imperative. But if there should be a war or conflict, it
is our view that it should always be waged against the
scourges that afflict all of our collective humanity:
poverty, diseases and all forms of underdevelopment,
which desperately need addressing by us all. But if war
must be resorted to in this case, then the Council -
and thus the United Nations collectively - should be
the final arbiter of the decision or decisions that are to
be made.

In conclusion, at no other time since the birth of
the United Nations has the Security Council been faced
with a more challenging issue. The world has called for
the Council to act and decide this matter. It must be
allowed to so act and decide. Its decisions must bring
finality to the very long and outstanding issue before
us. We note that, in any event, the Council's decision
will define and herald the birth of a new international
order - one of far-reaching consequences that will
affect all of us.

