Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman, Director John Ging of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Simonovie for
their briefings illustrating the political and diplomatic
developments aimed at putting an end to the conflict
in Ukraine, as well as the situation on the ground, the
ceasefire agreed to in Minsk, the dire humanitarian
situation endured by the Ukrainians and the alarming
human rights situation facing the country.

As a matter of principle, Angola supports the
peaceful resolution of conflicts through dialogue
and negotiations, strict adherence to the principles
of international law, and respect for the sovereignty,
independence, non-interference and territorial integrity
of all States. Angola reiterates its full support for the
implementation of the package of measures agreed to
in Minsk on 12 February. We believe that a permanent
ceasefire will allow for the overall implementation of
the Minsk agreement and ultimately, the establishment
of peace in Ukraine.

We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Ukraine, where over all,
since the beginning of the conflict in mid-April 2014,
almost 6,000 people have been killed and almost 15,000
wounded. We regret that over 1 million people are
reported to be internally displaced. This is a situation
that must stop and the Ukrainian people must be
allowed to live with one another in peace and security.

We call once again on the parties to the conflict to
respect the ceasefire and to implement speedily and in
good faith the package of measures under the Minsk
agreements. Having been endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 2202 (2015), the agreement
carries special weight resulting from the Council's
authority in matters pertaining to international peace
and security. In addition, the agreements' endorsement
by the Council's unanimous adoption of that resolution
confers additional responsibilities on the Council and
on the parties to the conflict to enforce the ceasefire
and the Minsk agreements.

