Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Fall for his
briefing, and would like to join other Council members
in congratulating him and other members of his team
on their commendable work carried out during his term
in office, including the preparation and organization of
the Second International Conference on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region.

We agree with the observation made by Mr. Fall
that the momentum and positive atmosphere created by
the outcomes of the summit should be maintained and
utilized to strengthen regional cooperation through the
implementation of the decisions of the Conference and
to strengthen peace and democratization processes in
the countries of the region. The signing of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region is an important step for building trust and
confidence in the region, and should be fully supported
and followed up by the speedy implementation of its
provisions.

We congratulate the countries of the region on
establishing the Conference Executive Secretariat in
Bujumbura and the Special Fund for Reconstruction
and Development in the Great Lakes Region. We
express our hope that they will become fully
operational as soon as possible. We believe that the
international community must continue to provide full
support and assistance in that area, and we share the
concern expressed by Mr. Fall that the positive
atmosphere of trust that has been created could quickly
evaporate if we do not manage to carry through the
decisions and outcomes of the International Conference
and strengthen regional confidence and cooperation.

In that regard, it is crucial for the countries of the
region to assume full ownership of the process,
including by paying their assessments to the budget.
We agree with Mr. Fall that a successful project of
regional cooperation in the Great Lakes region can
positively influence developments in other parts of the
African continent, serving as a source of inspiration for
others to follow.

Nevertheless, despite all the positive
developments in the region, we remain concerned
about several pockets of instability in the area. In
particular, we are deeply concerned about the situation
regarding the peace negotiations with the Lord's
Resistance Army. The stalemate in the peace
negotiations and the inability to extend the truce have
returned us to the situation that prevailed in northern
Uganda and the surrounding region a year ago. Unless
we proceed quickly and resolutely on that issue, we
may miss the best opportunity for peace in Uganda that
has emerged in 20 years. In that regard, we look
forward to the visit of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Lord's Resistance Army-
affected areas, Joaquim Chissano, to New York later
this month and to hearing his ideas on how the Security
Council can help to reinvigorate the peace process.

