Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom):
Thank you, Mr. President, for leading us today. Your
presence here, I think, testifies to the importance of
this meeting.

It is extremely good to have President Kagame
with us. I think that, from the comments he has heard
so far from around the Council table, he will have a
very clear sense of where the Council is coming from. I
do not want to make any real comments; I would like
to put some questions to President Kagame,
subscribing in particular to what the representative of
Ireland has just said as a foundation for what I am
going to say, coming as we both do, along with France,
from the European Union's position on this issue.

In the past few days, since President Kagame's
meeting with President Joseph Kabila in Washington,
we have had further discussions with the Congolese
President and with his authorities. It is becoming clear
to us that the new Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo accepts the principle of
combined security for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for Rwanda and for Uganda, in particular -
there are other States involved as well. They have
indicated to us specifically that if the talks that are now
beginning and that must continue - because dialogue is
essential here 4 focus as a prime objective on the
combined security of the Great Lakes countries, then
they can see some progress being made. They will
respect Rwanda's legitimate interests if Rwanda
respects theirs. I would very much like President
Kagame's confirmation that he accepts that as a basic
principle of what we are going to try to do over the
next few weeks, because certain things follow from
that, and, of course, follow from what has already been
written in terms of Council resolutions, the Lusaka
accords and the disengagement agreements to which
Rwanda is party.

As a sub-question, President Kagame mentioned
as one of his three core issues the need to settle the
issue of the members of the former Rwandan Armed
Forces (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe; could he indicate to
us how many fighters bearing arms we are talking
about? Some perhaps could be reabsorbed into the
Rwanda Patriotic Army (RPA) or into Rwanda's
structures; some will not be. How many are we talking
about, that President Kagame is concerned about?

Secondly, does President Kagame accept the
Secretary-General's proposal of a first confidence-
building measure: withdrawal from Pueto by President
Kagame's forces, in combination with the deployment,
by arrangement, of observers from the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC)? I think that if President Kagame
could take the first step in implementing the
disengagement agreements we would begin to get
somewhere. It would be extremely important and
would put pressure on other parties to make balanced
disengagements which get the thing going. And that,
after all, is what we need in terms ofthe steps that have
to be taken over the next few weeks.

Thirdly, will President Kagame go to the Lusaka
meeting, which, I understand, has been arranged for 12
February, of heads of State of the region? We believe
that his presence there to continue these discussions is
exceptionally important. And there, or elsewhere, will
he meet President Joseph Kabila again soon? President
Kabila has indicated to us that he wishes to continue
his bilateral communication with President Kagame,
and we would like President Kagame's reciprocal
agreement in principle to that.

The next question is: Has President Kagame
given instructions to his armed forces to respect
Congolese property and to refrain from any
exploitation of the mineral wealth of the Congo? That
is a top requirement of the Security Council and we
will be pursuing that. I hope that that is taken very
seriously by his Government.

Finally, will President Kagame take action, within
the scope of his responsibility in practice in that region,
for the protection of human rights and to ensure that
child soldiers are not recruited into any military
activity in the area of the Rwandan Patriotic Army's
operations?

I think all these questions are very important for
our discussions and I hope that we can make progress
over the next few weeks leading up to the meeting on
21 and 22 February with the Political Committee in this
Council.

