Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for convening this session and for guiding us so
effectively as President this month. We welcome the fact
that you have focused the Council's attention on issues
of crucial importance to Africa, including the lethal
threat from the alliance of terrorism and transnational

crime, and that Chad has received recognition for its
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping.

Ambassador Perceval has just quoted probably the
most revered Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjold,
and I will too. He famously said that the United Nations
was not created to take humanity to heaven but to save
it from hell. In the past two years of Australia's term on
the Council, heaven has never been within reach, but
there were many days when it seemed we were already
deep in hell - the massacres and mass rapes in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the brutal
killings of civilians in South Sudan; the horrific attacks
committed by both Seleka and anti-balaka forces in the
Central African Republic, where we only barely averted
disaster and where the killing in Bangui stopped
because there was no one left to kill; the awful rising
toll of United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers deliberately targeted and killed in situations
as diverse as Syria, Mali, Iraq and the Sudan; and the
constant drumbeat of horrific terrorist attacks with
children so often the victims.

A number of situations that had appeared to be on
a positive trajectory have deteriorated sharply. In Libya
and Yemen, conflict has broken out. Only a year after
the Council applauded Sierra Leone's Foreign Minister
in this Chamber for his county's peacebuilding
achievements at the end of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (see S/PV.7034),
the Ebola crisis threatens the gains that that country,
Liberia and Guinea have made in the past decade.

We have witnessed a deliberate pattern of
provocation, destabilization and outright aggression
that have led to the annexation of Crimea; conflict in
eastern Ukraine, with over 4,500 dead in the past 10
months; and a commercial aircraft shot out of the sky,
with 298 killed, including 38 Australians. There are
ominous indications of a further threat to the territorial
integrity of Georgia.

And then there is Syria - a situation already
extremely grave two years has grown immeasurably
worse two years later. Over 200,000 people have now
been killed, 12.3 million require urgent humanitarian
assistance, and over half the population has been
displaced. The Syrian regime's deliberate targeting ofits
citizens through the use ofbarrel bombs and siege-and-
starve tactics continues to violate every civilized norm,
despite the Council's unanimous demand that they stop.
We have seen the extremes to which the regime will
go: torture on an industrial scale, as evidenced in the
Caesar report, and the use of chemical weapons against
civilians in Guta and on multiple occasions since. That
has spawned the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, with its horrific oppression - an exhibitionist
defiance of the most basic norms of human behaviour.
As Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos told the
Council on 15 December (see S/PV.7342), we have run
out of words to describe this.

Worldwide, almost 60 million people are now
displace by conflict, either internally or as refugees,
which is the highest number since Second World War.
One hundred and twenty million people are in need of
urgent humanitarian assistance, the vast majority due
to conflict. The dimensions of the challenges before
the Council are staggering. We face more simultaneous
conflicts with a bigger impact on a larger number
of people across a wider swathe of the world that at
any time since the Second World War. Terrorism is
resurgent, and in large areas rampant.

It will, of course, always be the case that the
Council will be judged by its failures. Our failure
to break the geopolitical stalemate on Syria will be
a permanent stain, but faced with that catalogue of
crisis and conflict, the Council has sought to respond.
We have not always succeeded, but the Council had
endeavoured to use the tools it has in innovative ways,
and sometimes to decisive effect.

Peacekeeping is the Council's primordial tool. The
number of peacekeeping missions and the number of
personnel deployed are at record levels. The Council has
taken some crucial steps to strengthen peacekeeping,
and the Secretary-General's current high-level review
should consolidate these. The establishment of the Force
Intervention Brigade in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in March last year took robust peacekeeping for
the protection of civilians to a new level. The mandates
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic confirm that trend. The
decision of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
to shelter 80,000 civilians initially in its bases when
violence broke out a year ago demonstrated, we hope,
a new mindset.

As we commemorated the twentieth anniversary of

the genocide in Rwanda a few months later, there seemed
to be some sign that the international community now
recognized that we had a responsibility to protect that
requires us to respond in the face of mass atrocity,
and that this might mean something in practice. Later
today, we must act to help the people protect the people
ofNorth Korea by inscribing a new item on our agenda,
"The situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea". That is a situation of a totalitarian State
systematically and grossly violating the most basic
human rights of its citizens in a way unparalleled in
today's world.

In the past two years, the Council has used
another key tool, sanctions, as a response to threats
to international peace and security. The Council has
applied sanctions to two new situations, in the Central
African Republic and Yemen, while calibrating
existing sanctions regimes to better respond to evolving
situations. New listing criteria have been developed
with more direct focus on listing perpetrators of crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We have also pursued
accountability. While the Council has been unable to
provide the International Criminal Court the support
it deserves and needs, it is paying closer attention to
the link between human rights and conflict. Some resist
this, but the linkage is as linear as it is unassailable. The
just-published report of the International Commission
of Inquiry on Serious Crimes Committed in the Central
African Republic provides ample demonstration.

Australia came on to the Council convinced that
elected members could and should contribute across
the whole Council agenda, but we also knew that it
was important to identify practical issues that required
Council attention and on which we could focus in
order to try and make a difference. Our initiatives
on small arms, which resulted in the adoption of
resolution 2117 (2013) in September 2013, and on
policing, which resulted in the adoption of resolution
2185 (2014), adopted last month, sought to fill gaps
in the most defining Council task - the prevention
or control of conflict. Our ambition, shared with
Luxembourg and Jordan, to tackle the humanitarian
crisis in Syria - the single greatest humanitarian
crisis the world faces - reflected the determination
of three elected members to find a way through the
political gridlock of the permanent five members (P-5).
We succeeded certainly because we were determined,
but fundamentally also because the P-5 needed us to
succeed. There is a lesson for elected members in that.

Resolution 2191 (2014), adopted last week, was our
third Syrian resolution since February and has renewed
the historic mandate of resolution 2165 (2014), on
access across borders. As penholder on Afghanistan we
have sought to ensure strong Council support for that
country's transition to a democratic future. Resolution
2189 (2014), adopted 10 days ago, is designed to
underwrite that through a continuing international
presence to assist the Afghan security forces following
the conclusion of the International Security Assistance
Mission's combat mission at the end of this month.

Our experience as Chair of the Sanction Committees
on Al-Qaida, Taliban and Iran confirmed our view
that the United Nations system needs to modernize
and professionalize its approach to sanctions. We have
worked hard to that end in chairing our committees;
as a co-sponsor with Sweden, Greece, Germany and
Finland; at the high-level review of United Nations
sanctions; and in regular Council negotiations. There
is a strong and growing demand among affected States
and United Nations Members in general - since all
are obligated to implement the Council's sanctions
decisions - to engage with relevant committees and to
access technical assistance.

Australia intended to put forward a draft resolution
that would provide the United Nations system with
the capacity it needed to respond to that demand.
Unfortunately, despite the overwhelming support
of the United Nations membership for assistance, a
Council consensus has not been achievable, but that of
course is not the end of the matter. The conversation
has started; Member States will demand more by way
of participation and technical assistance from the
Council and the Secretariat; and the delivery of the
recommendations at the high-level review shortly will
be the next important phase in that work, and we will
continue to pursue it after the conclusion of our term.

As we approach the seventieth anniversary of the
Charter of the United Nations next year, it would be
nice to think that the fundamental norms it contains are
unversally accepted and no longer require protection,
but, ominously, that is not the case. Key precepts
of the Charter - including respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, the prohibition on the use of
force in inter-State relations, and the legal framework
for the protection of individuals in conflict and in
peacetime - have been dramatically defied in the past
year. The Council must continue to be vigilant and work
continuously, whatever the obstacles, to ensure that
those fundamental norms are protected for all Member
States and for the hundreds of millions of individuals
who look to the United Nations for protection.

To conclude, as Australia finishes its term, I would
like to thank the entire membership of the United
Nations for giving us the privilege of representing them
on the Council for the past two years, and convey our
uninhibited support to members ofthe Council for 2015
as they take over what is an immense responsibility. We
also convey our deepest gratitude to all United Nations
personnel at Headquarters and in the field who work
so hard and often in great danger to fulfil the tasks
the Council gives them and to realize the ideals of the
Charter. They are truly the custodians of the best of
humanity.

Finally, I would like to thank all Council
members, the Security Council Affairs Division for the
remarkable experience of working with them. Whatever
the Council's failures, we have also achieved a great
deal together and the whole Australian team is deeply
grateful for that.
