Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations gives the
Council the responsibility to

"determine the existence of any threat to the peace,
breach of the peace, or act of aggression and shall
make recommendations to maintain or restore
international peace and security".

Among the greatest threats to peace and security is the
use of chemical weapons. That is why for more than two
decades, the international community has outlawed the
production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons.
For almost half a decade, the Council has worked
tirelessly to put an end to the use of such weapons
in Syria.

But for the tenth time regarding Syria and for the
fourth time regarding chemical weapons, Russia has
actively obstructed the international community's
ability to identify the perpetrators of chemical-weapon
attacks. Russia has issued vetoes before in order to
prevent Council action and ensure accountability in
Syria. Russia has invented reasons not to support a
mechanism that it helped created, because it did not like
its scientific conclusions. Russia has acted to obstruct
those investigations many times, but today it strikes
a deep blow. Russia has killed the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), which has the
overwhelming support of the Council.

By eliminating our ability to identify the attackers,
Russia has undermined our ability to deter future
attacks. Al-Assad and ISIS will no longer be on notice
for the use of chemical weapons as a result of Russia's
actions today. The message to anyone listening is clear.
In effect, Russia accepts the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. How then can we trust Russia's supposed support
for peace in Syria? How can anyone take Russia's
proposal for political talks in Sochi seriously?

I have lost count of how many times I have stood
in this Chamber and implored Russia to do the right
thing in Syria. But instead Russia has played games.
Russia wants a mechanism, but not an independent
one. It wants reporting, but not if it blames Syria. If
Council members pay attention, they will notice that
the Russians think the JIM. works great when it finds
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant at fault for
chemical weapons, but when the perpetrator is one of
its own friends, the problem is suddenly the JIM, not its
friend that committed the crime.

But Russia knows how bad it looks to defend a
regime's use of chemical weapons, so it attempts to
create a distraction. In this case, the distraction is the
draft resolution that it offered. The draft resolution
would also allow Russia or any other member to
micromanage the JIM. and it would put the Council in
the absurd position of putting the fox in charge of the
henhouse, having countries such as Russia and Syria
dictate how, when and where we investigate the use of
chemical weapons.

In recent weeks, the United States has taken
great pains to work with Russia in drafting our draft
resolution. It is a shame that we found out today they
had planned to veto it the entire time. We revised our
draft resolution three times to incorporate Russia's
concerns and those of all Council members. At the
same time, Russia refused to hold a single consultation
on its own draft, while we held many consultations. It
is clear now that the only concern Russia had was that
the JIM. even existed and that it was capable of finding
the truth. Russia had hoped to bury the truth about
chemical weapons in Syria, but it has failed. We know
who is behind these attacks. The JIM. has provided that
information time and time again. The United States will
not give up on trying to achieve justice for the victims
in Syria.

Tragically, these attacks are ongoing. New cases
are being alleged. Russia has destroyed our best tool for
attributing these attacks, but it is not our only tool for
ending this barbaric practice. There is the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic. There is the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which
is mandated to generate the evidence to bring fair and
independent criminal proceedings against those who
commit atrocities in Syria.

And if and when it is necessary, there is the
United States of America. Regardless of what its
Russian protectors do in the Security Council, the
Al-Assad regime should be on clear notice that the
United States does not accept Syria's use of chemical
weapons. As we did in April, we will do it again if
we must - we will defend the international standard
against chemical-weapons use. It would be wise for the
Al-Assad regime to heed this warning.

The Security Council created the JIM. in a rare
moment of unity. I thank the other members of the
Council for their support, but what a shame it is that
Russia has brought us to this point. What a shame it
is that Russia has revealed itself to be a Government
whose allegiance is to the Syrian regime, not to the
truth or the protection of innocent civilians. Russia may
have succeeded in silencing one independent voice in
Syria today, but there are others that will carry on this
work, and we will not stop until there is justice for the
victims and accountability for the perpetrators of the
chemical-weapons attacks in Syria.

