Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to join the
previous speakers in thanking Prosecutor Bensouda for
presenting of her eleventh report on Libya.

Japan is committed to the establishment of the
rule of law in the international community and is
convinced of the importance of accountability. That is
why Japan has consistently supported the activities of
the International Criminal Court (ICC). I would like
to assure the Prosecutor of Japan's full support for the
work of her Office.

The Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1970 (2011) and referred the situation in
Libya to the Prosecutor of the ICC. The Council decided
that the Libyan authorities shall cooperate fully with
the ICC and put them under the obligation to do so. It is
encouraging that Libya has been cooperative with the
ICC on many occasions to achieve justice in Libya. We
hope that this cooperation will be enhanced. We also
value and appreciate the cooperation extended to the
ICC by the relevant States, such as Jordan and Tunisia.
Cooperation is a vital element for the ICC to function
effectively and produce a successful outcome.

They security situation in Libya continues to be
unstable. It is therefore not hard to imagine the serious
difficulties faced by the Office of the Prosecutor in
conducting investigations. However, it is unfortunate to
learn from the briefing that, despite the tireless efforts
by the Prosecutor, little progress has been made on
the cases. Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi still remains
out of the ICC's custody even though the Pre-Trial
Chamber decided on December 2014 that refusing to
surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the ICC was an act of
non-compliance by Libya. We encourage the relevant
authorities of the countries concerned, including the
Government of National Accord in Libya, to make
further efforts to cooperate with the ICC on this matter.

We are also disturbed by reports of continuing
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law in Libya. In the light of the importance of
achieving accountability in the political process,
we cannot simply let such crimes and violations
remain unpunished. As the Council called for in the
relevant resolutions, those perpetrators must be held
accountable. In that connection, we note that the
Office of the Prosecutor has been assessing the crimes
allegedly committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da'esh and will possibly open an investigation.
We look forward to a further update on that.

Given the challenges that Libya faces, it is of
paramount importance to support the Government of
National Accord and conclude the political process in
a peaceful and inclusive manner. In that regard, the
Government of Japan reiterates its support to Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, on his efforts to conclude a United Nations-
facilitated and Libyan-led political process that seeks
to secure peace, stability and prosperity for the people
of Libya.

Japan is fully committed to the ICC, including the
Office of the Prosecutor. As a member of the Security
Council, we would like to work to strengthen the
relationship between the Council and the ICC.

