Mr. Mikec (Croatia): Let me first express, on
behalf of the Croatian Government, our strongest
condemnation of the terrorist attack on United Nations
premises in Abuja, and extend our deepest condolences
to the families of the victims, the people and
Government of Nigeria, and the United Nations as a
whole.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your
team for your successful conduct of the Council's work
this month and especially for convening this important
debate. My delegation aligns itself with the statement
of the European Union. However, allow me to take part
in this timely debate by adding a few comments in my
national capacity.

The concepts of peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
like the international landscape, are constantly
changing, and the role of the United Nations in
multidimensional peacekeeping is becoming ever more
complex and deeper as it aims at resolving the
underlying causes, and not just the symptoms.

Over the years Croatia has gained extensive and
valuable knowledge and experience with United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, taking
into the account our path from hosting peacekeepers to
becoming a strong contributor to numerous
peacekeeping operations. In this regard, Croatia is
making every effort to use its experience in helping
other countries in need to overcome their difficulties.
Let me highlight some issues that we feel need further
attention.

The concept of peacekeeping cannot be touched
upon without mentioning two documents: the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809) and the New Horizon initiative.
Croatia supports guidelines provided in these
documents, especially the premise that conflict cannot
be resolved first and foremost by military means, but
that we must rather seek to address problems at their
root causes. Lasting peace and security can be achieved
only through adherence to the three interlinked and
firmly grounded basic pillars of security, development
and the protection of human rights.

Genuine and sustainable peace can be
accomplished only through the thorough rebuilding of
core national institutions and their functions, as well as
their employment on behalf of all social, religious and
ethnic groups. Therefore, peacekeeping has to be
considered as a beginning of the peacebuilding
process. Such a multidimensional approach needs to be
reflected in mission planning processes.

A clear political strategy and integrated mission
planning are extremely important and should include
the provision of a precisely defined mandate with clear
and objective benchmarks and goals that reflect the
actual situation on the ground and are as depoliticized
as possible, as well as a clear exit strategy. In order to
ensure that expected gaps are minimized and to
increase overall efficiency, we believe that each new
mission needs to be tailored to concrete conditions and
political realities on the ground.

We believe that cooperation and coordination
among the main stakeholders within United Nations
and troop- and police-contributing countries need to be
strengthened. Peacekeeping operations should be
planned with the unambiguous support of a core
number of nations willing to provide troops for
proposed mission. In that regard, Croatia welcomes the
ongoing practice of interaction with the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, which offers a
comprehensive overview on the situation of each
operation.

Croatia recognizes and supports the Council's
intention to further strengthen coherence among
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in its
work, and we particularly welcome the Council's
practice of transforming some former peacekeeping
missions into integrated peacebuilding missions. This
practice accords with the mandates and activities of
other stakeholders in charge of peacebuilding,
especially the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and
opens the door to further fruitful cooperation among
them. In that context, let me express here our hope that
the PBC's relevant knowledge and experience of
specific issues concerning countries that are on the
agendas of both the Security Council and the PBC will
find their way into the Council's deliberations.

The implementation of protection of civilians
mandates continues to be one of the most operationally
complex tasks for United Nations peacekeeping.
United Nations troops, police and civilians on the
ground continue to develop innovative approaches to
the protection of civilians. In that respect, Croatia
strongly support the implementation of a strategic
framework to guide the drafting of comprehensive
protection of civilians strategies, particularly a series
of protection of civilians training models for military,
police and civilian personnel. The Republic of Croatia
itself develops civilian and military capabilities
focused on training, education and mentoring of the
national forces of conflict-affected countries. Those
capabilities, properly adapted to concrete missions,
contribute to security and stability, especially by
providing assistance in the process of establishing self-
sustaining national forces and authorities.

In the conduct of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts, two additional aspects - cooperation among
international agencies and regional and subregional
organizations, and the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts - have to be considered in
order to strengthen overall achievements. Croatia
believes that these two aspects should be encouraged
as much as possible.

Finally, allow me to express Croatia's support for
the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (A/65/ 19). Even though much still can be
done, we believe that the report provides vital input to
the membership's continued efforts to implement the
United Nations peacekeeping reform agenda, and
shapes the future of United Nations peacekeeping.
Croatia will continue to contribute to that end.

In conclusion, we would like to recognize the
crucial role of all men and women serving in United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and in that regard we
condemn all attacks on United Nations peacekeeping
personnel. We would like to highlight our belief that
safety and security of all United Nations personnel are
of paramount importance.

