Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to express the satisfaction of
the delegation of Mali in seeing, your country,
Mr. President - Kazkahstan - preside over the
Security Council for this month of January. At the
same time, I would like to congratulate Japan on its
outstanding conduct of the Council's work during the
past month.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his tireless efforts to
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali and for the operationalization of the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel - two guarantees for
lasting stability throughout the region.

I would like to express our warm congratulations to
the newly elected members of the Council, namely, Cote
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland,
and assure them of our full and complete cooperation
for the success of their work in the service of peace.
I would also like to express our deep gratitude to the
delegations of Egypt, Japan, Senegal, Ukraine and
Uruguay for their excellent contribution in the pursuit
of solutions to the emerging challenges related to, inter
alia, environmental degradation, irregular migration,
trafficking of all kinds, and the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism, as well as the repeated asymmetric
attacks targeting United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the fulfilment of their mandates.

In the same vein, I would like to congratulate
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his excellent presentation
of the report under consideration (S/2017/1105).

The Government of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General and is pleased with the
quality of the cooperation between the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and the Government of the
Republic ofMali. That is demonstrated by the existence
of mechanisms between the two parties to evaluate
the criteria for monitoring the implementation of the
Agreement, as well as in the area of human rights.

The Government of Mali fully supports the
Secretary-General's assessment that undeniable
progress has been made at the political and institutional
levels and with regard to defence, security, justice and
economic development issues, as well as the provision
of basic social services.

We see that progress as a source of encouragement
for the Malian parties and for all our partners, whose
assistance and multifaceted support are particularly
appreciated. Without needing to recall the long list
of those developments, which reflect the will and
commitment of the Government of Mali, under the
authority of the Head of State, I would simply like to
underscore that such progress contributes to the gradual
restoration of peace and security in our country.

However, time is in short supply. I would like
to reaffirm the determination of the President of the
Republic of Mali to make every effort to accelerate
the implementation of the Agreement, for we remain
deeply convinced that there is no alternative to that
peaceful way for the lasting settlement of the complex
crisis in Mali. With regard to the prospects for 2018 in
connection with the implementation of the Agreement,
the Government of Mali will continue its efforts to
maintain the climate of increasing trust between the
signatory parties and to initiate a draft law on national
agreement in order to take up the proposals of the
national conference of understanding.

Anxious to meet the deep aspirations of all
our people, the Head of State has assigned the new
Government team the following four priorities:
completion of the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation; containment of the increasing
insecurity in the centre of the country; meeting social
demands by accelerating the implementation of the
presidential programme on urgent social needs; and
the organization of transparent, credible and peaceful
elections. As the Security Council can see, the
implementation of the Agreement is at the top of the
President's priorities.

The initiative of the Head of State to launch the
adoption process for the law on national understanding,
in line with implementing the charter for peace, unity
and national reconciliation issued as the outcome of the
national conference ofunderstanding, is also part ofthat
dynamic. That law seeks to rebuild the social fabric and
national unity and to strengthen reconciliation among
Malians by means of the exemption from prosecution
of all those involved in armed rebellion but who have
no blood on their hands; measures to restore calm
after accelerating the trials under way and granting
reparations to recognized victims; and a reintegration
programme for all those who lay down their arms and
publically and frankly commit to renouncing violence.
In that way, the Government will rapidly initiate a
draft law on national understanding that will reflect
those proposals.

It is because time is in short supply that, in addition
to that bold initiative of the President, the Government
will also seek to expedite the implementation of
political and institutional reforms, of the cantonment
and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, security sector reform, as well as the return of
refugees and displaced persons.

I also mention the holding, on 15 and 16 January, of
the twenty-third session of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee in Mali, which welcomed and validated
the timeline of priority actions selected by the
Malian parties. The timeline provides a road map for
implementing key provisions of the Agreement that
are conducive to stabilizing the country and holding
forthcoming elections. The Committee urged the
Malian parties to respect the commitments made and
encouraged the international community to provide
support in that regard.

In order to ensure greater efficiency in the dialogue
among the parties to the Agreement, the Malian parties
have agreed to the future participation of MINUSMA
and the lead partner of the international mediation at
the meetings of the inter-Malian discussion mechanism
as observers. All the details ofthis timeline are annexed
to the updated memorandum on the actions undertaken
by the Government and were distributed as Security
Council documents.

One of the major challenges to the stabilization of our
country lies in meeting the political deadlines to come.
The sovereign decision of the Government of Mali to
postpone the elections, initially scheduled for December
2017, to 2018 is due to the concern for inclusiveness
and openness of the top Malian authorities with a View
to creating an environment that is most conducive
to holding those elections. I take this opportunity to
reiterate the commitment of the Government of Mali
to organizing free, credible and transparent elections
within the constitutional deadlines and throughout the
national territory - taking into account the law on
gender so as to ensure the representativeness of women
in elected positions.

In addition, the Government is making every
effort to implement the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants.
In that connection, it should be recalled that, out of
the $50 million earmarked for the implementation of
the programme, the Government of Mali, despite its
limited resources, financed $10 million ofits own funds
to supplement the $15 million dollars provided by the
World Bank, which I commend. I hope that, with the
support of other partners, the gap will soon be bridged.

In the same vein, I am pleased to report that the
National Security Sector Reform Council has already
prepared a road map for the finalization of the national
security sector reform strategy. In that connection, at the
latest meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee
both signatory parties undertook to finalize, before
2 February, the consensual criteria and quotas for the
integration of ex-combatants within the national army.

In addition to improving security conditions in
the northern regions of the country, the Government
attaches particular importance to the situation in
the central regions of Mali, particularly the regions
of Mopti and Segou. Repeated attacks on civilians
and State officials undermine efforts to restore State
authority over the territory and hinder the provision by
the State of basic social services to our fellow citizens
in those regions.

This is a major challenge that the Government
intends to address through the rapid acceleration of the
effective operationalization of the integrated security
plan for the central regions, in order to guarantee the
peace of mind that would enable the effective return of
the administration to that part of the country, thereby
enabling children to go to school in peace and the
people to go about their business normally. Likewise,
the Government will immediately organize an inclusive
political dialogue on the security situation in the centre
of the country.

With regard to the human rights situation referred
to in the report of the Secretary-General under
consideration, I note that the establishment of a
ministry fully dedicated to human rights in successive
Governments illustrates the unwavering political will
of Malian authorities for the promotion and protection
of human rights. Despite the difficult situation in Mali,
the Government has committed itself to that task. I can
report to the Council that the Minister of Justice has
already given instructions to the judicial authorities
in affected jurisdictions to open investigations and
inquiries into allegations of human rights violations
set out in the report, including cases of forced
disappearances, arrests and arbitrary detentions. Those
efforts are possible thanks to the dynamic cooperation
of the Ministries of Justice and Human Rights with the
Human Rights Division of MINUSMA.

As for the humanitarian situation, it should be noted
that the Government of Mali is resolutely committed to
meeting the challenges related to the return of displaced
persons and refugees in optimal conditions; providing
access for people affected by the crisis to basic social
services, including education, health, nutrition, water,
hygiene and sanitation; and improving the livelihoods
and resilience of the people. Moreover, the Lyce'e de
Kidal was reopened for the school year 2017-2018 and
the State effectively returned in all the regional capitals
of the North and the main towns in the region.

I would like to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to the agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations and to all other humanitarian actors
operating in Mali, which continue to provide assistance
to refugees, displaced persons and those left behind in
crisis-affected areas.

With regard to MINUSMA-related security, the
Government of Mali renews its request to strengthen the
operational capabilities of the United Nations Mission
in Mali so as to allow it to fully discharge its mandate.
For my part, I welcome the signing, on 8 November
2017, of the memorandum of understanding between
MINUSMA and the Government of Mali on the
Mission's support for the Malian armed forces. We call
for the diligent implementation of the memorandum,
with a View to creating the conditions for the restoration
of State authority throughout the national territory, in
particular by allowing the return of the Administration
and the defence and security forces to all northern
regions, including Kidal.

At the regional level, Mali welcomes the progress
made in the process of operationalizing the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel. I welcome the support
of the Council and of all bilateral and multilateral
partners for the Force.

While the Malian presidency will end in the
coming weeks, Mali remains fully committed to the
security and development goals of the Organization.
We must hasten the signing of the technical agreement
that we discussed here this morning and pursue the
mobilization efforts of all bilateral and multilateral
partners for this security project that is critical for the
Group of Five for the Sahel countries and, above all,
enhances all efforts made since the beginning of the
Malian crisis - especially in the context of the spread
of the terrorist threat.

In conclusion, I reiterate the thanks and gratitude
of Mali and its President to the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative in Mali and all MINUSMA
personnel, as well as to the troop-contributing countries,
the French force Barkhane, the European training
mission and the members of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, led by Algeria, for their tireless support for
the peace and stabilization process in our country.

The Government of Mali strongly condemns
all cowardly and barbaric attacks on national and
international forces and on civilians. I reiterate our
condolences to the families of all victims - civilian
and military, foreign and Malian - who have fallen
in the fight against terrorism on the field of honour in
Mali and elsewhere.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
