Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, and sisterly Syria
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council.
We have every confidence in your abilities and in the
success of your presidency.

There was every reason to call for the convening
of this open Security Council meeting on the question
of Palestine to follow the development of events and
incidents in the Palestinian territories, which we
believe must be perceived primarily as an issue of
occupation. Addressing that issue requires, on the one
hand, a political vision and, on the other, the dispatch
of a neutral international third party.

First, this question must be considered primarily
as an issue of occupation, with all its attendant
practices, including the suppression of rights. It is the
last remaining situation of occupation faced by the
international community. The reason for that situation
is the occupier's rejection of the international will, of
Security Council resolutions and of all other
international instruments and agreements, in particular
those pertaining to occupation and its practices.

In our view, and in the view of the entire
international community, the most important reason for
this impasse is the Council's inability to deter the
occupier and, by the means provided under the
provisions of the Charter, to compel it to respect the
resolutions of international legitimacy. We have come
up against that fact again and again in the Council. The
occupying Power continues to defy all international
norms, while the Council regrettably remains a
prisoner to a lack of the necessary political will. That,
in turn, has freed Israel from responsibility and
accountability under international norms and the texts
and instruments of the United Nations itself, in
particular those ofthe Council.

Secondly, in the light of the representative of
Israel's statement this morning, we believe that to
consider the question of Palestine from the perspective
of the Palestinian people's reactions to the practices of
occupation on the one hand and the occupying Power's
escalation of those practices in response on the other
distracts us from the core of the question and its
political foundations. The issue is one of occupation,
and all occupations generate legitimate resistance until
they are brought to an end.

In the absence of a political vision for the
resolution of the question of Palestine, how can we not
expect the Palestinian people to reject occupation as a
permanent situation and its practices as natural?
Indeed, no actions to resist occupation took place
following the Madrid and Oslo conferences, because
the Palestinian people had pinned all their hopes and
expectations on peace treaties that they expected would
lead to a just, lasting and comprehensive political
settlement of the question of Palestine.

However, without any light at the end of the
political tunnel, as is the case now, it is pointless for
any political or military authority, however influential,
to wager continually on the security option alone in the
absence of a political vision to resolve the question.

One need only read the op-ed article written by
the head of the Israeli Government that appeared last
Sunday in a United States newspaper to see that the
Israeli Government has no intention of opening up the
political horizon.

Thirdly, the only solution lies in opening up the
political horizon, so that all parties can enjoy their
rights and abide by their obligations. The role of the
international community in this respect is to
internationalize the settlement through an international
peace conference encompassing all positive ideas,
views and initiatives. Such a conference should be
based on previous agreed frameworks, in order to
realize the vision of two independent States coexisting
within secure international borders, in keeping with the
decisions of the international community and the
resolutions ofthe Security Council.

Fourthly, along with a political vision, there must
be a neutral third party on the ground to serve as a
deterrent and as a security guarantee to all parties, in
order to put an end to the cycle of action and reaction.

In this regard, it would be sufficient to follow up
on the proposal made by the Secretary-General to set
up a multinational force to separate the two sides, with
a view to ensuring their security. Indeed, that security
will never be guaranteed by the policy of fragmenting
Palestinian territories - separating Palestinian lands
and isolating them from each other - or by besieging
the Palestinian people, restricting their movement and
stifling their economy.

The situation today requires that we keep an open
mind and deal with the political and humanitarian
realities in all their dimensions, both present and
future, in order to save the entire region from an
unknown and potentially dangerous fate. In the context
of the current delicate international situation, this
requires that all of us be level-headed and that we look
to the future from the perspective not of narrow
interests but of peaceful coexistence among States,
nations and civilizations.

