Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation welcomes
this open debate on youth, peace and security. We
wish to thank all the briefers for their comprehensive
briefings. The independent progress study on youth,
peace and security (see S/2018/86) was particularly
useful and illuminating.

The world today has more young people than ever
before - 46 per cent ofthe global population is under 26
years of age. Many parts ofthe world, including my own
country, has a youth bulge, with young people making

up a majority of our populations. Inspired by hope,
optimism and an unbridled sense of idealism, youth are
agents ofchange in their communities and societies. Yet,
despite being repositories of the world's greatest hopes,
the young also find themselves at the forefront of some
of the biggest challenges that we confront today. In an
ever-changing and increasingly complex world, they
face the pressures from socioeconomic inequalities,
political and social exclusion, discrimination and a lack
of fair opportunity.

Young people are also some of the worst victims
in situations of armed conflict, humanitarian crisis,
foreign occupation and long-standing and unresolved
disputes. Their sense of justice is aroused and their
patience is frequently tested by the inconsistent and
often selective global response to their pain, suffering
and plight. Yet we see that many of the fundamental
causes enraging our youth are often conspicuous by
their absence in our discourse on those issues.

As Secretary-General Antonio Guterres reminded
us recently,

"No one is born a terrorist, and nothing
justifies terrorism, but we know that factors such
as prolonged unresolved conflicts, lack of the
rule of law and socioeconomic marginalization
can all play a role in transforming grievances into
destructive action."

The toxic message of violent extremism preys on the
vulnerability of youth, recruiting them to its violent
ways by playing on their sensitivity to injustice and
oppression, and propagating hate, intolerance and
violence as the sole response to numerous inequities.
If one has nothing to live for, one finds something to
die for. We must break that nexus between desperation
and hopelessness.

The role of youth lies at the heart of international
peace and security. For far too long, young men have
been considered perpetrators of violence, and young
women its victims. While a small minority of youth
takes to violence, sweeping characterizations of young
populations have for long exacerbated their sense
of marginalization. It is time to debunk those false
stereotypes. It is time to recognize that youth are not
merely instruments of war, but essential partners in
peacebuilding. They are architects for economic and
social development and the establishment of effective,
inclusive institutions.

We need to fight the Violence of exclusion by talking
to young people, listening to them and giving them the
voice that they deserve. Resolution 2250 (2015), on
youth, peace and security, redresses that critical gap in
global thinking by recognizing the key role of youth
in conflict prevention and promoting lasting peace. We
must build on that momentum. There cannot be any
half measures in seeking to translate our commitment
to our youth.
My country, Pakistan, is proud to have led the
charge in successfully implementing holistic and
comprehensive strategies to counter the narrative of
extremism, and at the same time engage our youth so
that they can become productive members of our society.
We have adopted a whole-of-society approach based on
engagement with civil society, including faith leaders,
local communities and the media, to promote the
concept of a plural society based on building peaceful
and harmonious communities. A major focus of that
approach has been the empowerment of youth at the
grassroots level by engaging them as decision-makers
in the decision-making process.

We are also investing in youth so as to provide
them an opportunity to live their dreams and enable
them to become my country's future leaders. My
Government has launched the comprehensive Prime
Minister's youth programme, which aims at providing
the young and underprivileged with skills training and
access to higher education and employment. That, I am
happy to report, has already benefited over 1 million
young people.

We were proud to showcase many of our
achievements during the event entitled "Investing in
Youth to Counter Terrorism", which Pakistan co-hosted
with Norway and the United Nations Office on Counter-
Terrorism here at the United Nations on 12 April.
Speaking at our event, Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres said, "I do not agree that young people are
the leaders of tomorrow. More and more, they are the
leaders of today." Let us therefore commit ourselves, or
recommit ourselves, to building on the positive energy
and innovative spirit of our young people and to striving
for a world where the illusion of cynicism gives way to
the ideal of hope and equal and inclusive opportunities
available to the young match their boundless ambitions.
That is the least we owe to them.

