Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): May I join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also wish to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of France, for his excellent
stewardship of the Council last month.

My delegation also wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council
for convening this open meeting on the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait, again in response to the
request of the Permanent Representative of South
Africa in his capacity as Chairman of the Non-Aligned
Movement. The decision of the Council to convene this
open debate to enable the larger membership of the
Organization to express its views - particularly on an
issue as important as this - is commendable. We are
here today to voice our concerns regarding the
possibility that the Security Council is now being asked
to consider proposals that open up the prospect of war
against a sovereign State Member of the Organization.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement made yesterday by South Africa outlining the
position of the Non-Aligned Movement.

My delegation also wishes to express its
appreciation to the head of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), Mr. Hans Blix, and the head of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, for their utmost
professionalism in the implementation of resolution
1441 (2002). We welcome their comprehensive reports
to the Security Council on 27 January and 14 February
this year. In essence, both recognized that inspections
have yielded positive results and emphasized the need
for inspectors to continue their work. My delegation
favours the continuation of inspections as advocated by
most members of the Council and by other speakers in
this debate. We fully support the proposal made by
France with regard to the need to increase the human
and technical capacities of the inspection teams in
accordance with resolution 1441 (2002). We also
support the intention to request another meeting of the
Security Council at the ministerial level, on 14 March,
to appraise the situation and the progress made with
regard to the implementation of resolution 1441
(2002).

At the same time, the disarmament efforts must
be a part of a clear sanctions-lifting plan, so that the
debilitating humanitarian crisis in Iraq can be brought
to an immediate end. The success of the current
exercise requires the fullest cooperation by the
Government of Iraq in every respect. My delegation
welcomes the recent decision by the Government of
Iraq to issue a presidential decree containing
prohibitions with regard to the importation and
production of biological, chemical and nuclear
weapons. We also welcome Iraq's recent acceptance of
reconnaissance flights by United States U-2, French
Mirage and Russian Antonov aircraft to facilitate the
work of the inspectors.

Iraq must continue to cooperate with the
inspectors and refrain from giving any pretext to
warmongers. It is time to bring to a close a sad chapter
in the history of the region and forge a new relationship
among the regional States based on reconciliation, trust
and confidence with one another and a shared common
heritage. This, however, could only come about with
Iraq's full cooperation in other areas, under the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including an immediate
accounting for and return of Kuwaiti prisoners of war
and missing third-country nationals, as well as the
national archives of that country.

Only these actions on the part of Iraq would
ensure the return of normalcy in relations between Iraq
and Kuwait. Therefore, we would urge Iraq not to miss
this window of opportunity and to do what is right, in
the interest of peace and tranquillity for its people, the
region and the world.

Malaysia, like many peace-loving nations,
strongly opposes the use of force against Iraq, for the
following reasons.

First, we are convinced that the Iraqi crisis can be
solved through peaceful means. My delegation
continues firmly to believe that inspections can work
and that all avenues should be explored to find a
peaceful solution within the framework of the United
Nations. The Security Council must continue to
encourage diplomacy to resolve the problem through
effective inspections and weapons destruction, as
envisaged in resolution 1441 (2002), and not to
legitimize war against Iraq to effect regime change. It
is our earnest hope that Council members will preserve
the integrity of the Council's decision-making process
and do their utmost to resolve the problem without
recourse to military action.

Secondly, resorting to the use of force is most
likely to undermine international peace and security,
rather than to maintain or restore it. It would
undoubtedly give rise to the potential for an increasing
cycle of violence and further aggravate worldwide
terrorism, resulting in a more volatile world order.
Therefore, it must be avoided at all costs, as it is
unjustified and counter-productive.

Thirdly, a war on Iraq would have catastrophic
consequences for its population. Bringing the war to
Baghdad would inflict more suffering on the Iraqi
people, which has already been suffering enormously
since the imposition of economic sanctions in 1991. It
would have devastating effects on the country's 13
million children, many of whom are already
malnourished. Thousands of innocent people and
civilians would be killed, and more would be
displaced. The price that the Iraqi people would have to
pay is unacceptable, especially when clear alternatives
to war exist.

Lastly, there is no precedent in international law
for the use of force as a preventive measure when there
has been no actual or imminent attack by the offending
State. Unlike the situation in 1991, there has been no
indication by Iraq that it intends to attack another
country and no evidence of military preparations for
such attack. As may be recalled, the Security Council
has never authorized the use of force on the basis of a
potential threat of violence. All past authorizations
have been in response to actual invasions. An attack
against Iraq without any credible evidence provided to
the international community of the imminent threat it
poses is, therefore, illegal and unjustified. The
credibility of this Council as custodian in the
maintenance of international peace and security will be
at stake if it decides to take the path of destructive war
instead of that of constructive diplomacy.

The massive antiwar rallies held over the last few
days around the world are clear testimony that the
international community does not wish to see or
support military action against Iraq. Many believe that
there is still an alternative to war, and the use of force
could only be a last resort. For the sake of humanity
and the lives of innocent Iraqis, war must be avoided.
Diplomacy must be given every chance to work. Its
success far outweighs anything that military action
could bring to bear on the situation.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that the Security Council, in dealing with the Iraqi
crisis and other issues of peace and security, has a vital
responsibility to ensure that the international system,
based on the corpus of international law and norms,
will be preserved and strengthened. It is our fervent
hope that members of the Council will take a decision
that will serve the larger interests of the international
community and not just their narrow national interests.
As custodians of the Charter, we are reminded that the
United Nations was founded with the explicit
determination "to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war". We trust that the Council, on behalf of
the international community, will do what is right to
maintain peace in accordance with the principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter and
international law.

