I congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency this month. I thank in particular Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Stephanie Williams for her commitment to the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the people of Libya. Libya is at a critical juncture. With UNSMIL and international partners, we welcome the 21 August declaration by Libya's Prime Minister and Speaker of the House of Representatives calling for a ceasefire, demilitarization, the resumption of oil sector operations and a return to United Nations-facilitated political talks. These Libyan statements represent the hope of the Libyan people that their leaders will turn away from the violence and forge a peaceful political solution that rejects continued foreign interference and preserves Libyan sovereignty. This initiative by Libya's leaders is a positive, courageous step forward that we all should collectively support. Respect for Libya's sovereignty and territorial integrity should remain the international community's guideposts. We oppose any scheme purporting to divide Libya, occupy it or foist an external political settlement on Libyans. Libyan parties must drive the solution, which will best be reached through inclusive, United Nations- led political negotiations aimed at national elections. But a political solution will remain elusive as long as foreign backers on both sides continue to fuel the conflict. To be clear, the United States opposes all foreign military interference in Libya, supports United Nations-led negotiations toward a sustainable ceasefire and backs an immediate return to a United Nations-facilitated political process. We have said it before and we say it again - There is no military solution to the conflict in Libya. All actors involved in the conflict should abide by the commitments they made in Berlin and immediately suspend military operations, halt the ongoing transfer of foreign military equipment and fighters to Libya and allow local authorities to respond to the coronavirus disease pandemic. We urge Member States to continue to share information with the Panel of Experts on Libya with regard to potential arms embargo violations. We must make progress towards a lasting ceasefire. We believe finding a demilitarized solution beginning with Sirte offers a practical way forward to build confidence on the ground. There is no place for foreign mercenaries or proxy forces in Libya, including the Wagner Group, a Russian Ministry of Defence proxy, which is fighting alongside, and in support of, Libyan National Army forces. The United States remains appalled by reports of mass graves in Tarhouna. We welcome the appointments of three members of the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya. The Fact-Finding Mission will assist in holding accountable those who have committed human rights violations and abuses and deter further violations and abuses. Accountability for human rights violations and abuses committed by all actors is key to strengthening the durability of a political solution, so that Libyans see a genuine path to reconciliation and justice. The Security Council should consider ways to hold those who commit violations to account, including possible sanctions. We reiterate our strong support for Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams and commend her and UNSMIL's leadership in facilitating a comprehensive political process and confidence-building measures. As we begin discussions on UNSMIL's mandate renewal, we must not waste this opportunity to ensure that UNSMIL is fit for purpose going forward. We must capitalize on these recent positive developments and ensure that UNSMIL is as effective and efficient as it can be and that its leadership structure reflects this goal. Reforming UNSMIL now gives us the best chance to capitalize on battlefield changes to bring about a permanent political settlement and reinforce the Berlin process. The United States believes the peace process will succeed in the country, but only when the outside parties to the conflict stop fuelling the conflict and support the United Nations-led peace process, so the opposing leaders reconcile and come up with a peaceful power-sharing agreement that represents the wishes of the Libyan people.
