Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Mr. President, at the outset
I wish to congratulate you for having organized this
important meeting. I would also like to express my
appreciation to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for the
report on children and armed conflict, and we look
forward to her visit to the region in general and to
Lebanon in particular, where we are sure that she will
witness on the ground what I am going to share with
the Council about the suffering of Lebanese children as
a result of Israel's latest act of aggression this past
summer.

While the facts and the realities on the ground
have by now been well documented, the emotional,
psychological and collective trauma is much more
difficult to relay to Council members. The massacres
that took place at Qana II, Marwaheen and Chiah are
already etched in our history as another example of
Israel's intentions towards our youth and our
population. There were 360 child fatalities.
Hundreds of children suffered permanent injuries and
disabilities. Fifty schools were destroyed, with around
300 needing substantial repair. Primary health-care
facilities in many parts of the country were annihilated.
Water systems in southern Lebanon, the Beka'a Valley
and southern Beirut were destroyed, thereby stranding
at least 1.7 million people - 40 per cent of whom
were children - without the basic means of hygiene.

These are but a few examples of the 32 vital
points targeted by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF),
including 109 destroyed bridges, 137 damaged roads,
and severe damage to the oil reserves, causing one of
the largest ecological disasters ever in the
Mediterranean. With so much destruction, Lebanon
must once again undergo the difficult task of recovery.

According to Israeli logic, Lebanese civilian
infrastructure was deliberately targeted and its

designation was changed from civilian to military. The
IDF argued that the infrastructure could hypothetically
be used by Hizbollah, That twisted logic has not fooled
anyone. Allow me to refer to some reports.

While analyzing the various aspects of the impact
on life during this past summer's war on Lebanon, the
Human Rights Council's Commission of Inquiry on
Lebanon concluded, in the advance unedited version of
its report, that "the damage inflicted on some
infrastructure was done for the sake of destruction".
Yes, it was a simple attack for the sake of destruction.
The report also accused Israel of not providing local
civilians with effective warning, as required under
international humanitarian law. One stark example was
the massacre at Marwaheen on 15 July, in which 23
civilians, including 14 children, were bombed by sea
and gunned down by air as they attempted to flee a
conflict zone during the existence of a supposed "safe
passage" corridor that the IDF had promised the local
population.

The Secretary-General's report on children and
armed conflict (S/2006/826) stated conclusively that

"Children in Lebanon were also denied
access to humanitarian assistance owing to an
Israeli military blockade of Lebanon's borders,
seaports, bombing of roads and Beirut's airport."
(para. 52)

Those acts, as we stated earlier, cannot be
justified by any play on words or twisted logic. The
tactics used by the IDF created a situation in which
about 975,000 people, constituting approximately one
quarter of the Lebanese population - with one-third of
them being children - were displaced from their
homes and attacked as they fled. They returned to find
over 30,000 housing units destroyed and 1.2 million
cluster bombs scattered and hidden, waiting to remind
them of the trauma they had just survived.

Today, Lebanon's biggest challenge remains the
removal of the 1.2 million cluster bombs that Israel left
behind, including the location and removing of mines
planted by Israel. According to the group Landmine
Action and to Lebanese Government reports, three to
four civilians are still being killed or maimed every
day as a result of unexploded ordnance. Over 22 people
have died and 135 have been injured since the
cessation of hostilities, with 35 per cent of the victims
being children. Cluster munitions have prevented the
harvest of summer and fall crops in south Lebanon, a
region in which agriculture comprises about 70 per
cent of the economy.

The claims by Major-General Benny Gantz of the
IDF that those unreliable weapons can be used in a
precise or surgical way were complete fabrications. So
too was the statement by Ambassador Arkady
Mil-Man, the Israeli Ambassador to Russia, who
declared on 26 July that reports of the Israeli army
using cluster munitions were obvious propaganda on
the part of Hizbollah and other organizations that did
not know what was actually going on.

A more accurate rendition of the events that took
place can be summarized by an anonymous Israeli
reservist, who was quoted in the Ha 'aretz newspaper
on 14 September 2006 as saying:

"In the last 72 hours we fired all the munitions
we had, all at the same spot. We didn't even alter
the direction of the gun. Friends of mine in the
battalion told me they also fired everything."

In blunter terms than any of us could use, the
head of an IDF rocket unit was quoted in the same
newspaper on 22 November 2006 as saying: "What we
did was insane and monstrous[;] we covered entire
towns in cluster bombs". Again, no twist in logic can
underscore the reality of those testimonies and the
conclusions of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights.

Last week, the Third Committee adopted a
resolution on the status of human rights in Lebanon as
a result of the Israeli aggression this past summer. The
Committee condemned the killing of civilians,
children, older persons and women, wherever it
occurred, and called for respect for life as a
fundamental human right. In the report under
consideration today, the international community has
set out a strategy that the Lebanese Government
approves and fully endorses.

In conclusion, Lebanese children should not be
destined for martyrdom. Lebanese children, like all
children of the world, should have the right to live and
to dream of a better tomorrow. Lebanese children, like
all children of the world, should be the bearers of
peace in the future.

