Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes today's meeting on the working
methods of the Security Council and the implementation
of note by the President S/2017/507. We also welcome
Mr. Ian Martin, Executive Director of Security Council
Report, and thank him for his interesting briefing.

We express our commitment to improving the
work of the Council in this important area, which we
believe should continue to be guided by the Charter of
the United Nations and the corresponding provisional
rules of procedure. We also believe that it is important
to gradually develop and compile working practices on
the basis of the principles of coherency, transparency,
accountability, inclusion, efficiency and predictability,
among others.

Peru thanks the members of the Council for
unanimously adopting the latest note 507, in August
2017, under the leadership of the delegation of Japan and
Ambassador Koro Bessho. We underscore the rigorous
approach taken to consider the recommendations
and contributions made by all of the Members of the
Organization. Those contributions include those made
by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, of which Peru is a member and whose statement
we endorse. We would like to reiterate our commitment
to implementing its code of conduct, in particular
with regard to limiting the use of the veto in cases of
mass atrocities.

We would also like to underscore that it is important
that the Council's working methods ensure timely
cooperation with the Secretariat in addressing risks and
emerging threats to international peace and security.
We believe that is vital in preventing the occurrence,
escalation and continuation of conflict.

We would like to take this opportunity to highlight
a number of good practices and identify areas where
we believe it is important to continue to make progress.

First, for us it has been particularly useful to
observe, three months before taking up our membership,
the consultations of the Council and its subsidiary
bodies, and to receive the corresponding documents.
We believe that it is important to build on that practice
and extend it to the observation of the process of
negotiations on resolutions and presidential statements.
We would like to thank the members of the Council for
their support during the preparation process. We also
thank the Secretariat and civil society organizations.

Secondly, we acknowledge that note 507 recognizes
that all members of the Council can propose and draft
documents for adoption. We are encouraged by the
posibility of establishing co-penholderships, and we
stand ready to contribute to those responsibilities. We
welcome the fact that during the first month of our
membership on the Council there has been at least one
consultations meeting on documents that have been
adopted. We believe it is important to complement the
work of the penholders with the views of the Chairs
of various subsidiary bodies, as appropriate. The
reports of panels of experts and the field visits provide
substantive, first-hand information that is vital when
drafting resolutions or statements.

Thirdly, for the sake of transparency, Peru believes
it is important for delegations to publicly share their
positions in the Council's informative meetings. We
support the excellent practice started by Uruguay and
believe it should be extended to the subsidiary bodies
of the Council, as appropriate. At the same time, we
recognize the usefulness of closed consultations
to complement open debates and favour greater
interaction among the Council members and with
the Secretariat. We believe that it would be useful if,
at the end of meetings, the presidency could always
provide for the press a summary of the main points
discussed, particularly when formal documents have
not been adopted.

In the same vein, we consider positive the meetings
held at the beginning ofthe month to present the Council's
monthly programme of work to all Members of the
Organization. The same is true of the wrap-up sessions
at the end of the monthly programme. Furthermore, we
believe that, when proposing consideration of an urgent
item or under other business, the interested delegations
should provide information on the specific issues they
propose for discussion.

Finally, my delegation believes that the
implementation of sanctions must fully respect due
process. In that regard, it is urgent to appoint the
Ombudsperson of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities. It would
be advisable to assess the appropriateness of extending
such an individual to other sanctions committees.

I would like to reiterate to the Kuwaiti delegation
our support for the success of its work as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Peru will resolutely support
all initiatives to improve the working methods of
the Council.

