Mr. McIvor (New Zealand): Mr. President, may I
first of all thank you for calling this open debate to
discuss the critical issues currently facing United
Nations peacekeeping.

All Member States have a stake in peacekeeping.
The principle of collective responsibility means that
issues of the Organization's capacity to respond to
threats and the nature of those threats need to be
addressed by the membership as a whole. Peacekeeping
should not be considered the sole preserve of the
Security Council.

The Security Council has been entrusted with the
vital role of responding to specific threats or conflicts,
but we should differentiate this from the need for a
meaningful exchange on contemporary generic
peacekeeping issues. For this reason, we have proposed
elsewhere that the General Assembly plenary should
debate peacekeeping issues on an annual basis. The
purpose would be to contribute to the development of
peacekeeping policy by the Security Council and to
provide policy guidance to the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and to the Fifth Committee's
peacekeeping financial management discussions.
Peacekeeping is one of the most important - and
certainly one of the most visible - activities of the
United Nations. That the General Assembly should not
discuss peacekeeping at its highest level is arguably an
abdication of responsibility.

Complex peacekeeping missions are becoming
the norm. It is now accepted that effective
peacekeeping and peace support is likely to involve a
multidimensional response incorporating security, law
and order, support for civilian institutions and human
rights and humanitarian components. We know, too,
that development has a vital contribution to make to
ensuring peace. The Security Council provides a fire-
fighting mechanism. But a sustained effort will often
be necessary to guarantee a durable peace. Recent
developments in Haiti demonstrate this.

Accordingly, we would encourage the Council to
take a longer-term view of peacekeeping mandates and
a more holistic approach to peacekeeping activities.
The Council should consider ways to build into
mandates the future role of the broader United Nations
system, as peacekeeping operations evolve into peace-
building and peace support. The Council could, for
example, ask the Secretary-General to begin a dialogue
with United Nations funds and programmes and
develop a plan for the transition of a mission and its
eventual exit strategy, for incorporation in the next
mandate renewal proposal. There is also the question
of whether the structure and internal consultation
processes of the Secretariat are sufficient to ensure
integrated, quality policy advice on the new
peacekeeping challenges.

We also think it is time for an honest assessment
of existing consultative mechanisms between the
Security Council and non-Council members. It is not
enough to point to the existence of a mechanism. In
order to be meaningful, consultation should produce
results and recognize the shared responsibility of
Council and non-Council members for its quality. We
would like to see an evaluation of what has worked and
what has not worked so that we can formulate specific
proposals to improve consultation.

Many observers have noted the emergence of
multinational forces as a phenomenon distinct from
blue-beret peacekeeping operations. Multinational
forces have become more common as a means to
respond to different types of security crises and to
provide rapid deployment to deal quickly with an
emergency prior to the establishment of a peacekeeping
mission. Contributors to peacekeeping missions are
now predominantly developing countries. Whether this
trend continues remains to be seen, but for us the issue
is not peacekeeping operation versus multinational
force, so much as a perceived or real unevenness in the
international effort in responding to humanitarian and
security crises.

New peacekeeping missions this year will place
further strain on the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and will require additional financial
contributions from Member States. We need to address
this situation. We need a mechanism to ensure that,
when a mission is mandated, there is explicit
agreement that it can be adequately resourced and
supported. And there is an additional challenge. The
external security environment has changed
significantly. The United Nations, which for many
years has relied on its reputation for neutrality, now
recognizes that it is a target. This has both financial
and operational implications.

The United Nations has become increasingly
involved in regional conflicts, most recently in West
Africa. These pose new challenges to a Council that is
designed to consider peacekeeping mandates on an
individual basis. The increase in regional responses to
conflict requires the United Nations to forge
meaningful relationships with key regional political
and military institutions, especially where a United
Nations intervention is a precursor or successor to a
regional effort.

Finally, let me assure the Council that New
Zealand remains committed to United Nations
peacekeeping. Over the years, we have made a
significant contribution to a wide range of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We have contributed
to other peace support operations, particularly in our
own Asia-Pacific region. This includes assisting in the
restoration of law and order in the Solomon Islands last
year. We are also strong supporters of the international
campaign against terrorism and have deployed a
provincial reconstruction team in Bamyan province in
Afghanistan.

