Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the holding of this meeting and would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ghassan Salame and Swedish Ambassador Olof
Skoog, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, for their important briefings.

Peru supports the efforts of Special Representative
Salame' to promote an inclusive process in Libya that will
gradually lead to a constitutional referendum followed
by free, fair and secure parliamentary and presidential
elections, with broad participation of all political forces
and citizens. We believe that the new constitution, to
the extent that it reflects national consensus, should
serve to establish the institutional and governance
frameworks required to build sustainable peace in
Libya. It will also be necessary to adopt adequate
electoral legislation to supplement the new voter
registration. The international community, especially
the Council, must stand united in its support for the
good offices deployed by the United Nations Mission
to ensure that the High State Council and the House
of Representatives agree on the executive authority
required to conduct the electoral processes and to face
serious challenges and threats.

In that regard, we welcome the progress made in
the implementation of the United Nations action plan,
in particular the launch of the national conference
to build trust and reconciliation between political
actors and civil society, and we encourage greater
participation by women and young people. We also
consider it important to move towards the reintegration
of armed actors into civilian life and to strengthen the
institutions responsible for security, all the more so
when we note with concern that episodes of violence
continue to occur.

We must condemn the continuation of terrorist
attacks, such as the one against the High Commission
for National Elections facilities in Tripoli, and we
stress the urgent need to address the trafficking in
small arms and light weapons. We are concerned about
the impunity with which human rights continue to be
violated in Libya, including arbitrary detention, as
well as the vulnerability of migrants and refugees. We
hope that the joint task force of the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union can put an
end to the trafficking networks. It is also important to
consider imposing sanctions on those responsible for
those reprehensible acts.
At the same time, we view an urgent need for
fiscal capacity-building to approve a public budget
and fight against corruption. That is essential to face
the challenging humanitarian situation that continues
in various parts of the country to enable the country
to move towards sustainable peace while promoting
its development.

I would like to conclude, Madam President, by
highlighting the important work carried out by the
United Nations Mission in Libya, in a context of
heightened polarization, insecurity and sacrifice, and
by expressing Peru's support for the tireless efforts of
the Envoy Special.

