Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Llorentty Soliz, Permanent
Representative of Bolivia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his briefing on the Committee's work. We
thank the Ambassador of Bolivia and his delegation for
their stewardship ofthis subsidiary body ofthe Security
Council and for their flexibility and ability to include
differing points of View in their summary documents.
We also thank the entire team of the Committee's Group
of Experts for its professionalism.

Combating the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) is among the Russian
Federation's military and political priorities. As with
all other serious issues, it requires the concerted and
coordinated efforts of all States, without exception. We
are eager to find common ground with our partners so
as to promote the non-proliferation agenda as quickly
as possible, especially since the problems in this area
continue to worsen. Resolution 1540 (2004), which
Russia and the United States were instrumental in
bringing about, rightly occupies a special place in the
global non-proliferation architecture. It was designed
to establish a robust legal and law-enforcement bulwark
for preventing WMDs from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists.

The value of resolution 1540 (2004) also lies in the
fact that it is a tool for cooperation rather than coercion
or the extraction of services. The newer resolution, 2325
(2016), adopted as an outcome of the review process for
resolution 1540 (2004), strengthens its non-proliferation
potential, facilitates the exchange of best practices for
its implementation and increases the effectiveness of
the assistance provided to countries that need it while
taking due account of their specific requirements. We
believe that it is States that have the responsibility for
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). International and
regional organizations, industry, business, academia
and scientific circles, as well as other sectors of civil
society, play an important supporting role by assisting
States in implementing specific provisions of this
important Security Council resolution.

The resolution's institutional framework corresponds
to its mandated tasks. We believe that our approach
to the assessment of the operations of this Security
Council subsidiary body and its Group of Experts
should be a realistic one. Creating additional
bureaucratic structures around 1540 Committee
issues, limiting experts' contracts and advocating
artificially for radical and unconsidered proposals
can create additional obstacles rather than increasing
the effectiveness of the Committee's work. We should
therefore be guided by the principle of "first do no
harm". In the light ofthe ongoing activity of the Islamic
State and other terrorist groups in Syria that have
mastered chemical-weapon technology and are making
active use of it, the significance ofa collective effort to
suppress the heinous problem of chemical terrorism is
only increasing. But it is important to work in concert
while realizing that as the situation in Syria evolves,
terrorists, including those who have had practical
experience in the area of chemical weapons, will try to
go into hiding in third countries.

For our part, we are eager to strengthen the WMD
non-proliferation regime, including through the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We stand
ready to engage constructively with the Chair of the
Committee and our partners.

With regard to the references made today to the
Salisbury incident, I will be brief. We are waiting for
information from the investigation and answers to
the questions that we have asked. I am not wrong in
emphasizing that we are all pretty tired of unproven
statements. The same applies to eastern Ghouta, where
we hope peaceful civilian life will soon be restored.
The experts from the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons are investigating the allegations,
and we hope that they will be permitted to do that.
