Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour to have Minister
Trujillo Garcia among us once again in the Council.
We also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Rosa
Emilia Salamanca for their briefings.

Allow me to begin by reiterating the interest and
support ofthe Dominican Republic for the peace process
in Colombia and to commend the resolve and sacrifice
of the Colombian people in that process. Since the
signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, Colombia
has been an example for peace. Two years after the
signing of that historic agreement, Colombians have
put behind them more than half a century of violence,
held peaceful and inclusive elections, and established
transitional justice institutions.

We commend the efforts of the Colombian
Government to advance the process of reintegrating
former combatants who have laid down their weapons.
We want to acknowledge the progress and challenges
in the period covered, especially with regard to the
reactivation of institutional mechanisms that seek to
guarantee security across the Colombian territory.
However, we understand that there is a need for the
speedier implementation of some provisions governing
the reintegration of ex-combatants. As things stand
now, their implementation is at less than 20 per cent.

In that connection, the implementation of gender-
related provisions with regard to reintegration and
the guarantee of security for women, as established
in the peace agreement, is critical. To that end, there
is a need for the financial and technical resources
required in the national development plan and the
prompt implementation of gender-related actions in the
national reintegration policy, including those aimed at
the economic reintegration of women ex-combatants.
By the same token, it is crucial that protection be
provided for women leaders and defenders of human
rights who face attacks and threats. In that regard, we
call on the Government of Colombia to accelerate the
implementation of the comprehensive programme for the
security of women leaders and human rights defenders.

We invite the authorities to consider that
the immediate economic sacrifice necessary for
reintegration, while not insignificant, will, in the
medium and long terms, have repercussions on the
economic prosperity and social cohesion of Colombian
society. We therefore encourage the consideration
of proposals and alternative solutions that will be
put forward in consultations with the ex-combatants
living within the 24 territorial areas for training and
reintegration. Those areas and the monthly food and
health allowances for ex-combatants are expected
to remain in place until summer. We trust that the
decisions taken on those measures for the period after
August will be based on the positive effects that they
have had and the challenges ahead. It is essential that
projects for the reintegration of ex-combatants proposed
in the framework ofthe peace agreement be assessed so
that we can determine the extent and scale of progress.
It is also important that any process of inclusion take
into account the access of ex-combatants to land and
alternative income sources.

We understand that the political, legal and
socioeconomic integration of former members of
the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) is necessary. We trust
that issues related to land ownership will be dealt with
appropriately, since that is at the heart of effective
reintegration. During the reporting period, 12 former
FARC-EP members were assassinated, which brings
the total number of assassinations of that group to 99
since the signing of the final peace agreement. It is the
State's responsibility to identify those responsible and
bring them to justice.

The same applies to the threats against and killings
of social leaders and human rights defenders. That
situation bears noting and demands close attention.
We encourage the State to address the issue through
its presence in the most affected area and to maintain
ongoing dialogue with civil society through the
National Commission on Security Guarantees. Work on
that issue is also key to ensuring that peaceful and free
elections at the local level are held in October and that
they are free of any violence.

It is extremely important to bear in mind the
gender provisions contained in the peace agreement,
in particular the issue of women's reintegration and
security guarantees. We share the concerns expressed
by the international verification component concerning
the gender focus established in the peace agreement,
and we welcome the commitment of the Vice-President
of Colombia to looking into that report.

We also commend the adoption by the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia of a strategy
to implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018),
with a focus on the role of young people in reintegration
and ensuring security. It is a formal recognition of the
preponderant role that young people play in promoting
peace. That strategy should serve as an inspiration to
other missions in their efforts to put an end to conflict
and build peace.

We encourage all parties to support the important
work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace to promote
access to justice and national reconciliation in Colombia,
which is also an expression of the legal guarantees
granted to those who have laid down their arms. We
also emphasize the need to preserve the independence

and autonomy of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and
other transitional justice mechanisms, as well as to
maintain the legal security of those involved and avoid
the retroactive application of certain provisions to the
detriment of those who legitimately trusted in the State.

Finally, we call on Colombian society to avoid
polarization in public discussion of the implementation
of the peace agreements, to refrain from bombastic and
aggressive rhetoric, to reject the expressions of hatred
and divisiveness of a few and to embrace forgiveness,
reconciliation and the rule of law. We commend the
people and Government of Colombia for the example
they have set in the process that we are happy to
support today.

