The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Sierra Leone in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Bangnra (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Sierra Leone,
document S/ 1995/975.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
Secretary-General's report of 21 November on the
situation in Sierra Leone (S/l995/975). It is deeply
concerned at the conflict in that country, and at the
suffering resulting from it, in particular that of the
nearly two million internally displaced Sierra
Leoneans. It calls for an immediate end to the
fighting.

"The Security Council expresses its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his offer of good offices
in Sierra Leone and urges the Revolutionary United
Front to take advantage of that offer, thus enabling
both parties to enter into negotiations. It thanks the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for his
efforts to that end, in close coordination with the
Organization of African Unity, the Commonwealth,
the Economic Community of West African States,
and other organizations and neighbouring States
supporting the negotiations and the process of
democratization in Sierra Leone, and welcomes the
Secretary-General's decision that his Special
Envoy's mission should continue for the time being.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
it attaches to a coordinated international effort to
alleviate the humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone.
It welcomes the Secretary-General's efforts in this
regard and his initiative in preparing, in
collaboration with the Government of Sierra Leone,
an action plan for the demobilization and
reintegration of combatants.

"The Security Council underlines the need for
generous humanitarian assistance in a situation in
which nearly half the population of the country have
been internally displaced, and calls upon Member
States to provide such assistance. The Council
commends those humanitarian agencies active in
Sierra Leone. The Council deeply deplores attacks
on humanitarian convoys and demands that those
responsible cease such actions immediately.

"The Security Council welcomes the
programme of transition to democratic constitutional
rule set by the Government of Sierra Leone, which
is crucial to the restoration of peace and stability in
that country. It expresses its strong support for the
work of the Interim National Electoral Commission
(INEC) in preparing for the elections to be held on
26 February 1996. It welcomes the assistance being
given by the United Nations to the INEC at the
request of the Government of Sierra Leone, and calls
upon Member States to provide the fullest possible
material and financial support to the INEC in order
to ensure the success of the elections, with the
broadest possible participation.

"The Security Council urges the Secretary-
General to continue to monitor closely the situation
in Sierra Leone."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/57.
 

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

