Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I welcome to the
Council Prime Ministers Thaci and Vucie.

The United Kingdom welcomes Kosovo's continued
progress on the international stage, including the recent
statement by the International Olympic Committee
that Kosovo should be able to participate in the next
Olympic Games. Kosovo is now recognized by well over
half of the States Members of the United Nations. We
encourage those countries that have not yet recognized
Kosovo to do so.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
the progress of both Kosovo and Serbia towards
membership of the European Union. The normalization
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia is integral to
both countries' European Union accession paths and,
as we have said before, full implementation of the
dialogue agreement is necessary to unlock progress. I
welcome the expressions of commitment to the dialogue
that we have just heard from both Prime Ministers. We
encourage both sides to implement existing agreements
and to continue progress at the working level. It is
welcome that technical talks have continued to make
some progress through working level meetings,
including on the integrated management of crossing
points and on telecommunications and energy.

But it is clear that there needs to be a resumption
of high-level meetings once the new Government
of Kosovo is in place. The formation of a new
Government in Kosovo can give renewed momentum
to implementation of the dialogue. We hope that there
will be decisive progress to this end at the constitutive
session of the Kosovo Assembly, which we expect to
take place on 8 December.

The United Kingdom notes with concern continuing
inter-ethnic incidents, including an increased number
of thefts targeting the Kosovo Serb community in
western Kosovo and reports of violence against
Serb returnees and their property. There can be no
tolerance of such incidents or complacency about the
need to tackle them vigorously and hold perpetrators
accountable. We commend the efforts of the Kosovo
authorities, in particular the Kosovo police, to address
these incidents promptly. As the Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/773) notes, their timely intervention in
Mitrovica on 14 October to disperse crowds following
the suspension of the Serbia-Albania football match
successfully averted an escalation and possible violence.

The United Kingdom continues to give strong
support to the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). The allegations in the press about
EULEX need to be looked into. The High Representative
has announced an external, independent investigation
into EULEX, which we fully support.

The United Kingdom joins the Secretary-General
in welcoming the shared determination of the Kosovo
authorities and the leadership of the Islamic community
in Kosovo to tackle the issues of extremism and foreign
fighters. The multiple arrests carried out by the Kosovo
police on 11 August and 25 September underline their
commitment to preventing Kosovars travelling overseas
to participate in conflicts. We encourage the continued
close cooperation of police and security services in
the region to tackle those risks. The role played by
the leadership of the Islamic community of Kosovo
and other religious and secular leaders in dissociating
themselves and their communities from extremism has
been a very positive one.

Finally, the United Kingdom reiterates its View
that a reduction in the frequency of these debates is
overdue, given the progress in Kosovo over the last
15 years and the improved relations between Pristina
and Belgrade. As the workload of the Security Council
continues to expand, the Council needs to be focusing
on situations and issues that constitute a genuine threat
to international peace and security. Kosovo is not, in
our view, one of them. The current frequency of these
debates, during which we tend to hear largely familiar
restatements of well-established positions by Council
members, does not strike us as a productive use of
Council time.

I also support the suggestion made by other
representatives that the time has come to consider
whether the configuration of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
requires downward adjustment to reflect the current
circumstances in Kosovo.

