Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2312 (2016),
which extends for 12 months the mandate on which the
EUNAVFOR Med Operation Sophia is based, to fight
against migrants on the high seas off the coast of Libya.
I thank the British penholder for the very effective
work done on this issue. Throughout the negotiations,
the resolution enjoyed the full support of the European
Union members of the Security Council.

Every day more men and women, often
accompanied by children, risk their lives attempting to
cross the Mediterranean Sea in the hands of smugglers
who cynically exploit their distress. The European
Union EUNAVFOR Med Operation Sophia has saved
more than 25,000 individuals since the beginning ofthe
year. These are all lives that were saved. This is only
part of the response to the overall crisis of migrants,
but it remains useful and necessary nonetheless. The
effectiveness of the EUNAVFOR Med Operation
Sophia is based to a large extent on the mandate
provided by the Council, which allows it to have at
its disposal the necessary resources to effectively
combat the trafficking in migrants. It strives to do so
in the framework of more general cooperation with the
Government of National Accord, led by Prime Minister
Serraj, which will soon involve the training of Libyan
coast guards by the European Union.
As was the case with resolution 2240 (2015), this
new text precisely defines the conditions under which
the use of force is allowed in facing up to traffickers
and smugglers. It also includes robust guarantees for
the protection of the rights of migrants and refugees
aboard the ships in question. Nothing has changed on
that decisive point, and therefore our demands remain
the same.

France considers it crucial that the United Nations
continue to mobilize to come up with a comprehensive
solution to the migrant crisis in the Mediterranean and
the tragic situations it leads to. This text, in our View, is
part of the answer. Our belief is that the Council cannot
remain on the sidelines in silence in the tragic context
of the situation in the Mediterranean right now.

