Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate Poland on its
excellent Security Council presidency in May. I also
congratulate Russia on assuming the presidency and
wish it every success.

We regret that the Security Council has not been
able to achieve consensus on a text. On behalf ofrealism
and pragmatism, and independent of the differences
that may exist between us on the content, who could
argue that the gravity of the situation in Gaza and the
threats to regional stability that result from it do not
demand a strong message from the Council?

We are touching on the heart of the Council's
responsibility - both its role as recognized by the
Charter of the United Nations with regard to peace and
security and its historic role in the conflict between
Israel and Palestine. It is the Council that, over a
number of decades, has defined the main parameters
for resolving that conflict, and those same parameters
have been rendered fragile by unilateral initiatives. If
the Council fails to fulfil its responsibilities today, who
will assume them?

After two months in which 120 people have been
killed and 4,000 have been left with bullet wounds, and
in which the risk of an escalation of the situation in
Gaza has never been higher since 2014, as we have seen
by the dozens of rockets launched from Gaza into Israeli
territory during recent days, the Council is silent. The
Council's heavy silence is increasingly deafening. This
silence is neither acceptable nor understandable. It is not
acceptable to the Palestinian and Israeli people, who are
the first victims of the conflict. It is not understandable
to the world, which looks to us and harshly judges our
inaction in the face of a new conflict in the Middle
East. Lastly, it is disastrous for the very credibility
of the Council and, more broadly, of multilateralism,
which we believe in more than ever.

We have been ready to commit to a constructive
discussion on all draft texts presented to Council
members over the past few months without exception.
There may be difficulties with certain texts, but we
believe precisely in the possibility of overcoming
those difficulties through discussion. We believe in
the possibility of patiently and pragmatically reaching
consensus. After all, that is the very heart of our
responsibility under the terms of the Charter of the
United Nations.

A new opportunity was given to us to overcome
this silence by engaging in a discussion on the draft
resolution as presented by Kuwait (S/2018/516). The
text that was initially presented did present some
difficulties. Alongside other members of the Council,
we are committed to a rigorous discussion in order to
distinctly improve the text and that was the condition
that we set in order to provide our support to the text.

The final text is certainly not perfect. We would
have liked it to clearly establish Hamas" responsibility
and condemn the rocket launches against Israel,
for example, but the in-depth consultations carried
out over the past two weeks have led to significant
improvements. The text that we support today responds
to a situation in which, over the past few weeks and in
particular on 14 May, when 60 people lost their lives,
we have seen a disproportionate and indiscriminate use
of force. The text deplores that situation and calls for
the right to respect for peaceful protest. It also calls
for protection measures to be taken in the Palestinian
territories and in particular in Gaza. It requests that
the Secretary-General report on the subject within
two months.

But the text does not stop there. It responds, at least
in part, to the concerns we have voiced. For example,
the text condemns all acts of violence - including
terrorist acts - against civilians. It calls on all parties
to respect international humanitarian law and human
rights. It also condemns any action that could endanger
the lives of civilians and calls upon all actors to ensure
that protests remain peaceful. It is no longer silent on
rocket attacks targeting civilians on Israeli territory. It
also recalls that the lifting of the blockade on Gaza,
which must take place, should take into account the
security concerns of all. As the Council knows, France
will never compromise on Israel's security. Finally,
the text encourages initiatives that seek long-term
improvements to the humanitarian situation in Gaza,
pursuant to the proposals of the Special Coordinator of
the United Nations, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, as well as
tangible progress in inter-Palestinian reconciliation.

The text ends with a call for relaunching the peace
process in order to reach an agreement between the
parties within the framework of the two-State solution.
All of these elements, like our readiness to allow the
Security Council to assume its responsibilities have led
us to vote in favour of the draft resolution. The meaning
of our work, the very purpose of the Council is to work
towards a common understanding and response to
threats to peace and security. We once again call on all
parties to embark upon this path in good faith and with
perseverance. The credibility of the Council and our
collective action depend on it.

