On behalf of the Government of Malta, I thank Estonia for organizing this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Malta recognizes the importance of holding regular constructive discussions on this matter, as civilians are the ones who bear the brunt of conflict. In that connection, we welcome the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2020/366) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Malta fully aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union and would like to add a few additional remarks in our national capacity. Malta remains deeply concerned about the devastating impact on, and the ongoing suffering of, civilians due to the conflicts in Libya and Syria. The fact that attacks on civilians, hospitals, medical facilities, schools and refugee camps continue, in complete violation of international law and international humanitarian law, is completely unacceptable. Malta stresses the need for all parties to conflicts to ensure the protection of civilians and respect the principles of distinction between civilians and combatants, proportionality and precaution. In 2019, tens of thousands of civilians were affected by conflict around the world. In addition, the coronavirus disease pandemic has further exacerbated the vulnerability of people in conflict zones. Women and girls in particular have always been subject to sexual and gender- based violence, which has been adopted repeatedly over the years as a war tactic. Malta remains deeply concerned about reports of increased violence against women and girls, especially in conflict-affected areas, where there is little social cohesion and services are limited. We call on all partners to ensure widespread compliance with commitments undertaken within the highest organs of the United Nations system in order to address gender-based violence in conflict. Furthermore, Malta remains committed to the Secretary-General's view that the effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda needs to remain a priority throughout this period. As previously stated, Malta intends to launch its first women and peace and security action plan this year. Malta also underlines the importance of protecting children in armed conflict. It remains unacceptable that, for thousands of children born in the last decade, living in a war-torn country is normal. Daily bombings are normal. Fleeing homes is normal. Forced disappearances are normal. Sexual violence is normal. Not knowing where the next meal will come from is normal. No access to clean water and sanitation is normal. Political settlements may end wars, but the psychological and social consequences of conflicts will be felt for decades. During the past year, children were once again exposed to a multitude of violations, including killings, maimings and sexual violence, as well as forced displacement. Mental health and psychosocial support will need to play a more central role in peacebuilding efforts, especially when it comes to women, children and vulnerable groups. In our view, the principle of accountability remains fundamental. It must be implemented and further strengthened, as serious crimes and violations of humanitarian law cannot go unpunished. Credible investigations are needed in order to ensure that victims get the justice they deserve. Peace without justice is fragile and short-lived. We must therefore take concrete steps in that regard. Malta fully supports the global call for peace made by the Secretary-General in March, in which he emphasized the need "to put armed conflict on lockdown and focus together on the true fight of our lives." We also join Special Representative Gamba in urging the inclusion of child protection provisions, such as securing the release of all children associated with parties to conflict, prioritizing their reintegration and immediately ending their recruitment and abuse. The best way to protect civilians is prevention. We urge all States and parties to armed conflict to comply with international humanitarian law and international human rights law at all times. We recall their obligation to respect and ensure respect for international humanitarian law in all circumstances. Finally, we urge them to allow the unhindered provision of life-saving assistance such as medicines, food and fuel for civilian purposes throughout the country and across conflict lines. We have the tools to protect civilians, even in situations of armed conflict. The international community must act today to mitigate the impact of conflict on civilians when possible, prevent their involvement in future conflicts and assist affected civilians in recovering from violent conflict.
