Sir Emyr Jones Parry: In September 2005, the
United Nations has an important rendezvous with the
Millennium Declaration, when a summit of the General
Assembly will review progress in implementing the
commitments we took on in 2000. The Millennium
Development Goals can be achieved in most of Asia
and Latin America, but we already know that Africa is
way off track, threatening us with an overall failure in
2015 if we do not start making real breakthroughs now.
Many African leaders have stepped up to the challenge
in establishing the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD).

It is in Africa that honouring our commitments
will affect most lives, and where failing to honour
them will cause the most despair. We have a moral duty
and a practical self-interest in helping their efforts to
build a prosperous and stable continent. Without
security in Africa, there will be no prosperity and
stability. In the Security Council, we spend some 50
per cent to 60 per cent of our time on Africa. The new
threat of weapons of mass destruction and terror
always risks being spread where instability and conflict
reign. Yet recent peace agreements offer millions of
Africans the chance of a fresh start, and through
structures like the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Africans are building their own peacekeeping
capacities. It is the responsibility of the Council to give
them our fullest support.

Why West Africa? Because it is a region of key
interest where the United Nations is investing heavily,
where there is much promise, where there are vibrant
societies, where there is rich potential and yet where
there are fragile States that often lack infrastructure
and absorptive capacities. Problems are shared, and
often have contagious effects on neighbours. ECOWAS
has demonstrated political and military leadership in
the region and is striving today for increased economic
cooperation, as a contribution to greater prosperity.

Hence the simple aims of the mission: to identify
a coherent strategy for United Nations intervention
across the spectrum; to encourage and support the
efforts of ECOWAS; to identify how to build on
current cooperation among United Nations missions
and the United Nations bodies in the subregion; and to
determine how we should assess overall progress
towards the Council's objectives to further peace and
regional security. All of those aims are set out in
greater detail in the letter which you, Mr. President,
sent to the Secretary-General on 15 June (S/2004/49l).

During the visit, our focus was on underscoring
the regional aspects as we visited individual countries
and debated issues with their leaders.

Regional cooperation can clearly be a major
catalyst for economic growth. Yet what we see time
and time again is that legitimate free movement is
inhibited by restrictions and by racketeers. Yet porous
borders facilitate trafficking in arms, persons and illicit
items in general. It is also clear that tackling problems
successfully in one country sometimes only displaces
the problem to a neighbour. Fighters who are unable to
operate in one country and who have no apparent
allegiance just move next door. A graphic analogy was
used on one occasion: if you have got a cockroach in
one room, there is no point in just fumigating the room.
The only way to get rid of the cockroaches is to
fumigate the house. That is a simple analogy as to why
a regional approach is needed.

The problem of refugees is affecting the whole
region. Guinea, for example, has borne the burden of
Sierra Leonean and Liberian exiles.
We went beyond the simple issues. We
recognized that the horizontal aspects of concern to the
Council do not respect national borders. Throughout
the visit we tried to address the themes of human
rights; governance; child soldiers; peace-building;
small arms proliferation; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; the role of women; poverty;
HIV/AIDS; elections; and so forth. There is a raft of
such issues. But they have common themes affecting
all the countries and the region as a whole.

We were also keen to meet representatives of
civil society and the non-governmental organizations
working in the field. The briefing that we were given at
the Arria-style meeting beforehand proved very useful.

Of course, the raison d'etre of the Security
Council is international peace and security. Without
security and peace, there can be no sustainable
development. But without development, stability and
security become even more difficult. So we come to
the self-evident truth: security and development tend to
be interdependent. As well as the broader interest, we
therefore looked at the situation in individual
countries, discussed the key issues with ministers and
demonstrated our support for the United Nations
missions active in the region and for the work of the
funds and specialized agencies.

We visited seven countries in eight days. It was
right to start in Ghana, which holds the current
chairmanship of ECOWAS. While there we also met
the ECOWAS secretariat. We moved on successively to
cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Guinea-
Bissau and Guinea (Conakry). We were also briefed in
Dakar by Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa.

The formal written report should be circulated
later this week - initially in English, I think, with
translations to follow. Meanwhile, I would like to share
some quick impressions of the discussion in the
individual capitals.

In Accra, Mr. Chambas, Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS, set out the agenda for the work of
ECOWAS. Frankly, it is impressive and fits well with
the Council's priorities. It is dominated by a political
and military role, with the intention now being to
prepare a standby force of 6,500. ECOWAS throughout
is playing a constructive role in the region, especially
through the Ghanaian-Nigerian efforts to facilitate
dialogue in C6te d'Ivoire. Economic aspects are less
advanced, but they offer considerable potential.
The visit to Abidjan was timely and important.
We expressed concern at the present political impasse
and the non-functioning of the Government, and we
delivered tough messages to all the parties, to the
Government, to President Gbagbo, to parliamentarians
and to civil society. We emphasized the cardinal
importance of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and
brought together its signatories for the first time since
that Agreement was signed. We were given
commitments, and it is our view that we should
monitor them carefully and hold accountable anyone
who is obstructive. The goal is clear: it is to proceed
peacefully to elections in 2005 based on Linas-
Marcoussis.

In Monrovia, Liberia - a country starting afresh
and picking itself up from the devastation wreaked by
Taylor for so long - we were impressed by the
commitment of Chairman Bryant and his team and by
the improved security situation, thanks to the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). But progress is
clearly going to be a big challenge. In stressing the
need to build peace and institutions, we emphasized
that there could be no impunity for those who faced
indictment.

We spent 24 hours in Freetown - but I would
like to say that our first thoughts today must be
sympathy for the families of those who perished in
yesterday's tragic helicopter accident, individuals who
were dedicating themselves to peace and to rebuilding
Sierra Leone, and our deepest sympathy must go to the
Government of Pakistan.

In Sierra Leone, there has been a lot of progress.
The military and police forces are gradually
strengthening, and we seem on course to drawn down
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) as previously agreed by the Council. But
getting Sierra Leone to point where it is capable of
managing its own security and defence is going to be
only a first challenge. The State is fragile, and building
its institutions, particularly developing a prosperous
economy, one which at the moment is heavily
dependent on the presence of the international
community, is going to be very difficult.

In Abuja, we had an outstanding meeting with
President Obasanjo and Foreign Minister Adenji. We
shared impressions on regional aspects and on the role
of ECOWAS. But we were also able to discuss the
positive developments in the Sudan and the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur. We are encouraged by
President Obasanjo's commitment and his belief in the
role that the African Union could play.

The President also gave us a magisterial
presentation on the importance of NEPAD. He
emphasized the importance of the international
community's supporting the initiative through a much
increased flow of resources, improved trade access and
debt relief. But he also set out a clear context of
development and security and stressed the need for a
partnership covering conflict, security, governance,
democracy and economic development. He also briefed
us on the useful progress made in the 25 June meeting,
which he chaired between Presidents Kabila and
Kagame.

We found Guinea-Bissau evidently the poorest
country which we visited, yet we were told that the
conditions were visibly better than when our
colleagues visited last year. We welcomed there the
presence of Ambassador Kumalo and of two colleagues
from the Economic and Social Council, who joined us
to underline the strength of United Nations support as a
whole for Guinea-Bissau.

The country is starting from the bottom, having
emerged from turmoil, and the Government has been in
office only for some 50 days. But there were
encouraging signs, with a President and a Government
committed to progress. The International Monetary
Fund (IMF) is likely to agree a special post-conflict
programme in September, so we encourage the positive
trends and underline to the military the importance of
political control and the need for substantial
restructuring and retirement within the military
establishment.

The challenge for the United Nations system and
for Guinea-Bissau's development partners will be to
support these positive trends and facilitate an
absorptive capacity and administrative infrastructure,
both of which are, at the moment, cruelly lacking.

In Conakry, we spent an hour with President
Conte and discussed regional issues. The President
welcomed the dialogue, noted that Guinea had suffered
most from regional conflict, and expressed his personal
commitment to working for peace.

Throughout the visit, we were very impressed by
the dedication of United Nations peacekeepers and by
the United Nations country teams. We were able to
explore a range of issues with the different Special
Representatives. Coordination is in place to deliver
effective, coherent policies worked out in conjunction
with host Governments. The Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General have a key role in leadership and
direction and also in presenting the United Nations to
the host country. What is vital, it seems to us, is that
the United Nations be seen to be supporting policies of
which the Government has ownership and that it
should be perceived as a friend, as an enabler, and that
at the same time that it should do this without fostering
permanent dependency. We felt that the representatives
were achieving those goals.

I should like to thank my colleagues for their
contributions and for the tireless energy which they
displayed throughout a long mission, and our particular
thanks are due to the Secretariat.

If I may, I should now like to offer some
conclusions, starting with a statement of the blindingly
obvious: the United Nations and the international
community have to stay the course in West Africa. This
will require a sustained effort, but we cannot afford to
give up anywhere. We cannot afford the risk of failing
States, or even failure in parts of individual States.

But building peace, establishing institutions,
developing absorptive capacities, putting in place the
rule of law and holding free and fair elections are much
more difficult than trying to stop a conflict. The risk of
slipping back into conflict is always greater in the first
two years or so after the end of conflict, so vigilance
and sustained commitment by the United Nations and
its entire family, by the international financial
institutions, by ECOWAS and all the other elements of
the international community, will, in our view, remain
essential.

But to get there, economic development will also
be essential. It is essential to underpin, support and
harness the assets and economic potential of the region.
Some continuing degree of dependency culture is
natural and inevitable, but sovereign Governments
must exercise control and assume their responsibilities
quickly, so that sustainable development and peace go
hand in hand and are secured.

It seems to us that the regional approach is
absolutely essential, for the reasons I have tried to set
out. The countries and the different issues are so
intertwined that regional success is a prerequisite for
stability in one country. Therefore it also makes sense
for us to support those countries in the region which
demonstrate commitment to good governance and to
human rights. Sometimes they are overlooked in our
concentration on the problem cases. It was suggested to
us that, if there is another mission next year that we
ought to go and see more of the successful countries,
those not in conflict.
We should not be too shy in taking action to avert
conflict. If the warning signs are there, we should be
prepared to act, and be prepared to act sooner. The
Mixed Commission on Bakassi, for example, chaired
by Special Representative Ould-Abdallah, is a good
example of conflict prevention and of better value and
more effective use of funding in the long run than
peacekeeping.

Within the region, the Special Representatives
meet regularly, and it is important that the regional
synergies of individual peacekeeping operations are
better developed. But what we have to remember is
that the peacekeeping operations are very tightly
resourced indeed, with no reserves and little flexibility.
They are very much operating at the maximum of what
is possible.

More people are killed by small arms in Africa
than by any another type of weapon. The arms trade
causes instability. The present moratorium needs to
evolve into a more aggressive attack on all aspects of
this trade, something which I hope the Council can
come back to soon.

By necessity, most of our United Nations effort is
targeted at post-conflict situations. But clearly more
effective conflict-prevention policies are needed, and
that is not only in West Africa. Again, that is
something which I hope the Council could address
substantively, and soon.

In all this, we were struck that ECOWAS is a
force for good, and we should look to see how we can
give it further support.

Are there imaginative ways in which we can help
with the training and even the funding of a standby
force? It seems to me that we need a better definition

of the relationship between United Nations
peacekeeping and regional efforts. Perhaps the High-
Level Panel will help us on that. Certainly, the special
event which the incoming Romanian presidency
intends to hold on 20 July to look at the relationship
with regional organizations is a step in that direction.

Development, security and stability are essential
if peace is to endure in West Africa. That will demand
the sustained effort of the international community as a
whole and all the interventions that we can bring to
bear. By that, of course, I do not mean military
intervention; I am talking about the range of peaceful
support which can be given to Governments.

Sometimes in this city, perhaps in this country,
some dispute the role and the relevance of the United
Nations. Those of us who last week saw first-hand the
work of the United Nations in West Africa and who
now have a reinforced impression of the problems
which the United Nations is tackling there have no
doubts about the primary importance of the United
Nations and of its work in the field. It is a simple truth,
it seems to me, that we need to tackle these problems
in West Africa if only because, if neglected, they could
become problems for all of us.

That is my contribution, but the mission was very
much a team effort. If I may, Mr. President, I would
like to ask you to invite Ambassador De La Sabliere
and Ambassador Gaspar Martins to add their personal
impressions, too.

