Switzerland would like to thank Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for organizing this debate and the briefers for their contributions. The situations on the Security Council's agenda are witnessing the negative impact of current challenges, such as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and climate change, on international peace and security. It is necessary that the Council recognize such linkages and strengthen its engagement as part of a holistic approach that engages the three pillars of the United Nations in order to be able to address the root causes of conflicts and insecurity. The following three areas of action call for greater engagement by the Security Council. First, the effects of climate change threaten peacebuilding efforts and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in various contexts where high levels of inequality and vulnerability are present within the population. Climate change and natural disasters can result in the displacement of people and contribute to heightened tensions among different communities. We need to prevent such disasters and food insecurity. That is why, for example, Switzerland is assisting communities in Somalia in the implementation of an early warning network. A systematic analysis of climate change-related risks must inform the Security Council's decisions, particularly in relation to the mandates of peace missions. To that end, we call on the Council to make full use of existing resources within the United Nations system, including the climate security mechanism, which brings together the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and field- level structures. Switzerland commends the commitment of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security and the establishment of the informal expert group of the Security Council on that issue. Secondly, as the Security Council affirms in its resolution 2532 (2020), the COVID-19 pandemic threatens to reverse the peacebuilding and development gains made by countries in transition and post-conflict countries. An inclusive and human rights-based approach must guide efforts to build back better in the aftermath of the pandemic. The Peacebuilding Commission is ideally positioned to promote a coherent and coordinated response between the three pillars of the United Nations system and its principal bodies in line with the priorities identified by Member States at the country level. We call on the Council to fully take into account the Peacebuilding Commission's contributions in its work. Thirdly, the common challenge posed by the current crises also opens up opportunities. The Blue Peace initiative launched by Switzerland is such an example. The joint management of shared water resources can reduce tensions and promote stable relations among the various States and stakeholders. Several specific programmes have been implemented on the ground in the Middle East, Central Asia and West Africa. The Security Council's support for preventive diplomacy, through United Nations special political missions and in cooperation with regional and subregional organizations, is based on the same approach and has significant further potential for development. The linkages between peace, development and humanitarian action are central to Switzerland's foreign policy, including in its role as Vice-President of the Economic and Social Council, as a member of the Peacebuilding Commission next year and, if elected, as a non-permanent member of the Security Council for the period from 2023 to 2024.
