Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I should
like to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
having organized this open debate on the very important
and pressing topic of conflict prevention.

The nature of conflict has changed significantly
over the years. Of course, the resolution of purely
internal matters is a question for the local legal system.
But it is abundantly clear that the boundary between
intra-State and inter-State conflicts has become
increasingly blurred in recent decades. The most
complicated instances include attempts by a State
to disguise its role in inspiring disorder and fuelling
conflict on the territory of another State, including
by, but not limited to, setting up and supporting a
subordinate separatist regime in areas beyond the
control of the legitimate Government. That obviously
imposes an additional burden upon the international
system and mechanisms, including various regional
and subregional organizations dealing with conflict
prevention and resolution. It is therefore important to
maintain consistency in identifying ways and means of
international response to such situations, as well as to
develop a comprehensive approach to the problem of
violent separatism.

As far as inter-State relations are concerned, the
concept of conflict-prevention is inextricably linked to
the principle of the peaceful settlement of international
disputes enshrined in paragraph 3 of Article 2 of
the Charter of the United Nations. The true value of
that principle is to commit States to refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force,
respect each other's territorial integrity and resolve
their disputes in conformity with international law.

At the same time, in circumstances where one State
has neglected its obligation to settle an international
dispute by peaceful means and has resorted to force and
occupied the territory of another State, the reference to
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes must
in no way impair the application of the inherent right
of self-defence enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter.

International law requires not just an outcome
in preventing or resolving conflicts, but that such
an outcome be accompanied by a process that is
consistent with particular norms of international law.
It is important that conflict-settlement frameworks
and mechanisms not be used as a tool to consolidate
solutions that are a priori illegal and a fait accompli.
Attempts to impose or encourage such solutions will
fail to provide the necessary foundations for enduring
peace and long-term stability.

As a matter of priority, special attention should be
given to the implementation of resolutions adopted by
the principal organs of the United Nations, in particular
those relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution. It is equally
important that Security Council resolutions call things
by their names - call a spade a spade - rather than seek
a balance in addressing the key issue of responsibility.

It is also important to underline the role of the rule
of law in preventing conflict, mitigating the effects of
a conflict once it has arisen and in resolving conflicts
and thus establishing a stable and durable peace. The
imperative of establishing and documenting truth,
shedding light on real facts and combating impunity is
undeniable. Such efforts must be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches.

We look forward to further initiatives on this
important topic. Azerbaijan will continue to be an
active partner in that process.

