Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), for their
briefings and work. We would also like to thank
Prosecutors Serge Brammetz and Hassan Jallow for
their briefings and work.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, as well as the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, in their efforts to
bring to justice the perpetrators of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes committed during
the conflicts that affected those countries and whose
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights shocked the conscience of
humankind. The work conducted by those tribunals
reaffirms the commitment of the international
community to combat impunity with respect to war
crimes and crimes against humanity in order to ensure
that such acts are never repeated. Such efforts contribute
to strengthening the rule of law at the international
level.

As we near the end of the work of both Tribunals,
which are in the midst of transferring their archives
and their pending cases to the International Residual
Mechanism, we believe that this represents an important
opportunity to bolster the cooperation between that
body and the States concerned in order to ensure
completion of the mandates set out in resolution 1966
(2010). This support is an essential component of the
successful achievement of the goals set.

Turning first to the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia, we wish to underscore that, although
it is true that significant progress has been made and
judicial proceedings have been completed in 147 of the
161 individual cases that were entrusted to the court,
we nonetheless note with concern that, despite the fact
that more than two decades have elapsed since the
ICTY was established, several cases are experiencing
procedural delays, due mainly to external factors. We
hope that these difficulties can be overcome so that the
trials can be completed by the set deadline, with due
respect for the principles of due process and judicial
impartiality.

Venezuela would also like to acknowledge the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
which was highlighted at the closing ceremony held last
week in Arusha, Tanzania, and which is reflected in the
raft of jurisprudence accumulated over the years, the
safeguarding and preservation of judicial archives, the
many lessons learned and the capacity-building that has
been engaged in by this body throughout its lifetime.
All of this represents a legacy that can serve to enrich
the work of other legal bodies such as the International
Criminal Court. In a similar vein, we duly acknowledge
the influence exercised by the ICTR on the capacity-
building of the judicial system in Rwanda itself.

We also commend the ICTR for having wrapped
up the cases of 93 accused, leaving just one single
case pending in the Appeals Chamber that involves six
individuals; it is projected that this appeals case will be
concluded by the end of this year.

With regard to the cases of the nine fugitives from
justice, six of which were referred to the jurisdiction of
the national courts of Rwanda and the other three to the
Residual Mechanism, we encourage the authorities to
locate, apprehend and try those accused as quickly as
possible in order to ensure that justice is applied to all
of the indicted.

With regard to those individuals who are serving
their sentences and those who have been acquitted,
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has
referred these cases to the Residual Mechanism so that
it can support the relocation of the individuals that
have been acquitted, given that theirs is a humanitarian
issue that requires the cooperation of the international
community. Only thus will such persons be able to be
reintegrated into society. By the same token, we support
the strategic plan adopted by the Residual Mechanism
consisting of stepping up efforts to find appropriate
places for the relocation of these individuals and thus
provide them with appropriate levels of humanitarian
assistance. We encourage the Mechanism to maintain
the pace of work documented in the management
report in order to achieve a successful and unhindered
transition of the two Tribunals.

We would like to pay due tribute to the work of
Chile in its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals. We underscore the
work done by its delegation and the contribution it has
made to those bodies.

We would like to conclude by reiterating our
commitment to and support for the work done by
the International Tribunals in the fulfilment of their
mandates. Support for them and their work will make
it possible to fulfil the commitment made by the
international community to promote the rule of law and
put an end to impunity in the fight against genocide
and crimes against humanity, thus strengthening global
peace and security.

