I would like to express Japan's appreciation for the initiative of the Indonesian presidency to discuss this topic of great importance in the Security Council. Linkages between international terrorism and organized crime continue to pose a serious challenge and threat not only to human security, but also to international peace and security. The proceeds of organized crime, such as trafficking in person, illicit trade in arms and drugs, and kidnapping, are often an important source of funding for terrorists. To fully implement relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2482 (2019), which calls upon Member States to redouble their efforts on this critical issue, Japan has been making every effort to counter both terrorism and organized crime and to synergize measures on both fronts. In addition to putting in place stringent national measures, Japan contributes to capacity-building in other Member States in collaboration with relevant United Nations bodies. To take one notable example, Japan has been a long-standing partner of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in providing a series of trainings to boost capacities for border control in the countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and for maritime law enforcement in the Indian Ocean region. Recognizing the issues related to the conditions of prisons and correctional facilities as an exacerbating factor in violent extremism, Japan has supported the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to improve strategies for the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of terrorists in South- East Asia through a community-based approach. Pivotal initiatives are being advanced, as exemplified by the United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, led by the United Nations Office of Counter- Terrorism. Japan has been a donor to this project since its launch last year and hopes that it will effectively assist Member States in enhancing their detection capabilities against both terrorists and serious criminals. The ongoing coronavirus disease crisis is negatively impacting our efforts to counter terrorism and organized crime. There is a growing risk of terrorist attacks against potential targets whose defensive measures had to be downgraded due to the pandemic. Vigilance is needed even outside conflict areas, including in cyberspace, which terrorists increasingly exploit for propaganda, recruitment and financing. In the face of the pandemic, Japan has swiftly redesigned its assistance to UNODC to enhance Member States' capacities for border controls, prison management and cybersecurity. The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols remain among the most important foundations for international cooperation in combating terrorism and organized crime. Undeterred by its postponement this spring due to the pandemic, the fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice is envisaged to be held in Kyoto in March 2021. Japan will work closely with UNODC and Member States to ensure success at the Kyoto Congress. To respond to the ever-evolving intrigue of terrorists and criminal organizations, Member States and relevant international bodies need to coordinate their measures and implement them effectively. Japan is determined to continue to contribute to such endeavours in close cooperation with the United Nations.
