Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank and to congratulate Ambassadors
Jurica, Urbina and Verbeke for their statements
regarding the three Committees under their
chairmanship, namely, the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and
1267 (1999), respectively. Members of the Council are
unanimous in believing that theirs is effective and
serious work that deserves our encouragement in
moving ahead.

My delegation, which has always advocated
strengthened cooperation among all United Nations
bodies working to combat terrorism, very much
appreciates this joint briefing, which clearly illustrates
the joint, effective and complementary work being
done by the three Committees. Moreover, the workshop
held in Dakar, Senegal, in September 2007 for West
African countries was a good example of the benefits
of that cooperation. It is also gratifying to note that the
three Committees have not lost sight of the need to
provide appropriate technical assistance to States in
accordance with their needs. That will enable States
requesting such assistance to enhance their capacity to
combat terrorist threats. As this is a collective and
unified undertaking, it is important that, if possible, all
States achieve the highest possible security standards
in order to avert any potential breech that could be
exploited by terrorist groups.

In their efforts to carry out joint visits to Member
States, we must in particular encourage the 1267 and
1373 Committees to continue the process of improving
their methods. Those visits, which are certainly very
useful, could perhaps benefit from being more flexible
and focused on specific objectives and the main
concerns of the countries visited.

With regard to the 1540 Committee, we welcome
the considerable increase in the number of countries
that have submitted their initial reports. We of course
encourage countries that have not yet done so to meet
their obligations under the resolution. It is also
important that Member States continue to cooperate
with the Committee, especially as regards providing
the required reports and additional information.

Given the great importance of this issue that
concerns us all, my delegation would like to propose
the idea of having the three Committees hold regular
joint briefings for all Member States. That would make
for greater interaction with the Committees and all
Member States, which could then have an exchange of
experiences and information from which useful lessons
could be learned. That would also ensure greater
transparency in the Council's counter-terrorism efforts.
Lastly, it would bring about better involvement by all
Member States in combating international terrorism.
Such an initiative is clearly useful and possible, as
each Committee already holds annual public
information meetings.

I would also like to thank and congratulate the
1267 Committee for the dialogue and open exchange it
hosted yesterday, along with the representatives of
Denmark, Liechtenstein, Sweden and Switzerland.

In conclusion, Burkina Faso encourages the
participation of expert groups in the efforts of the
United Nations system in the framework of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We call for the
strengthening and improvement of cooperation
between regional and subregional organizations and
United Nations bodies with the responsibility of
combating terrorism. In that regard, it is important to
note that the African Centre for the Study and Research
on Terrorism, located in Algiers, is an excellent vehicle
for, and good example of, cooperation between United
Nations and African Union bodies.

