Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this important debate. My delegation greatly
appreciates the valuable contribution of the World
Food Programme, which strives to make a difference in
the lives of millions of human beings throughout the
world. I am honoured to express Bulgaria's great
admiration for Ms. Catherine Bertini, and to recognize
her remarkable work during her two terms as Executive
Director of the Programme. She has been able to
reorganize and modernize the World Food Programme,
making it more effective than ever. Bulgaria would like
to thank her warmly for that.

We support the newly developed strategy to
mobilize resources for the World Food Programme
with a view to improving the predictability of long-
term contributions. We are pleased with the partnership
of principal donors, as well as with that of non-
traditional contributors. We also hope that the trend
towards increased resources for the Programme will
continue.

My second observation concerns the need for
early warning and preventive action. The international
community must intervene at the right time to mobilize
awareness about the need for a donor response
adequate to meet the food needs of vulnerable people.
The experience of the World Food Programme in
Africa in the last few years has proven that when
resources are provided on time, we can avert a crisis of
vast proportions and fraught with potentially tragic
consequences.

It is clear that the needs caused by the
proliferation of conflicts - sometimes aggravated by
drought and other natural disasters - are so huge that
they cannot be covered by a single organization. The
partnership established among the World Food
Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the World Health
Organization is a good example in that regard. Our
delegation would like in particular to stress the
cooperation that should take place at the operational
level in the field, as well as joint activities with non-
governmental organizations.

Unfortunately, in many conflicts humanitarian aid
does not reach those who desperately need it, and
humanitarian personnel are used as targets. The
Council must act, and must take appropriate measures
when access is refused, especially when it comes to
freedom of movement in the areas concerned, including
through targeted sanctions.

Bulgaria supports the World Food Programme's
new approaches aimed at gaining access to victims of
armed conflict and at providing them with food
assistance. We are also pleased with the establishment
of the Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping Unit, which
makes it possible to identify the areas to which food
assistance must be directed. At the same time, we are
concerned about the decrease in resources for
development efforts. The current levels are the lowest
in 23 years.

I would also like to say a few words about the
categories of people who are particularly vulnerable:
women, children, refugees, displaced persons and
populations deprived of means of subsistence. Our
commitment to them must be translated into a better
and more secure reality. The Council and humanitarian
organizations must step up their efforts to strengthen
the protection of such persons.

