Mr. Cunningham (United States): Much has
happened since we met in this Chamber last Thursday.
Last Thursday, President Bush spoke from the Rose
Garden to the parties in the Middle East conflict and he
dispatched Secretary Powell to the region to work
towards the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1402 (2002). I spoke with the Secretary
before his departure last night, briefed him on our
informal discussions of yesterday and conveyed the
Council's support for his mission.

The Council has now adopted three constructive
and comprehensive resolutions and has said what needs
to be said in a clear, unified voice. Resolutions 1397
(2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) form a roadmap
and a goal. They are the basis for the Secretary's
mission and the efforts of the "quartet", which is due to
meet in Madrid on 10 April.

In the region itself, Special Envoy General Zinni
met with Chairman Arafat last Friday and with Prime
Minister Sharon today. Echoing the Security Council's
recent calls, General Zinni focused on the need for an
immediate ceasefire, Israeli withdrawal and agreement
from the Palestinian Authority on implementation of
the Tenet work plan.

Now is the time for leadership on the ground and
in the region. We do not need any more resolutions. We
need full implementation of the existing ones.
Although neither side has demonstrated compliance
with resolution 1402 (2002), a high-level diplomatic
effort is now under way. President Bush has called for
Israeli withdrawal without delay. He spoke directly
with Prime Minister Sharon on 6 April to deliver this
message. Today, he repeated, once again, that he meant
what he said.

He has also called on the Palestinian Authority
and leaders in the region to do everything in their
power to stop terrorist activities and to stop inciting
violence by glorifying terror in State-owned media or
by telling suicide bombers that they are martyrs. In the
absence of a clear condemnation of terrorism by Arab
leaders, Palestinian suicide bombers in Gaza and the
West Bank will be convinced that they have a green
light to destroy any hope of a return to a peaceful
settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute. All who care
about the Palestinian people must join in acting against
groups like Hizbullah, Hamas and Islamic Jihad, which
oppose a peace process and seek the destruction of
Israel.

I must again call the Council's attention to the
dangerous situation along the Blue Line. A thorough
discussion of non-compliance with United Nations
resolutions would necessarily demand a focus on
Hizbullah and its backers. Hizbullah actions can only
be understood as a deliberate effort to escalate the
situation and widen the conflict just as Secretary of
State Powell arrives in the region to promote
implementation of resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002). Daily Hizbullah-initiated attacks are in breach
of resolution 1391 (2002) and risk provoking
dangerous escalation. Hizbullah's 4 April assault on
United Nations peacekeepers also shows their contempt
for United Nations institutions, Security Council
decisions and Lebanon's own obligations under
resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).

Finally, in the current, extremely dangerous
situation, we call on all sides, especially Lebanese and
Syrian leaders who have influence over Hizbullah's
actions, to exercise maximum restraint and work to
prevent a serious escalation that could destabilize the
region.

