Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Mr. Fall, for his briefing. We would also
like to thank the Executive Secretary of the Great
Lakes Conference Secretariat, Ms. Mulamula, for her
briefing.

China welcomes the successful convening of the
Second Summit of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the signing and adoption of
the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the African
Union and the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
Region for their contribution to the preparations for the
Conference.

In recent years, there have been some
encouraging developments in the situation in the Great
Lakes Region. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi successfully held historic elections. Many
countries gradually came out of the shadows of conflict
and actively carried out the work of post-war
reconstruction.

Of course, this region is still faced with problems,
such as poverty and disease. Some countries are still
either suffering from armed conflict or facing the
arduous challenge of peacebuilding.
The international community cannot shirk its
responsibility to assist the countries in the region to
quickly eliminate armed conflict, achieve national
reconciliation and move forward along the road of
sustainable development. It should also continue to
increase economic assistance to the countries in the
region. We hope that the Peacebuilding Commission
will also give positive attention to the post-conflict
reconstruction process in the Great Lakes region.

Peace and development in that region are
inseparable from the ownership of the process by the
countries concerned; and they need to solve the
relevant issues properly within the regional framework
and through dialogue and consultation. They should
also further consolidate the good-neighbourly relations
among the countries.

The signing of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region marks the
occasion for the countries of the region to enter a new
path towards solving their disputes independently and
to develop their economies through solidarity and self-
reliance. This should be conducive to quickly easing
the regional conflict, accelerating post-war
reconstruction and achieving lasting peace and security
in the region. We earnestly hope that the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region will continue to
provide a platform for the countries in the region to
carry out constructive dialogue and cooperation and
that it will strive to make a positive contribution to the
achievement of sustainable peace and development in
the region.

As a friend of the countries in the region, China
has followed the situation in the Great Lakes region
with close attention and has done its share to assist the
countries concerned to end conflict and achieve
development. China actively participated in the
relevant United Nations peacekeeping operations and
provided assistance, within its capabilities, to the
countries concerned through bilateral channels. We are
ready to continue to strengthen this comprehensive
cooperation with the countries in the region in the
framework of the China-Africa Cooperation Forum, so
as to make a positive contribution to achieving lasting
peace, stability and development in the region.

Finally, I would like to thank the delegation of
the United Republic of Tanzania for drafting the
Presidential Statement, which we support.

