Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation expresses
its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening
this Council meeting, which affords us another timely
opportunity to review the situation in Kosovo as well
as the important work being carried out by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999).

This meeting is indeed significant as UNMIK
enters its second year of operation. The presence in the
Council today of Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
UNMIK, is therefore most appropriate. We welcome
him back to the Council and would like once again to
reaffirm our full support for his leadership of UNMIK,
as well as for his tireless efforts in the implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999) on the ground. We are
grateful for his frank, forthright and passionate
briefing, which we have listened to most attentively.

We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for
his detailed, comprehensive and extremely useful
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
remarks made by Ambassador Holbrooke on the need
for the Council not to convey the impression that, at its
meeting today, it is one-sided. I trust, Mr. President,
that you will correct this misimpression.

After 12 months, UNMIK, in close cooperation
with the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and with the support of
the international community, has made great progress
in dealing with the disastrous consequences of the
recent violence and repression in Kosovo. There has
clearly been a steady and progressive implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999) and UNMIK continues to be
on the right track in the process of building stability,
peace, democracy and prosperity in Kosovo. My
delegation strongly supports this process, under the
stewardship of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and under the overall supervision of
this Council.

The four pillars of UNMIK have registered
significant progress in a number of important areas,
ranging from the provision of immediate humanitarian
assistance in the aftermath of the conflict to the
rebuilding and consolidation of sectoral facilities, such
as health, education, transport and other social
services, as well as from the establishment of the
provisional institutions for democratic and autonomous
self-governance to the initial stage of the longer-term
development and reconstruction of Kosovo.

As the Secretary-General himself states in his
report, "Kosovo today is definitely a better place than
the international community found it 12 short months
ago" (S/2000/538, para. 3). Significantly, during that
short period of time, the strenuous efforts of UNMIK to
engage the local population in the establishment of
substantial autonomy and self-government in Kosovo
have produced tangible results. The central and
municipal provisional administrative structures have
been established and further consolidated.

Notwithstanding some shortcomings, which are
due in large part to the complexity of the current
situation on the ground, the establishment of important
administrative structures, such as the Kosovo
Transitional Council, the Interim Administrative
Council and 20 departments under the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure, as well as the Kosovo Police
Service, represent real and important achievements of
UNMIK in this regard. We have already emphasized
the importance of the participation of representatives of
all Kosovo communities in these consultative and
administrative mechanisms.

My delegation notes that the civil registration
process and the preparation for the upcoming
municipal elections are already under way. We strongly
urge the Serb community to participate in the
registration process and call upon the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to fully cooperate with
UNMIK on the registration of Kosovars internally
displaced in Serbia. We look forward to the successful
conduct of the municipal elections, which will lay a
viable foundation for the future of Kosovo. Such a
future must necessarily take into account many
important, complex and sensitive factors, including the
pertinent issue of the aspirations of the majority
Albanian community in Kosovo, as recognized in the
Rambouillet accords, as well as the legitimate rights of
the other ethnic minorities.

Despite those achievements, there are still areas
where greater efforts are required before peace and
stability in Kosovo can be further consolidated. The
continued fragile security situation in Kosovo remains
a major challenge to UNMIK and KFOR, as well as to
the international community. The upsurge in acts of
violence over the past week is a matter of deep concern
to the international community. Appropriate measures
are therefore necessary to address effectively problems
relating to inter-ethnic tensions and violence and to
promote co-existence and tolerance in Kosovo. We
note that UNMIK, in close cooperation with KFOR,
has undertaken decisive measures to contain such inter-
ethnic violence. However, success will depend in large
measure on the availability of resources, particularly
relating to police personnel.

It is imperative that all Kosovo leaders and
ordinary people, regardless of their ethnic background,
constructively play their part in the fight against
extremism and promote tolerance and co-existence. In
this regard, we welcome the statements that have been
made by Mr. Ibrahim Rugova and Mr. Hashim Thaci,
which clearly demonstrate their continued commitment
to peace and stability in Kosovo. Given the background
of violence and mass expulsion that their people have
been subjected to, their courageous statements are
particularly commendable.

The resolution of inter-community tensions is, to
a large extent, linked to the issue of missing persons
and the continued detention of Kosovars in jails in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This issue, which has
also been highlighted by Mr. Kouchner, must be
addressed on an urgent basis.

We welcome the establishment of the Victim
Recovery and Identification Commission and ongoing
support for the crucial work being carried out by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to deal with the issue of missing persons.
At the same time, we have expressed our strong
support for the appointment of a special envoy for
missing persons, detainees and prisoners to look into
this matter. We look forward to the early appointment
of the envoy. We believe that tangible progress on this
matter will have a significant impact on the efforts to
forge inter-communal harmony and peaceful co-
existence among the several ethnic groups in Kosovo.
While all parties must cooperate in resolving this issue,
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities have a
particular responsibility, given the fact that over 1,000
Kosovar Albanians are known to be in Serbian jails,
not to mention the many thousands unaccounted for.
The issue of detainees and missing persons must not be
exploited for political reasons.

Peace in Kosovo should be viewed as a long-term
process, and not as a quick-exit strategy, by the
international community. This is because of the great
complexity of the problems, which will take many
years to resolve. While many achievements have been
made in such a short period of time, which we
welcome, we are fully cognizant of the remaining
challenges that have to be faced to make such progress
irreversible. Hence, the importance of sustained
international support and investment, both political and
material, which are imperative to the success of the
international role in Kosovo.

