Mr. Berml'ldez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to congratulate and commend Ethiopia
for the effective manner in which it conducted the work
of the Security Council the month of September, and to
wish you, Sir, and your delegation success in leading
the Council this month.

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his briefing today.

To begin, I would like I would like to reflect on
the juncture at which Mali is today, with a security
situation that has seriously deteriorated; a precarious
humanitarian situation resulting primarily from
insecurity; an Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali that has been in effect for more than two
years, but continues to await implementation; a newly
established Sanctions Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2374 (2017); a peacekeeping operation on
the ground enjoying the most robust and lethal mandate
of its kind; and a joint multinational force to counter
terrorism that is supposed to begin operations in the
near future. Uruguay welcomes the establishment of
a joint force by the Group of Five for the Sahel, and
encourages such subregional initiatives to address
the challenges accompanied by national ownership.
Nevertheless, the civilian population in Mali continues
to fall prey to the actions of terrorist groups, the
repeated clashes among armed groups and the absence
of State authority primarily in the northern half of
the country.

We regret that the situation in the Republic of Mali
continues to deteriorate, largely owing to the actions
of terrorist and extremist groups, which are enemies
of the peace and reconciliation process, but also of
additional and deep concern are the violations of the
provisions of the Agreement by the signatory groups
themselves. Uruguay reiterates and emphasizes that
the primary responsibility for public order and the
protection of civilians in the Republic of Mali lies with
its authorities.

The international community, in particular the
United Nations, is assisting the Government in its efforts
to shoulder the responsibilities that intrinsically befall
it as a sovereign country. The international community
indeed has been supporting Mali in its efforts to achieve
peace in the country in a number of ways, including
by making financial contributions for the development
of projects in the north of the country; establishing
and strengthening the mandate of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA); and carrying out peacebuilding
projects under the aegis of the Peacebuilding Fund, as
well as visits by the Secretary-General and missions of
the Security Council.

We believe that it is necessary and urgent to
adopt a multidimensional approach to address the
root causes fuelling the conflict in Mali. Areas such
as social development, providing basic services to the
population, access tojustice and creatingjobs should be
among the priorities, along with initiatives pertaining
to security, if we want to achieve long-term stability.

We note with concern the repeated allegations of
human rights violations committed by armed groups
and security forces in the country. In that regard,
Uruguay calls for all security activities, including
those deployed to counter terrorism, to be carried out
in strict compliance with the norms of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
as well as to ensure that all due process guarantees be
accorded to the alleged victims of those Violations.
Those responsible for committing those violations
must be held accountable.

We welcome the establishment of the sanctions
regime pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), in response
to the request of the Government of Mali. We must
not lose sight of the fact that the imposition of those
sanctions constitutes an additional tool for the Council
to achieve sustainable peace in Mali, but at the same
time we must continue to use the other tools at our
disposal, including operations deployed on the ground,
mediation and good offices, among others, while always
keeping within the framework of Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation as the cornerstone of the political
process. But what is most important is continuing
dialogue and the commitment to the agreements by all
the signatories.

Lastly, we would like to express our support and
appreciation to MINUSMA and the troop-contributing
countries that are doing commendable work in an
adverse environment and with limited capacities,
but - beyond any doubt - with outstanding courage,
goodwill and devotion to carrying out their mandate.

