Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): We find
Mr. Carl Bildt's statements very interesting for several
reasons, the first being his experience. He was the
European Union's envoy during a particularly sensitive
phase of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He carried
out his task in an authoritative manner, with perseverance
and wisdom, and finally, jointly with Mr. Holbrooke,
achieved a successful outcome. He was the first High
Representative of the international community for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and, as a result, he has a wealth of
experience that it is in our interest to draw on.

The second reason why we attach a great deal of
importance to Mr. Bildt's statements touches on the very
circumstances of his appointment and his mandate. The
Secretary-General was right to appoint a Special Envoy for
the Balkans as a whole. I believe that what is important
with respect to Mr. Bildt's task is the scope of his
competence and the need for him to have a global overview
of the region. This is because, as we know, different
institutions and bodies with different mandates and
compositions are taking a variety of approaches to the
Balkan region, and therefore it is up to Mr. Bildt to take a
sweeping look at the overall situation, where, despite the
specificity of the situations, certain characteristic elements
recur.

I believe that in this respect Mr. Bildt is keenly
aware, as he has demonstrated today, of the three
important considerations. The first is, of course, to try to
contribute to strengthening trends towards cooperation and
solidarity as opposed to trends towards disintegration or
division. I believe that this is a very interesting
approach - the only viable one, in fact - and that Mr.
Bildt has rightly chosen it.

The second important consideration is that we must
not shy away from the word "reform". Of course, when
we speak of reform, we mean democratic reform. Indeed,
certain actors in the region must either become more
aware of the need for democratic reform or step aside,
because this is a key element in the successful
consolidation of trends towards cooperation and solidarity.

My third comment concerns the importance of
reconstruction. We must continue to lend our assistance
in order to provide grounds for hope.
These three aspects - solidarity, reform and
reconstruction - underpin Mr. Bildt's overall vision, and
that is why we are gratified to have him with us today.
We welcome the work he has already done, and we
encourage him to continue in that same vein.

