Mr. Cunningham (United States): The United
States is deeply concerned by the situation in the
Middle East. We approach the tenth anniversary of the
Madrid Conference in October against the backdrop of
the most serious confrontation between Israelis and
Palestinians in a decade. Palestinians and Israelis have
been traumatized by almost a year of violence and
disruption. There has been great suffering on both
sides. We are deeply saddened by the tragic loss of life,
including of children. This violence has taken a
tremendous toll and seriously undermined the working
partnership that began with the signing of the Oslo
Declaration of Principles.

The United States and others in the international
community - including the other co-sponsor, Russia,
and our Secretary-General - are working hard to end
the violence and to restore some measure of confidence
between the parties. It is precisely because of the
gravity of events on the ground that we question the
appropriateness and effectiveness of any action here in
New York. What is required now is not rhetoric, not
debate that polarizes an already volatile situation and
certainly not an effort to condemn one side with
unbalanced charges or to impose unworkable ideas that
will not change the reality on the ground. That is not
the way for the Council to fulfil its duties. It must not
be drawn into an effort that will make lasting peace
more difficult.

Instead, what should guide action and debate is
what can be done practically, working with both sides
to end the violence and transform the environment in a
way that will permit the resumption of a political
process and a return to negotiations. It is towards this
objective that the United States and others here have
been working intensively. Our pledge is that we will
continue our efforts.

It is critical that the terror and violence end. It is
imperative that everything possible be done to pre-
empt terror, arrest those responsible for terrorism,
bring them to justice and end the incitement that
creates an environment for their actions. There can be
no justification or excuse for these actions. These
horrific attacks have killed and wounded Israelis
indiscriminately and have claimed American lives as
well.

The Palestinian Authority must act and make it
unmistakably clear by its own actions that it will not
tolerate these activities. Without such action, the
situation will only deteriorate further.

At the same time, Israel should also avoid actions
that might escalate the situation, and take steps on the
ground, of both an economic and a security nature, that
will alleviate pressure on Palestinians and transform
the reality of their daily lives.

There is no magic wand to accomplish these
objectives, no statement, resolution, nor action by the
Council that can remedy this tragic situation. But there
is a pathway forward, which the United States and
others in this room have endorsed. The
recommendations of the Sharm el-Sheikh Fact-finding
Committee, led by former Senator Mitchell and other
distinguished international statesmen from Turkey,
Norway and the European Union, provide a realistic,
practical, comprehensive approach to dealing with this
crisis. These recommendations have been accepted by
the parties themselves and provide a road map for them
to follow in order to end the violence, rebuild
confidence and change the dynamic of grievance and
violence so that Israelis and Palestinians can resume a
political process again.

The Fact-Finding Committee's recommendations
rightly call initially for an unconditional end to the
violence. Indeed, there can be no progress, let alone
meaningful negotiations, without it. The United States
has taken the lead in working with the parties to
develop a security work plan for implementing a
ceasefire. At the same time, the report ends with a call
for returning to negotiations. These negotiations will
allow the parties to address the underlying issues that
fuel their conflict and to return to a path towards peace.
The United States continues to believe that the bases
for these negotiations are Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the principles embodied
in the Madrid Conference.

Simply and sadly put, there are no quick or easy
solutions to this bitter conflict. There are no shortcuts
in this Council or elsewhere. Peace cannot be imposed;
it has to be worked for. Implementation of the Mitchell
recommendations, however difficult, remains the only
Viable pathway forward. And we call upon those
gathered here today to support ongoing efforts towards
that end.

