Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Nikolay Mladenov for
his briefing, which was, as usual, most enlightening,
as well as for his commitment day in and day out. I
join other members of the Council, on principle, to
express our regret that the quarterly report presented
to us today pursuant to resolution 2334 (2015) is not a
written report. In the absence of any clarification to the
contrary in the text of the resolution, the procedure that
must be followed by default is that of a written report.
Ten members of the Council made this request more
than six months ago and it is important that it be taken
into account.

Developments over the past few days confirm
once again the assessment that we highlight before the
Council on a regular basis, namely, that the illusion
of the status quo conceals a daily deterioration of the
situation that is liable to degenerate at any time and
further undermines the foundations of peace every day.
I said this last month about Gaza (see S/PV.8405), which,
from 11 to 13 November, was on the verge of being
plunged into a new conflict. The return to relative calm
does not detract from the tragic humanitarian situation
of the people of that territory. The situation requires
urgent political, humanitarian and development
measures to be adopted. Today, however, I would like
to focus on the West Bank, where last week's escalation
reminds us ofjust how volatile the situation is.

First of all, I wish to recall the violence of recent
days, which intensified after the 9 December firearms
attack on Israeli civilians on the outskirts of the
Ofra settlement in the West Bank and - as we are
aware - took a tragic death toll. I wish to reiterate with
the utmost clarity that France emphatically condemns
this attack and the apologia that Hamas has made in its
regard. Violence against civilians is unacceptable and
unjustifiable. In the wake of the attack, Israeli forces
deployed massively in the West Bank, including Zone
A, particularly in Ramallah. A new cycle of violence
followed, marked by numerous clashes with Palestinian
protesters and attacks by Israeli settlers. It peaked
during the day of 13 December, with several attacks
in the West Bank and Jerusalem that killed two Israeli
soldiers. While a precarious calm se3ems to have been
restored on the ground, we call on all parties to exercise
restraint. We regret that the Israeli authorities have
chosen to respond to these events with new decisions in
favour of settlement activities.

My second point concerns the fact that these
developments have unfolded in an environment
marked by the absence of any political horizon and
an acceleration of settlement activity policies. In this
context, I reiterate that France's position on settlement
activity will not change. Settlement activities are
illegal under international law; they contravene the
Fourth Geneva Convention and paragraphs 1 and 2 of
resolution 2334 (2016). They are dangerous, aggravate
tensions between populations and exacerbate spiralling
violence. Settlement activity is counterproductive; it is
progressively destroying prospects both on the ground
and at the political level for the two-State solution,
which must remain our ultimate goal.

While resolution 2334 (2016) calls for an immediate
halt to settlement activity, exactly the opposite has
occurred since its adoption almost two years ago.
This systematic policy has continued over the course
of the year, with a number of announcements of new
housing units in Jerusalem, almost reaching the woeful
record set in 2012, and a succession of announcements
of new housing units in settlements in the West Bank,
especially in particularly sensitive areas such as
Hebron. I would like to recall here the unique situation
of that divided city, where the presence of 800 settlers
has become a symbol of settlement activity and its
consequences, including the expulsion ofthe Palestinian
population, recurrent tensions between armed settlers
and Palestinians, and restrictions on public freedoms,
including movement and access to places of worship.

Demolitions and forced displacements have also
continued at a steady pace. Almost 200 Palestinian
structures were demolished in the first half of
2018, and more than 40 schools in Zone C and East
Jerusalem have been subject to an order of demolition.
We call on the Israeli authorities to abandon these
demolitions and forced displacements. We have taken
note of the suspension of the demolition orders in
Khan Al-Ahmar and call on the Israeli Government
to definitively abandon the demolition of the village
and the displacement of its population. I join my
British colleague in underscoring the need to support
the maintenance of the Palestinian presence in East
Jerusalem.

Finally, legislative initiatives aimed at regularizing

the so-called outposts - which are illegal not
only under international law but also under Israeli
law - are continuing, with the adoption of a so-

called regularization law, covering settlements built on
private Palestinian land, that is the subject of an appeal
to the Israeli Supreme Court. A second law, under
review, concerns the regularization of more than 60
settlements. We call on the Israeli authorities to reverse
these decisions, which seek to normalize or even
intensify a policy that is illegal under international law.
In light of this risk - to introduce my last
point - we are obligated under both international
humanitarian law and resolution 2334 (2016) to refuse
to recognize the 1967 border violations effected by
the Israeli settlement policy under paragraph 3 of the
resolution; to acknowledge the distinction between
Israel and the occupied territories, under paragraph
5; and to address the need to identify practical means
to ensure the implementation of relevant Council
resolutions by the parties, under paragraph 11.

We hope that the decisions taken by the international
community that meet these obligations, in particular
those under paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016), will
be systematically reflected in the reports submitted to
the Council pursuant to the resolution, as was the case
today. The European Union has adopted, through the
2013 guidelines on European financing and the 2015
Interpretative Notice on products of the settlements,
several instruments that must be included among the
good practices in this regard.

The reality is that we are close to the point of
no return. The fragmented territorial aggregation
that is taking shape before our eyes is creating an
unequal coexistence of two populations on the same
territory. The culmination of this process will spell,
for the Palestinians, the abandonment of their national
aspirations, which involve the establishment ofa State;
and for the Israelis, the renunciation of the democratic
nature of the State of Israel.

As we all know, the destinies of Israelis and
Palestinians are intertwined; neither of the two peoples
will realize their aspirations in the long term at the
expense of the other. As a friend of the Israelis and
the Palestinians, France has only one objective - the
implementation through negotiation of a two-State
solution, which is the only way to bring about a just
and lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. It is
against that yardstick and in the light of respect for
internationally agreed parameters that France will
closely scrutinize, with the resolve to make progress,
the forthcoming proposal of the United States that
has just been mentioned by my colleague and friend,
Ambassador Nikki Haley.

