Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the United States Permanent
Mission for its hard work in steering the successful
adoption today of resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989
(2011). I also commend the efforts of all Security
Council members over the last few weeks.

Today the Council has taken an important step in
strengthening one of its key tools in the fight against
terrorism. We have adopted a new sanctions regime
targeting the insurgency in Afghanistan and a second
targeting the terrorism threat posed by Al-Qaida. In
effect, we have split the old 1267 Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime into two.

Creating a new and separate regime for
Afghanistan is an important step. It sends a clear signal
that now is the time for the Taliban to come forward
and join the political process. It also allows for more
specific procedures tailored to the situation we face
today in Afghanistan. The resolution introduces
broader listing criteria and a greater role for the Afghan
Government in consultation on listing and de-listing
decisions. It also explicitly links de-listing individuals
with the Kabul communique's reconciliation conditions
of renouncing violence, cutting ties with Al-Qaida and
accepting the framework of the Afghan Constitution.
We are pleased that the Government of Afghanistan
supports this initiative and welcome its continued
engagement in the implementation of sanctions that
counter the insurgency.

Let me now turn to the Al-Qaida resolution. Here
we have enhanced procedures to ensure that they
continue to be clear, fair and effective. We have
renewed and strengthened the role of the
Ombudsperson and we have improved de-listing
procedures by introducing two so-called sunset clauses.

In particular, we have agreed in today's resolution
to strengthen the capacity of the Office of the
Ombudsperson, which demonstrates the Council's
unanimous support for this important role. We have
agreed that Member States should provide all relevant
information to assist the Ombudsperson in carrying out
reviews of de-listing requests, including, where
appropriate, classified information. We have also
introduced stronger language, urging designating States
to allow the Ombudsperson to reveal their identity to
petitioners.
In addition, the Ombudsperson will now be able
to make recommendations to the sanctions Committee
on whether individuals and entities should be de-listed.
A recommendation to de-list an individual or entity
will trigger a sunset clause, which will make it more
straightforward to de-list individuals and entities which
no longer constitute a threat, while ensuring that those
who do continue to pose a threat remain listed. We
have also agreed on an additional sunset clause,
triggered by a de-listing request from a designating
State. Finally, we have further improved de-listing
procedures by clarifying the need for Member States to
provide reasons when proposing or opposing de-listing
requests.

The combined changes to both resolutions
adopted today constitute a significant step forward in
ensuring that sanctions respond to current terrorist
threats, adapt to the new situation in Afghanistan and
continue to ensure fair, clear and effective procedures.

