Mr. Trautwein (Germany): I would like, first, to
fully align my delegation with the statement just
delivered by the representation of the Netherlands on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union. I will
therefore limit myself to a few comments.

We would like to thank Ambassador de La
Sabliere and the Secretariat for preparing and leading
the mission in such an excellent way. My delegation
wishes that we could call the mission a full success.
But the reports of a major military operation by
Rwandan troops in eastern Congo and the ensuing
controversy between the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of Rwanda
have demonstrated that there is a continuing
considerable lack of confidence- or simply distrust.
Yesterday's reaction by the Council in the form of a
presidential statement should be a very clear warning
to Rwanda. The intention stated by Rwanda to conduct
a calibrated action within 14 days against members of
the former Rwandan Army (ex-FAR) forces and
Interahamwe might reignite the regional conflict, and it
seriously threatens the fragile transitional process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must also play its part more actively. In
particular, it has to do more to disarm the troops of the
ex-FAR/Interahamwe. Only a serious and sustained
military effort on the part of the Congolese Army will
yield success. Rwanda, in return, must offer a climate
to potential returnees in which they feel welcome and
can enjoy full political freedoms.

Although the mission dealt primarily with the
Great Lakes conflict, we had a chance to speak briefly
with President Museveni about the conflict in northern
Uganda and the ensuing humanitarian crisis there. The
Council should keep the conflict on its agenda and
encourage peaceful solutions. We welcome any attempt
on the part of the Ugandan Government to enter into a
dialogue with the Lord's Resistance Army leadership.

In conclusion, I would like to point out a very
important aspect of this and other missions of the
Council. Although we are sometimes frustrated by
developments in the Great Lakes region, we should
always bear in mind that our efforts to achieve lasting
peace are aimed at populations longing desperately for
a normal life in a stable environment. The mission met
many courageous and dedicated persons from all walks
of life, who devote their lives to ending impunity,
building bridges between ethnic groups and bringing
humanitarian assistance to communities forgotten by
their Government and local rulers. That was, and is,
very inspiring.

