Mr. Sharma (India): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for October. We also extend our
congratulations to the Permanent Representative of
Mali, Ambassador Moctar Ouane, for his splendid
stewardship of the Council in its eventful last month.
Let me also thank you, Sir, for calling this meeting and
giving us the opportunity to speak on this very
important issue.

The Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement made a
statement yesterday on behalf of the Movement, with
which we associate ourselves. As we are deeply
concerned at the recent developments, we thought it
necessary also to share our sentiments with the
Council. As many delegations have spoken yesterday
and today, and as many more are to speak, I shall keep
my statement short.

My Government is deeply concerned at the recent
incidents of violence in Jerusalem, the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip and in other parts of the Palestinian
National Authority areas and Israel. This has led to a
most regrettable loss of life and property. It has also
vitiated the atmosphere for the Middle East peace
process. Issues involved in the Middle East peace
process are of immense complexity. That is why the
overriding need now is for restraint, avoidance of
provocation and shunning all acts that could destabilize
the process.

We have noted with increasing concern that the
cessation of hostilities between the Palestinians and the
Israelis was short-lived, and we hope that efforts to
stop the violence will be redoubled, thus facilitating an
early conclusion of the peace process. We remain
convinced of the need for dialogue and peaceful
negotiation to find a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement of all issues. We support the endeavours of
the international community towards that objective.

There had been considerable progress in the
peace process between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Recent events should not be allowed to retard or delay
the peace process, for which the leadership of Palestine
and of Israel has striven so hard. We believe that, given
the required will and determination, and given a
commitment to settle disputes peacefully, no odds are
insurmountable, no goal too far. Violence has to be
abjured. Diplomacy and statesmanship have to triumph.
There is no alternative and no other way towards
lasting peace.

