Mr. Baja (Philippines): First of all, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on Greece's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to commend Ambassador De La Sabliere and his
delegation for their excellent and efficient leadership
of the Council under France's presidency.

I thank Assistant Secretary-General Danilo Turk
for his comprehensive presentation of what can be
described as one of the successes of the United Nations
in the implementation of a peace process. I would also
like to express, on behalf of my delegation, our
commendation for his dedicated service and
contribution to the United Nations task of managing
post-conflict situations in all parts of the world through
the United Nations political missions. Danilo is the
first high official of the United Nations who, after the
Philippines was elected in 2003, briefed me on what it
takes to participate in the Council.

The success story of Bougainville owes much to
the perseverance, the political will, the courage and the
wisdom of the leaders and people of Papua New
Guinea and those of the new Autonomous Bougainville
Government. My delegation commends the people of
Bougainville and the Autonomous Bougainville
Government for the successful conduct of the first
general elections for the president and the House of
Representatives, held from 20 May to 9 June. We
applaud the people and the leaders of Papua New
Guinea for achieving a major milestone in the
Bougainville peace process with the inauguration on 15
June of the first Autonomous Bougainville
Government. As the Permanent Representative of
Papua New Guinea would say, seven under par is an
excellent score.

Secondly, Bougainville is also an example of the
key role played by the United Nations in encouraging
and implementing the Peace Agreement forged by the
conflicting parties. From the time the United Nations
was requested by the Government of Papua New
Guinea to play a role in the peace process and
established the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville in August 1998, the Organization has
been at the forefront of the peace and reconciliation
process, acting as mediator to the parties to the
conflict. It supervised the weapons disposal
programme that contributed significantly to the
stabilization of the security situation, which in turn
provided the climate conducive for the elections to be
held peacefully and credibly. Hand in hand with that
stabilization, the United Nations also contributed to the
political aspect of the peace process with the creation
of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville and as Chair of the Peace Process
Consultative Committee overseeing the
implementation of the constitutional process that led to
the adoption of the Constitution of the Autonomous
Government and the preparations for the elections. The
two successive missions, though small, have clearly
demonstrated the critical contribution that a United
Nations special mission with a clear mandate can make
to a conflict situation.

Thirdly, the countries of the region, particularly
Australia and the members of the Pacific Islands
Forum, can claim justifiable pride in the Bougainville
success story through the crucial support they provided
in helping to bring the conflict to a peaceful end.

There are, of course, challenges facing
Bougainville, as pointed out by the Assistant
Secretary-General. These include establishing an
effective and autonomous administration; developing
credible policing, legal and judicial arrangements;
meeting the budgetary requirements of an autonomous
Government; and encouraging economic development.
Meeting those challenges will require unity and
cooperation on the part of all Bougainville leaders,
which we urge.

Reconstruction is now the most pressing
challenge for the new Government. Assistance from
the international community, especially the United
Nations and regional donors - which so far have
contributed generously - will be even more necessary.
That will preserve the gains that the peace process has
achieved and also ensure that the peace dividends
enrich the people of Bougainville.

Finally, as stressed by the Assistant Secretary-
General, a number of lessons can be drawn from
Bougainville's success story that will be useful in other
post-conflict situations. Let us profit from them.

