Mr. Losada Fernandez (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all, Mr. President, to thank you for the
opportunity given to the European Union to participate
in Security Council discussions on the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). This is
without a doubt the most appropriate forum to provide
long-term support to our brothers in the G-5 Sahel.

This meeting is doubly important. On the one hand,
it helps to keep the Sahel at the top of the international
agenda; on the other, it is an important step in the rise
of that African force, which, as the Secretary-General
emphasizes in his report (S/2017/869) and reiterated this
morning, urgently needs our support. Security in the
Sahel is the security of all. Accordingly, there can be no
lasting stability in the Sahel without the full, effective
and inclusive implementation of the provisions of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Allow
me to raise three points.

First, I must pay tribute to the Heads of State of
the G-5 Sahel, the United Nations and the security
actors on the ground, whose remarkable work has been
carried out often under very difficult circumstances.
The recent attacks in northern and central Mali, as
well as on the Nigerian border, demonstrate that
very clearly. I would also like to pay tribute to all the
Blue Helmets of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, Operation
Barkhane troops, European and American soldiers and
soldiers of the Group of Five for the Sahel, including
recently our Chadian friends, who made the ultimate
sacrifice for security in the Sahel, Mali and the
neighbouring countries.

I would also like to underscore the outstanding
work that has been done by the military staffs ofthe G-5
Sahel countries since the summit of the Heads of State
of the G-5 Sahel in February 2017, held in Bamako. In
just a few months, a concept of operations was validated
by the African Union, and then incorporated into
resolution 2359 (2017) to achieve an initial operational
capability and also, according to the information
provided, to conduct the first joint operation, which was
conducted in the past few days in the central strategic
corridor. There are of course still challenges in terms
of equipment, but also financially, for this force to
become fully operational. I understand that work on the
civilian and judicial component, on respect for human
rights, gender and on the link between the Joint Force
and the local populations, including by explaining the
mandate of the force, are also under way. We actively
encourage those efforts.

The second point is that I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his excellent report on
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and his commendable
personal commitment. We fully share his analysis
of the situation in the region and the challenges that
we will all need to face together. We also welcome
the options that have been proposed that will have to
be implemented gradually to eradicate the terrorist
threat; to deal with the Libyan crisis; to prevent and
contain the violence around the Lake Chad basin and
northern Mali; to cope with the growing expenditures
of the G-5 Sahel States on security; to ensure better
border control in order to avoid exploitation of human
beings and the trafficking in drugs and weapons that
finance terrorism; and, finally, to contribute to the
socioeconomic development of a region with a high
proportion of youth who legitimately have ambitions
for their future and better opportunities. All those are
challenges that we face today and will face in the years
to come.

With regard to this analysis of the situation, from the
very start, the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel reached
similar conclusions. From the outset, they committed
to providing a response, such as the establishment
of the Force, whose goals, let us recall, range from
combating terrorism and organized crime to supporting
development efforts, including the re-establishment
of the authority of the State in the areas that are most
fragile and isolated, as well as facilitating humanitarian
operations. Early on, G-5 Sahel countries shared their
concerns with us. Immediately, Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission, responded to them by offering
support to their efforts during the announcement of the
Joint Force in N'Djamena in November 2015.

On the third point, the European Union and its
member States, the top donors in Africa, have already
provided support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. They
will continue to extend that support. They are already
involved in a large number of projects that can provide
support and facilitate the deployment of the Force,
including to facilitate contacts with local populations.
That comprehensive approach was embodied 2011
European Union strategy for security and development
in the Sahel, which underscores the security-
development nexus that is essential to guarantee
stability in the region.

During the third ministerial meeting of the
European Union and the G-5 Sahel, held on 5 June
2017, Ms. Mogherini announced the European Union's
support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force through an initial
contribution of €50 million from the European Union
African Peace Facility, including as well by mobilizing
support from the European Union Common Security
and Defence Policy missions that are deployed in
the region.

With the support of the European Union Training
Mission in Mali (EUTM. Mali), the initial requests
of the G-5 Sahel General Staff are being processed.
The question of respect for human rights, including
the protection of children serving in armed groups as
well as gender issues, are key points in our continuing
commitment to the Force. The training of the Malian
armed forces provided by EUTM. Mali are conducted, I
would just remind Council members, in the framework
of international standards for human rights.

In Brussels, and following the meetings in Paris
and Berlin over the past few months, we are also
working on the issue ofmobilizing and coordinating the
efforts of the international community for the benefit
of the Joint Force. To that end, and in the wake of the
announcements made on the sidelines of the General
Assembly last September, in which Ms. Mogherini
participated, on 14 December we will organize in
Brussels, together with Mali's chairmanship of the G-5
Sahel, a conference of Heads of State and Government
on security and development in the Sahel. The meeting,
which will bring together a large part ofthe international
community, will be an opportunity to raise additional
funding to scale up the Joint Force and to make it
fully operational, including its civilian component, in
response to the commitment undertaken by the G-5
Sahel countries and in line with resolution 2359 (2017).
The European Union has taken steps to provide direct
support for requests of the Joint Force. That mechanism
is operational and open to contributions from the
international community. Also, the conference will
be an opportunity to address the issue of development
and take into account the work that has been done in
the past few months in the framework of the alliance
that is now called "Alliance With the Sahel", instead of
"Alliance for the Sahel."

I therefore welcome this meeting in New York
today. I trust in our spirit of solidarity, which I have no
doubt will make ensure that we are on the same track
to take up the challenges that we face. Along the same
lines, I am sure that the Brussels conference will be
a success.

I will conclude by quoting Ms. Mogherini, who
summarizes our willingness and approach, both in
c

security and development terms: 'we do not work for

Africa, we work with Africa".

