Mr. Beyendeza (Uganda): My delegation
congratulates you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and looks
forward to an open and transparent handling of
important issues - as you promised and now have
demonstrated - such as the Democratic Republic of
the Council and others that the Council will discuss
during this month of your presidency.

The Ugandan delegation also welcomes the
participation of the Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo today. We particularly want to
emphasize the positive and constructive attitudes in his
presentation, not only with regard to the security
concerns of his country but also those of the
neighbours, including my country, Uganda.
Furthermore, my delegation thanks the Secretary-
General for his report and the able manner in which it
was presented by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guehenno. We also take
note of the five-point programme of action proposed by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children in Armed Conflict, following his recent visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

For us in Uganda, the challenges raised by
Ambassador Olara Otunnu have been our painful
concerns for some time, following the continuing
abduction of children in the northern part of Uganda by
the Lord's Resistance Army. We would therefore like to
renew our long-standing invitation to the Special
Representative to make time in his busy schedule to
visit Uganda on the same subject. Maybe it could make
a difference.

This is the second time in a relatively short period
that the Security Council is devoting yet another open
meeting to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Although this meeting focuses primarily on the report
of the Secretary-General and the draft resolution for the
renewal of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), my
delegation believes that some of the most important
issues that have been covered today have also been
covered in past Council meetings. My delegation will
therefore be brief and will mention a few of the issues
that we feel should be addressed.

First, Uganda has continued to implement the
withdrawal policy within the framework of the Lusaka
Peace Accord, as the Security Council has noted and
has been recognized in the Secretary-General's report,
S/2001/572, now before the Council. We want to assure
the Council that this will continue.

Secondly, our country continues to cooperate with
MONUC under the planned withdrawal programme and
the programme for demobilization, disarming,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration. Again, the
report of the Secretary-General has confirmed that
Uganda is the only country, apart from Angola, that
continues to provide information on numbers,
disposition and armaments of our forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We shall continue
to cooperate in this regard.

Thirdly, my delegation notes that the Secretary-
General's report wishes to maintain the same level of
operation, at 5,537 officers and men. In our view, this
is too small a force and too large an area which is
expected to be covered. We therefore propose that this
process should be left open and be reviewed, even at
midterm, to address the concerns as troops are
withdrawn and MONUC is called upon to take more
and more areas under its observation and control.

Fourthly, Uganda wishes once again to share
some views expressed by some members of the
Security Council concerning the issue of the violation
of human rights. Our delegation believes that any
violation of human rights is wrong in any
circumstances, and therefore this matter should be
addressed in the entirety of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Finally, my delegation would like to reaffirm its
support for the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, for Uganda believes firmly that that
Agreement addressed two fundamental areas in the root
of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and indeed the region. The first area is the
internal dimension of the conflict, which is going to be
settled through a dialogue. The second is the external
dimension, which addresses the security concerns of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo itself and of its
neighbours. My delegation would like to call upon all
the signatories to Lusaka Agreement to implement it
fully.

