The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the observer of the Holy See.

Reverend Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation wishes to thank the Spanish
presidency of the Security Council for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, which could not be
more timely as the region is literally on fire.

As the entire world counts the dead, we must not
obscure the plight of the wounded, the displaced and the
refugees who are continually subject to great fear and
apprehension, even as they flee the senseless violence in
the Middle East, which completely disregards the most

elementary terms of international humanitarian law
and, indeed, of humanity. This horrific picture plays
out daily in the media as migrants and refugees flood
the European continent, seeking some small measure
of peace and security, but who are not always welcome.
What of the children and the women? What of the
elderly, the maimed and the handicapped? Where is the
distinction between combatants and non-combatants?

My delegation believes that it has a solemn duty
to remind the international community once again that
extremists are seeking to eradicate religions, ethnic
groups and cultures that have been in the Middle East
for millennia. My delegation is deeply concerned over
the plight of Christians and other groups in territories
controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
in particular those who are held captive for ransom
and in conditions of enslavement. The Holy See also
highlights with sadness the wanton destruction of
the priceless cultural patrimony of humankind in the
region. Pope Francis, in his address to the General
Assembly on September 25, renewed his

"repeated appeals concerning the painful situation
in the entire Middle East, North Africa and other
African countries where Christians, along with
other cultural and ethnic groups, and including
those adherents of the majority religion who have
no desire to be caught up in the hatred and madness,
have been forced to witness the destruction of
their places of worship, their cultural and religious
heritage and their homes and property, and are
faced with the alternatives either of fleeing or
of paying with their lives or with enslavement"
(A/70/PV.3, p. 5).

Grave conflicts have been waged in the Middle
East, including in Palestine, ever since the birth of
the United Nations. The violence that characterizes
the present situation proves that not only have these
problems not been solved or gone away, but that they
seem to be increasingly intractable. In recent years,
other very serious conflicts, in particular the Syrian
crisis, have added to the complexity of the problems in
the region.

It is deeply regrettable that the Middle East a a cradle
of great civilizations and the birthplace of the three
main monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity
and Islam - should be immersed in a situation that
combines every form of conflict and every possible
actor: State and non-State combatants, ethnic and
cultural groups, fundamentalist terrorism and organized
criminality, religious and ethnic hatred, regional and
international geopolitical rivalries. In such a context,
flooding the region with more and more destructive
weapons will not end the conflicts. Instead of arms
and munitions, the international community needs to
endow the region with more courageous, impartial and
persevering negotiations and mediations.

My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate
the Holy See's profound gratitude to those countries of
the region that, in spite of their own difficult situations
and limited resources, have welcomed and taken care of
millions of refugees. On its part, the Catholic Church
remains active at the forefront in providing, to all
those in need and with all the means at its disposal,
humanitarian aid through churches, schools, medical
facilities, rehabilitation centers and pastoral care
institutions.

My delegation calls on the international community
to assist and support the countries of the region in
maintaining their political stability and to mobilize
the economic resources necessary to enable them to
deal appropriately with the ever-increasing number
of displaced persons and migrants. We also call on
the international community to take action with
regard to the situation in Lebanon, with a view to
restoring political stability through a revitalization
of the country's constitutional institutions through
presidential elections.

Let me conclude by citing the words ofPope Francis
in his letter to the Secretary-General of9 August 2014:

"The most basic understanding of human dignity
compels the international community, particularly
to the norms and mechanisms of international law,
to do all that it can to stop and prevent further
systematic violence against ethnic and religious
minorities and to protect innocent peoples".

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.


