Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Let me begin by first
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of June. I thank you
for holding today's debate on Afghanistan. I welcome
the presence of my good friend, Special Representative
Kubis, among us here today. We thank him for his
comprehensive briefing and steadfast support for
Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is at a critical juncture. As foreign
forces prepare to withdraw next year, Afghan national
forces are assuming full responsibility for the security
and defence of their country. Two days ago in Kabul,
a milestone was reached - the official launch of the
fifth and final stage of the security transition. This is
a remarkable achievement and a source of pride for
the Afghan people. Our security forces are handling
complex security situations with increased confidence
and fortitude. We stand ready to consolidate our gains,
stand on our feet, defend ourselves and secure lasting
peace.

The transition in its entirety aims to bring enduring
peace and stability to Afghanistan. To ensure the
security and defence of our country, it is essential to
bring all Afghans together through a national dialogue
and in a spirit of national unity to achieve a political
solution that is embraced by all. In recent months,
Afghanistan has been extensively involved with various
stakeholders, the United States of America in particular,
in starting direct negotiations with the Taliban as part
of the peace process. In that regard, an agreement was
reached with the United States on the opening of a
Taliban office in Doha, Qatar, under assurances that
peace talks would be conducted in accordance with the
following concrete set of principles.
The sole purpose of the office would be to serve
as a venue for direct negotiations between the Taliban
and the High Peace Council. The office would not serve
as an official representation of the Taliban in the form
of a Government, embassy, emirate or sovereign entity.
The office would not engage in or support any activity
related to terrorism and acts of violence, inconsistent
with international law, and consistent with the
provisions of resolutions 1988 (2011) and 2082 (2012).

Yet just two days ago, on 18 June, in a rather
theatrical sequence of events, the Taliban office was
inaugurated in a manner that contradicted the very
principles to which I just referred. Furthermore, the
public statement by the Taliban representatives in Doha
not only lacked any clear commitment to peace talks
with the Afghan High Peace Council -the sole body
mandated to conduct peace talks - but made explicit
reference to the continuation of violence. Again, that
goes against the very spirit of peace.

Given the concerns that have arisen, emanating
from the obvious contradictions pertaining to our peace
process, the Government of Afghanistan decided,
first, that the High Peace Council would not engage
in peace talks under the circumstances in which the
Taliban office was opened; and secondly, to suspend
negotiations on the bilateral security agreement with
the United States. Afghanistan naturally expects its
international partners to stand against any threat to the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the country. In fact, all of Afghanistan's partnership
agreements are made in light of Afghanistan's national
interests and aimed at promoting the country's peace,
security and stability.

While Afghanistan is committed to a peace process
and reconciliation that ensures a permanent end to the
conflict, pursuing a process that will undermine the
hard won gains of the past 12 years - our Constitution,
the rights of all citizens, particularly women, and our
democratic order - will by no means be acceptable
to the Afghan people. Afghanistan does not recognize
such a thing as the Emirate of the Taliban. The raising
of the Taliban flag on Tuesday in Doha was just a
reminder of a dark and bloody past from which our
country still struggles to emerge. The Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan is the sole sovereign and legitimate

authority chosen by the Afghan people and recognized
and supported by the international community.

Further, Afghanistan's ownership of the peace
and reconciliation process is indispensible, and will
not be compromised. Any successful outcome to the
reconciliation process requires preserving the Afghan-
led and Afghan-managed character of the negotiations.
This is an issue that has been recognized and endorsed
both in Afghanistan and by the international community
as a whole, including the Security Council.

I take this opportunity to wish to also make
clear to the international community, all Member
States and international and regional organizations
that the Taliban office was established for one clear
objective - peace talks that strictly observe agreed
principles, as mentioned. Any other activity or function
undertaken by or with the Taliban office outside the
Afghan-led peace talks purposes is unacceptable.

The continuing campaign of fear and terror, violence
and brutality endangers the prospects of the peace
process. There has been an escalation in acts ofviolence
in recent weeks, affecting all citizens - men, women
and children - as well as international personnel.
We condemn all heinous acts of terror, including the
recent attacks on the International Organization for
Migration, the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Kabul airport and the Supreme Court. Children
are increasingly bearing the brunt of the conflict. Last
month in Kandahar, terrorists beheaded two children
as they were scavenging for food to take home to their
families next to a local police checkpoint. Days earlier,
in Paktika province, children died in a suicide bombing
near their school.

We also note with regret the continued civilian
casualties caused by counter-terrorism operations. The
loss of one innocent life is one too many. We condemn
all incidents of civilian casualties and call for their
immediate end.

Despite all the challenges we face, Afghanistan
is confidently advancing forward towards another
milestone, namely, next year's presidential andprovincial
council elections. President Karzai has embarked
upon a broad consultative process with the relevant
stakeholders, including civil society and political
parties, with the clear aim of having the polling take
place in a spirit ofnational unity and with consensus on
core electoral issues. Afghans see successful elections
as a new and important benchmark for progress that

will allow the country to embrace the needs ofthe post-
2014 transformation decade. Preparations for the polls
are well under way, with voter registration and security
preparations having already started. The electoral law
and draft Independent Election Commission law were
adopted by the lower house of Parliament and are now
under consideration by the upper house. We welcome
the readiness of the United Nations and other partners
to support Afghan-led elections. We are confident that
the elections will unify Afghans around a common
objective.

Afghanistan has always seen regional cooperation
as an important pillar of stability and prosperity in our
part of the world. A new regional order is emerging,
increasing the prospects for a more peaceful and stable
region. The Istanbul Process has become a catalyst for
results-oriented cooperation in our wider region. We
are encouraged by the strong commitment shown by
all regional and international partners for that historic
initiative. That was further exemplified by the third
ministerial meeting of the Heart of Asia countries, held
in Almaty in April. We also thank the Government of
China for its generosity in hosting the next ministerial
meeting of the Process next year.

Afghanistan is committed to expanding relations
with all of our neighbors. We applaud our brothers
and sisters in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the
Islamic Republic of Iran for their recent successful
elections.

The Government of Afghanistan looks forward to
working with the new Government and leadership of
Pakistan, and hopes that Pakistan will sincerely support
peace and stability in our country. Afghanistan desires
friendly relations with Pakistan that are characterized
by mutual respect and observance of each other's
national sovereignty. That is crucial to stability in
Afghanistan and to prosperity and cooperation in the
region.

Without any doubt, terrorism constitutes to pose a
serious threat to the peace and stability of Afghanistan
and the region. The people of Afghanistan are still the
main victims of a heinous and continuous terrorist
campaign. The fact remains that, so long as terrorist
sanctuaries continue to exist on Pakistan's soil and some
elements continue to use terrorism as an instrument of
foreign policy, peace will prevail neither in Afghanistan
nor in the region. We also are very concerned about
ongoing border shelling, which constitutes a serious
threat to Afghan sovereignty and the prospect of
friendly relations between our two countries. We should
not forget that, as two brotherly countries, Afghanistan
and Pakistan have a shared stake in a successful fight
against terrorism and in the prospects for peace and
stability in Afghanistan and our region.

We in Afghanistan know that long-term peace
and prosperity is interlinked with development, good
governance and human rights. The Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework forms the basis for a
revitalized partnership between Afghanistan and
our international partners while addressing those
key issues. Aid coherence, in partnership with the
international community, is critical to our sustainable
development. The mutual commitments made in Tokyo
will be solidified during the transformation decade. In
that regard, we look forward to the meeting of senior
officials to be held in Kabul on 3 July.

By the same token, the empowerment
of women as proactive members of Afghan
society - as parliamentarians, peacebuilders and
Government officials * and as the most vibrant
members of civil society is among our proudest
achievements. While obstacles remain to fully realize
that goal, we are working to protect and promote the
human rights of all Afghans, and those of women in
particular. Afghanistan condemns in the strongest
terms all incidents of violence against women. The
fight against impunity is central to our human rights
efforts, as evidenced by the prosecution of an increasing
number of perpetrators in various parts of the country.

This moment marks an important chapter in
Afghanistan's history. The security transition and the
upcoming elections will mark major achievements for
the future of our country. Those achievements will be
the result of the diligent efforts that we have made over
the past 12 years. We have come this far together on a
joint journey founded on a shared commitment to the
betterment of our country, for the benefit of current
and future generations. Our mission is unfinished, but
well on its way. Afghanistan has come a long way to
even consider falling short of fulfilling the goals we set
out in 2001. We have been, and we remain, steadfastly
committed to building a peaceful, stable, prosperous
and democratic Afghanistan.

