Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Taye-Brook Zerihoun; Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; and Mr. Mauro Vieira,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their informative briefings. We also welcome
the appointment of Mr. Jose Viegas Filho as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-
Bissau and wish him success in his work.

We note the significant progress that has been
made in resolving the political crisis in Guinea-Bissau
since the appointment of Prime Minister Aristides
Gomes by President Jose' Mario Vaz in early April. We
welcome the formation of a consensus Government,
whose members, we understand, are acceptable to all
the main political forces in Guinea-Bissau. We support
the work of the country's leadership in preparing for
the parliamentary elections scheduled for November.
We expect the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to provide
effective support for the electoral processes, in line
with its mandate established pursuant to resolution
2404 (2018). We have taken note ofthe plans to convene
a national assembly on issues related to a review of
the Constitution in the near future. We believe that
will be extremely important from the point of View
of formulating proposals for reforming the country's
founding laws and avoid any future repetition of the
current political turbulence. We note with satisfaction
UNIOGBIS'S efforts supporting the authorities in
preparing the assembly.

We would like to draw special attention to the
importance of combating transnational crime and drug
trafficking in the region. The efforts that Mr. Fedotov
spoke about deserve our full support.

We would like to thank the Economic Community of
West African States for promoting a political settlement
of the political crisis in Guinea-Bissau. At the same
time, we believe that any agreements concerning the
country's future and its arrangements should be based
on the aspirations of its citizens themselves, without
any pressure or the imposition of ready-made solutions
from the outside. Responding to truly national interests
is the only way that they can play a positive role in the
country's ability to emerge from a prolonged crisis.

