Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to join others in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Augustine
Mahiga, for his comprehensive briefing on recent
developments in Somalia and for the Secretary-
General's report. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Mohamed Ali, Prime Minister of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia, to the Council and to
thank him for his statement outlining his perspective
on the situation in Somalia and the plans of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) for the future.
I would also like to thank the African Union (AU)
Special Representative for Somalia, Mr. Diarra, for his
statement.

The worsening humanitarian situation in Somalia,
caused by the famine, is cause for serious concern. As
the Secretary-General's report notes, more than half of
the Somali population is in the grip of this
humanitarian crisis. While the international community
has undertaken emergency measures to provide aid to
those in need, nearly 2.8 million people are living in
the hardest-hit areas controlled by Al-Shabaab, where
access of humanitarian agencies is severely restricted.
We urge all Somali groups to provide unfettered access
to the humanitarian agencies and to facilitate the
delivery of aid to all those in need. India has decided to
provide humanitarian assistance of $8 million to the
countries afflicted with severe famine and drought in
the Horn of Africa - that is, Somalia, Kenya and
Djibouti - through the World Food Programme
(WFP). This is in addition to our contributions of
$1.5 million to the AU trust fund for Somalia and
$0.5 million to the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), both for augmenting the AU Mission in
Somalia. We appreciate the key role played by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
WFP and other United Nations organizations in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. We join others in
calling upon Member States to join the efforts of the
United Nations and the African Union by responding
positively to the humanitarian appeal.

While the international community has been
battling the humanitarian crisis, there have been some

positive developments on the political and security
fronts. The signing of the Kampala Accord and its
subsequent approval by the Somali Parliament and the
formation of a new Government have imparted a
positive momentum to the political process that needs
to be maintained in the extended transition period. We
also welcome the high-level consultative meeting on
ending the transition in Somalia, held from 4 to
6 September in Mogadishu, and the adoption of a road
map as a result. We reaffirm our support for this
process and hope that the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs) will implement the road map in a
time-bound manner and complete the pending
transition tasks. This alone would enable a genuine,
inclusive and comprehensive national reconciliation to
take place in Somalia so as to end the two-decades-
long instability and insecurity.

In this connection, we appreciate the engagement
of the President and the Speaker of Somalia with the
international community. We also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga for his
persistent efforts and cooperation with the Somali
leaders and with the AU, the East African Community,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other stakeholders.

The opportunity presented by the withdrawal of
Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu should be utilized by the
TFG to increase its effective presence all over
Mogadishu through the delivery of basic services. This
will not only enhance the TFG's legitimacy but also
help the political process. There is an urgent need to
bring AMISOM's strength to 12,000, as mandated by
the Security Council. In this connection, we commend
the Governments of Uganda and Burundi for their
contributions to AMISOM. and for the sacrifices made
by their peacekeepers.

AMISOM. is the mainstay of international efforts
to re-establish security in Somalia. It is therefore
imperative for the international community to urgently
bridge the resource gaps that have an adverse impact
on AMISOM's effectiveness in fulfilling its mandate.
As the Secretary-General has reported, without
international support for equipping and outfitting
additional troops, troop-contributing countries will
continue to face difficulties in deploying peacekeepers
in a timely manner. Member States should contribute
promptly to the United Nations and AU trust funds for
AMISOM. without caveats. As already mentioned,
India has contributed $2 million for AMISOM
operations through the AU and UN trust funds without
any caveats. We also support the extension of the
mandate of AMISOM.

There is also a need to expand the TFG forces
and strengthen their capacities for long-term stability
and security in Somalia. New recruitments have to be
undertaken and full training and proper equipment
provided.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a serious
problem facing the international community. As at
31 August, Somali pirates held 19 ships and
405 hostages. Combating maritime piracy is therefore
an important issue that is intrinsically linked to the
security situation in Somalia. So far, the TFIs have not
paid adequate attention to this problem. We hope that
in the extended transition period, the TFIs will fully
implement the benchmarks concerning piracy
contained in the road map adopted on 6 September,
including the adoption of a legal framework against
piracy, hostage-taking, payment of ransom, the
demarcation of an exclusive economic zone, the
establishment of an operational coastguard, the
appointment of a counter-piracy coordinator, and so on.
In addition to the benchmarks in the road map, the
TFIs should expeditiously implement the provisions
contained in the relevant Security Council resolutions
for restricting port revenues for Al-Shabaab. In this
connection, we will engage constructively with the
members of the Security Council on the draft
resolution on a legal mechanism for the prosecution
and detention of pirates. We also stand ready to help in
capacity-building for the TFIs and the States of the
region for effective measures against piracy off the
coast of Somalia.

Further, given the growing scope and expanding
coverage of the problem, the international community
has to think about adopting a comprehensive counter-
piracy strategy. In our view, such a strategy should
involve: a United Nations-led anti-piracy force to
conduct naval operations, which would help achieve
greater coordination in anti-piracy operations by
various naval forces; the enactment of national laws on
priority to criminalize piracy as defined in the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; the
effective sanitization of the Somali coastline, along
with the identification of safe corridors and buffer
zones.

India has already taken several steps, including
anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden since 2008 and
has also deployed its ships in the eastern and north-
eastern Arabian Sea. This has helped to neutralize
several attempts at piracy. While we will continue our
counter-piracy operations, there is also an urgent need
for the international community to address the serious
problem of hostage-taking by pirates and the
consequent humanitarian problems faced by the
hostages and their families. We hope that the
Secretary-General's report on piracy, which is due in
October, will contain concrete recommendations on all
aspects of the problem of piracy, including hostage-
taking and the plight of hostages.

