Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Since the
Council last held an open debate on this topic six
months ago, resolution 1674 (2006) has been adopted.
Many of us had asked for such a resolution during that
earlier debate. We commend the Council for having
produced a text that contains many crucial elements for
the further improvement of the international protection
regime for civilians in armed conflict. The recognition
that the deliberate targeting of civilians and other
protected persons and the commission of systematic,
flagrant and widespread violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law in armed conflict
may constitute a threat to international peace and
security is a very welcome statement. However, we
would have welcomed clear language on the role that
the Council is willing to assume with regard to the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, as well as on mechanisms for
implementation, in accordance with the World Summit
Outcome document.

While the Council acknowledged that there are a
number of national and international justice and
reconciliation mechanisms that can be instrumental in
ending impunity, we were disappointed to note that the
resolution does not contain a reference to the vital role
that the International Criminal Court is playing in this
respect. Such a reference would have updated and

strengthened the resolution in a manner that would
have taken into account the major relevant
developments since 2000, including the referral of a
situation to the International Criminal Court by the
Council itself.

Important developments have also taken place
with regard to the quality of the provision of
humanitarian assistance to civilian populations affected
by armed conflict. The modernization of the Central
Emergency Response Fund and the establishment of
clear leadership functions within the United Nations
system for prompt and coordinated humanitarian action
will significantly contribute to ensuring more
predictable humanitarian financing and to enhancing
the overall response capacity.

In order to have the intended impact on the
ground, such improvements in the operational tools
must be supported, however, by the recognition of the
right of affected civilians to humanitarian assistance
and the acceptance of secure and prompt access for
humanitarian organizations and workers by all parties
to a conflict, as well as by neighbouring countries,
where needed. It is with that purpose that the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence must be understood and
applied.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the subject also pointed out that a prompt and
predictable humanitarian response can bring
sustainable relief to civilians caught in an armed
conflict only when there is a political solution to the
conflict. We therefore welcome the efforts of the
Secretariat to strengthen the United Nations good-
offices capacity, including in its mediation activities. It
is clear that the effectiveness of the protection of
civilians can be significantly enhanced if the mandates
of peacekeeping operations are drafted in a clear
manner that takes into account the specific needs of
civilians in a particular situation.

There is a continuing need to give special
attention to the situation of internally displaced
persons. It is estimated that more than 25 million
people worldwide have been forced to flee their
homes- mostly as a result of armed conflict -
without crossing an international border. Such people
often live under the most difficult and trying
conditions. The issue of internal displacement is a
complex one. It is not merely a humanitarian
problem- although, of course, it has a strong
humanitarian component. There must, however, be an
integrated and comprehensive approach to internal
displacement, and more conceptual work is needed on
issues such as the prevention of displacement and the
question of when internal displacement ends. We
appreciate the efforts undertaken by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in this respect
and commend the work carried out by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the Human
Rights of Internally Displaced Persons, Professor
Walter Kalin.

