Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Allow me
to express our pleasure at seeing you, Sir, preside over
this most important meeting of the Council. The debate
you have organized gives us an opportunity to explore
together the vast resources of Chapter VIII of the
Charter and I hope to exploit it for the greater good of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

The statements made by the Secretary-General
and the various representatives of regional
organizations have broadly laid the groundwork and
opened extensive prospects for exemplary cooperation
on stabilization between the universal Organization and
regional organizations. Promising approaches and
ambitious partnerships are already taking shape and it
is now up to us to give them substance by establishing
appropriate frameworks for our work, harmonizing our
methods and pooling our capacities and resources in a
spirit of complementarity and cooperation. The
moment is all the more auspicious in that the United
Nations is generously opening itself to the outside
world, experiencing far-reaching changes and deeply
committed to a vast and bold reform movement in
order to adapt itself to today's realities.

It is undeniable that the role of regional
organizations and their activities with respect to the
United Nations have taken a quantum leap forward
since An Agenda for Peace called for cooperation
between the United Nations and those bodies in order
to strengthen our Organization's capacities in
preventive diplomacy, peace-building and
peacekeeping. The new approach has generated a wide
variety of instruments for cooperation under Chapter
VIII, as well as mechanisms for periodic consultations,
such as the meetings held between the Secretary-
General and the leaders of regional organizations. More
recently, the Millennium Declaration relevantly
recalled that the multidimensional nature of the
challenges facing the Organization calls for a
multidisciplinary approach involving multiple actors at
both the diagnostic and the treatment phases of a crisis.
That awareness opens new avenues for the potential
uses of Chapter VIII at a time when the globalization
of threats calls for a global definition of the concept of
security and for a concerted, collective response.

For some 10 years now, the United Nations has
continuously broadened and strengthened its conflict-
management instruments through increased
cooperation with regional organizations. The fact
remains, however, that the principal responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security lies
with our universal Organization. The Security Council
remains the chief forum for international conflict
management and its primacy is key to the preservation
of the very foundations of international law, as
enshrined in the Charter. It is therefore imperative that
regional security operations be pursued under a
Council mandate, in the understanding that regular
dialogue should be maintained between our Council
and those organizations, some of which - the African
Union in particular, but also such African subregional
organizations as the Economic Community of West
African States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development - are today playing an active and vital
role in conflict prevention and settlement and in the
maintenance of peace.

While it is generally acknowledged that today
peacekeeping and peace-building operations have
become multidisplinary in nature, stabilization
processes constitute a sensitive, often precarious stage
at which achievements can never be considered
irreversible, because they depend on a multitude of
factors which are often difficult to contain and whose
effects are magnified by institutional vacuums, the
imperatives of reconciliation and the requirements of
reconstruction, which are sometimes, it must be said,
exacerbated by external actors. Those requirements,
which are indispensable to affirming and enshrining a
lasting peace, underscore the increased importance of
peace-building missions.

Thus stabilization is one of the most complex
elements of conflict resolution, because of the way
interests and actors are interwoven. Faced with those
challenges, regional organizations do not all have the
same institutional, material and human advantages, nor
do they operate within the same context, regardless of
the political will that they may have.

The Organization of American States has a long
historical tradition, and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) relies on the
concept of integrated security and enjoys positive
synergies with the European Union. Likewise, the
African Union has, for two years now, had at its
disposal institutions that are essential to the
development of a comprehensive and coherent
approach to security.

Those historical and contextual regional
differences do not prevent us from envisaging the
creation of a mechanism for the systematic exchange of
experiences. Indeed, they call for the formulation of a
framework for cooperation that is imaginative and
flexible and that takes into account the specificities of
each situation and the degree of involvement of the
regional or subregional organization concerned.

In the case of Africa, and probably on other
continents, it seems to us that the stabilization process,
which is by definition complex, must necessarily
involve the development dimension and therefore
requires coordinated economic and political
approaches. That vision is based on the institutional
advancements brought about by the African Union,
especially the establishment of the Peace and Security
Council and the NEPAD strategic initiative. That
visionary political will, which is based on the
indivisibility of peace and development and
demonstrated by the African States and their Union,
needs to be shared by the United Nations system,
which should provide its full support.

In the case of Europe, the principle of
subsidiarity, which the European Union has
successfully used in its internal procedures, can, if
applied on the basis of previously agreed arrangements,
ensure the harmonious effectiveness of joint action.

The division of operational tasks must be
supported by a periodic consultation exercise between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs on the one hand, and
regional and subregional actors on the other. The rich
experience gained in the context of the
complementarity of efforts between the OSCE and the
United Nations seems to us, from that perspective, a
useful and promising source of inspiration.

We believe that the time has come for the United
Nations and the League of Arab States - itself
committed, as its Secretary-General has just reminded
us, to a far-reaching process of reform aimed at
enhancing its effectiveness and relevance, especially in
the area of security - should give thought to the
establishment of a framework of cooperative efforts
that is based on the comparative advantages of each.

The periodic meetings between the Secretary-
General and regional organizations is an ideal means
not only to fine-tune ongoing actions but also to
organize our common response to possible threats to
stability. Similarly, the meetings held by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, as a subsidiary organ of the
Council, with regional organizations are quite useful,
because they lead to enhanced cooperation and to the
harmonization of our actions to combat this modern-
day scourge.

It seems to us that the time has come for the
Security Council itself to undertake a responsible and
fruitful dialogue in order to achieve a real partnership
with mechanisms and structures worldwide that
contribute to the maintenance of peace and security.
In that regard, we deem it timely and necessary
for an institutional relationship to be established as
soon as possible with the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, which after only three months of
existence, is already shaping up to be a solid and
credible partner for the Security Council. That means
that the Security Council, without giving up its central
role, should increasingly adopt a regional approach and
consequently rely more and more on the contributions
of regional organizations in the context of the many
demands placed on it.

The complexity of present threats and of the
crises deriving from them calls for strengthening
complementarities between the United Nations and
regional organizations, not only to give our joint
actions true coherence but also to rationalize our
mechanisms for cooperation and mutual consultation
while ensuring the establishment of the necessary
synergies.

