Ms. Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa: Allow me to start by
thanking the Security Council for dedicating this
meeting to United Nations policing.

Affording protection to civilians is central to the
implementation of the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) mandate. Since
the establishment of the protection of civilian sites
in 2013, the UNMISS police component has adopted
various approaches that have enhanced protection for
around 200,000 internally displaced persons living
within these sites. In this regard, United Nations police
(UNPOL) employs gender-responsive policing as one
of the key approaches towards the special protection
needs of girls, women, boys and men, and takes into
account gender considerations in delivering on its
mandated tasks.

To enhance the protective environment through
physical protection and to preserve the civilian
character of the sites, UNPOL officers regularly
conduct search-and-cordon operations, confiscate and
destroy weapons, detain criminals and expel suspected
combatants. UNPOL officers also visit checkpoints
alongside the perimeter and regularly engage with the
host State police, organize firewood and market escorts,
and undertake random patrols. We mediate in minor
conflicts, monitor and report human rights violations,
raise awareness, promote reconciliation and recovery,
and keep public order through the deployment of formed
police units. These activities allow UNPOL officers
to maintain a very visible and proactive presence,
while ensuring that women and girls are engaged and
consulted and that their needs and perspectives are
included in all prevention and protection efforts.

Recently, UNMISS piloted new measures that
enhance protection and promote confidence and trust
between UNPOL officers and the community, as part
of its community-oriented policing initiatives. The
protection-of-civilians site in Juba is divided into
different zones. Each zone has been assigned dedicated
UNPOL officers who are easily recognizable,
approachable and accountable. Additionally, the
Mission is exploring the establishment of police
posts inside the protection-ofcivilians site to further
facilitate access for civilians to UNPOL at all times.
To assist the displaced and vulnerable population in
areas beyond the protection-of-civilian sites, UNPOL
officers conduct regular high-visibility patrols. Such
patrolling is aimed at increasing the confidence of
civilians residing in these areas and has opened new
sources of information.

Notwithstanding these efforts, sexual and gender-
based violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence, remains pervasive throughout the country
and continues to be a challenge. The latest report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2018/250) reports 196 cases in 2017. The findings of
the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan and
recent reports of sexual violence perpetrated against
children are deeply concerning and alarming.

The police component of UNMISS champions a
gender-responsive policing in how it implements the
protection ofcivilians mandate set out in resolution 2406
(2018). This approach embraces a differentiated and
special protection needs of girls, women, boys and men
and takes into account gender considerations as a cross-
cutting issue throughout its mandated tasks to ensure
operational effectiveness and efficiency. A specialized
protection team on gender, children and vulnerable
persons protection has been deployed to the Mission
to assist and advise in the design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of initiatives aimed at
combating sexual and gender-based violence and
conflict-related sexual violence, as well as to coordinate
efforts with relevant United Nations agencies, host-
State Government departments, international and
national non-governmental organizations, women's
organizations and community-based organizations.

The UNMISS police component works closely
with the Police Division on restructuring the current
specialized team into an enhanced sexual and gender-
based violence specialized police team. This new team
will remain embedded in the Mission headquarters but
will adopt a mobile approach, covering protection-of-
civilians sites in Malakal, Bor, Wau and Bentiu, as well
as other areas of concern.

To reinforce the efforts of UNPOL in addressing
sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence, a technical working group was
established, comprising the South Sudan National Police
Service and Immigration, the National Prisons Service
and the South Sudan judiciary. The United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), along with UNMISS
component,s including the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, the Human Rights Division, the
Gender Affairs Unit, the Child Protection Unit and
the Office of the Senior Women's Protection Adviser
are members of this working group. Initial discussions
within the working group have outlined the need to
build the capacities of the Special Protection Units of
the South Sudan National Police Service in addressing
sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence. This will also include the need for the
creation of adequate support mechanisms for survivors,
including a fully functioning referral pathway.

UNPOL is also supporting UNDP inthe development
of a sexual and gender-based violence investigation
manual intended for the South Sudan National Police
Service, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional
Affairs and the South Sudan judiciary. Through the
Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections,
UNPOL support for the South Sudan National Police
Service will continue to be strengthened through the
incorporation of a gender-responsive approach.

UNMISS police recently deployed a mixed
formed police unit (FPU), comprising 50 per cent
women police officers. These police personnel
provide security to unarmed individual police officers
conducting community-oriented policing activities,
such as awareness-raising and fostering community
watch groups, in addition to providing force protection
in situations where women and children converge in
large numbers. Through participation in coordinated
patrols, UNPOL officers support protection actors such
as child protection officers and women's protection
advisers, and facilitate information gathering through
specialized policing skills. FPU elements provide
security and protection to displaced women leaders at
national and subnational level consultations as part of
the resolution 1325 (2000) Global Open Day on Women,
Peace and Security initiative. This enables the inclusive
and representative participation of women from all
sections of South Sudan.

Furthermore, evidence indicates that women police
officers and mixed formed police units act as catalysts
that promote confidence, encourage survivors of sexual
violence to report incidents, and enable civilians to
share strategic information that contributes to the early
warning system of the Mission. The recently revised
standard operating procedure on assessment of the
operational capability of formed police units prioritizes
the deployment of gender-integrated FPUs and calls
for a minimum of 32 women officers, including at the
command level. This positive development meets one
of the 10 strategic areas agreed amongst the Heads of
police components during last year's United Nations
Police Week Conference.

I am pleased to share that, as of today, UNMISS
has the largest combined deployment of women police
personnel in any peacekeeping mission, including both
individual police officers and formed police units.
Collectively, women officers comprise 22 per cent of
the Mission's police component, including 33 per cent
women in professional police positions. The UNPOL
Women's Network empowers women police officers
within the police component and inspires women
officers in the South Sudan National Police Service.
In line with the vision of the Secretary-General's
gender-parity strategy and recently endorsed
Department of Peacekeeping Operations uniformed
personnel gender-parity strategy, I intend to continue
collaborating with the Police Division to further engage
police-contributing countries in deploying additional
women police officers.

The UNMISS police component remains
committed to protecting civilians, preventing sexual
and gender-based violence, and building confidence
among civilians. We will continue in our efforts to
foster a secure environment for the voluntary return
of the displaced population, while ensuring that all
policing activities complement and strengthen the
overall efforts of the Mission.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Security
Council members for their continued support.

