Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to congratulate Germany on its presidency
of the Security Council this month and also for having
so confidently and professionally led the work of the
Council. I want as well to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs and Peacebuilding,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her thorough briefing. I
also express my appreciation for the efforts made by
the United Nations to achieve peace in the region, and
I thank the two Co-Directors of EcoPeace Middle East
for their briefings.

Against the backdrop of the troubled regional and
international situations following the emergence of
several crises of international concern, Jordan, under
the leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II, has
continued its tireless efforts in support ofour Palestinian
brothers in their just and legitimate struggle to realize
their national rights and to create an independent
Palestinian State across the June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. Jordan continues its
coordination with all international stakeholders,
highlighting the constants from which we will not move
back. The Palestinian question, with all of its injustice
and suffering, is at the top of the priorities of Jordan's
foreign policy this year, as has been the case each year
under the leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II,
who said:

"Our Palestinian brothers deserve our full support
so that they can hold fast and continue to work with
the international community and its institutions
to achieve a just and comprehensive solution
that redresses the historical injustices they have
suffered and realize their right to a State. Jordan
will continue to carry out its national and historical
duty to support the Palestinian question which is a
first priority for Jordan."

The Hashemite historical custodianship of the
Muslim and Christian Holy Sites in Jerusalem is a task
that was entrusted to us, and we will continue to carry it
out to the best of our ability. The protection and defence
of the Holy Sites and their Arab identity, whether
Christian or Muslim, is ofparamount importance to His
Majesty King Abdullah II.

We stress in that regard that Jordan will fully
use its capacities to preserve the current historical
and legal status of the Holy Sites and to ensure that
Israel, the occupying Power, respects its commitment
under international law to guarantee the security of the
faithful, so as Jerusalem can remain a symbol of peace
and harmony. We underscore the freedom of entry to or
exit from the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

We condemn the repeated Israeli violations of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the latest example of which was
its being stormed by hundreds of extremists over the
past few days under the protection of the Israeli police
and special forces. In that context, I recall the final
communiques issued at the Arab-European summit,
held in Sharm El-Sheikh in February; the Arab Summit,
held in Tunisia in March; the Russian-Arab Cooperation
Forum, all of which emphasized the importance of the
Hashemite custodianship of Islamic and Christian holy
sites in Jerusalem.

As for the issue of Palestinian refugees, the
international community must continue to shoulder
its legal, political and moral responsibilities in their
regard, as their issue remains one ofthe most important
final status issues and must be resolved on the basis of
the resolutions of international legitimacy, in particular
General Assembly resolution 194 (III) and the Arab
Peace Initiative, in order to ensure the right of refugees
to return and be compensated. In that regard, we stress
that all final status issues must be resolved through
direct negotiations. We also emphasize the need to
continue to provide support to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). We recall the visit of the Secretary-
General earlier this month to Jordan, where he met with
a group of aspiring UNRWA students in the Al-Baqa'a
refugee camp. We support the Secretary-General's call
to allow 700 UNRWA schools to continue to provide
education to more than 530,000 male and female
Palestinian students in its five areas of operation.

With regard to the Syrian crisis, we reaffirm
Jordan's firm position that a political solution to the
crisis must be reached. Syria must recover and restore
its role as a cornerstone of stability in the region and a
key component of joint Arab action. Political approaches
should be based on the principle of protecting the
sisterly country of Syria, preserving its independence
and territorial integrity and ensuring the safe and
voluntary return of its refugees to their country, cities
and villages of origin. That is the objective around
which we must all unite.

On behalf of the international community, Jordan
has hosted its brothers from Syria and shared its
available resources with them. We will continue to
do so until their safe and voluntary return has been
secured. In that regard, I wish to emphasize the need to
support the host countries of Syrian refugees, which is
a shared responsibility.

On the occupied Syrian Golan, it remains our
position that it is an occupied Syrian territory, in
accordance with all resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly resolution 497 (1981), which
was adopted unanimously by the Council.

The escalation in Libya must come to an end,
which will require a calm and restrained approach. We
stress the importance of reaching a political solution
and supporting the efforts of the United Nations to
overcome the crisis, guarantee security and ensure the
stability and territorial integrity of Libya.

It is important that we pursue our common
global efforts to combat terrorism, obscurantism and
extremism. In spite of the defeat of Da'esh in Iraq and
Syria, the threat of terrorism has not yet ended and
remains a challenge. Jordan continues to support Iraq
in its counter-terrorism endeavours and will continue
to support the country in its reconstruction and
stabilization efforts, given Iraq's fundamental role as a
pillar of security and stability in the region.

Finally, the crises in the region require all of us
to show greater levels of cooperation in order to
combat common challenges and build a future that our
peoples deserve - one that is more secure and stable,
that provides our youth with excellent opportunities
and prospects, and our societies with sustainable
development, and that is full of hope and prosperity.

