Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The bloodshed and violence in Syria must be
immediately ended. To that end, the Russian Federation
has undertaken active diplomatic efforts in contacts
with the Syrians, Syria's Arab neighbours and other
members of the international community. Today, it was
announced in Moscow that, on instructions from
President Medvedev of the Russian Federation,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
Lavrov and the Director of the Foreign Intelligence
Service of the Russian Federation, Mr. Fradkov, are to
Visit Damascus on 7 February for a meeting with
President Al-Assad of the Syrian Arab Republic.

In the Security Council, we have actively tried to
reach a decision for an objective solution that would
truly help to put a prompt end to violence and start a
political process in Syria. The decision of the Security
Council should be just that, but from the very
beginning of the Syrian crisis some influential
members of the international community, including
some sitting at this table, have undermined any
possibility of a political settlement, calling for regime
change, encouraging the opposition towards power,
indulging in provocation and nurturing the armed
struggle.

The work of the Security Council was not taken
to its conclusion. The draft resolution put to the vote
(S/2012/77) did not adequately reflect the true state of
affairs in Syria and sent a biased signal to the Syrian
sides. The sponsors of the draft resolution did not take
into account our proposed amendments to the draft
resolution to the effect that the Syrian opposition must
distance itself from extremist groups that are
committing acts of violence, and calling on States and
all those with any relevant opportunity to use their
influence to stop those groups committing acts of
violence. Nor has account been taken of our proposals
that along with the withdrawal of the Syrian armed
forces from the cities, there should be an end to attacks
by armed groups on State institutions and
neighbourhoods. Nor has there been support for the
proposal to show more flexibility for the intermediary
efforts of the League of Arab States, which would
increase the chances for the success of an inclusive
Syrian political process.

Under these conditions, the Russian delegation
voted against the draft resolution submitted. We greatly
regret such an outcome of our joint work in the
Security Council. We believe that intensive efforts by

the international community will be continued, with a
view to an immediate end to the violence and a
successful beginning and conclusion of an inclusive
Syrian political process and to withdrawal of that
country from a profound crisis.

Russia, for its part, will continue to work
precisely in that direction.

