Ms. Patten: I would like to thank the Security
Council, and in particular the presidency of Japan, for
inviting me to brief it on my recent visit to Cox's Bazar.

The presidential statement on Myanmar
(S/PRST/2017/22), adopted by the Council on
6 November, underscored the importance of preventing
and responding to sexual violence, and of cooperation
between the Government of Myanmar and my Office
in that regard. I am pleased to inform the Council
that the Government of Myanmar has extended an
invitation to me to visit Nay Pyi Taw and Yangon from
14 to 16 December to meet with the State Counsellor,
the Ministers for Defence and Home Affairs and
representatives of the armed and security forces.
I look forward to that visit and hope it will generate
commitments in line with the measures requested by
the Council in resolution 2106 (2013).

Since the Council established it, in 2009, my
mandate has served as a voice for the voiceless. I come
before the Council today to amplify the voices of the
survivors who so bravely shared their stories with me
because they want the world to know their plight. I
visited Bangladesh from 5 to 13 November, including
several camps and settlements - namely, Kutupalong,
Unchiprang and Leda, as well as the Konapara border
area. I also deployed an inter-agency technical team,
which included representatives of the International
Organization for Migration, UNICEF and the United
Nations Population Fund, to carry out an initial
assessment of the situation.

Over the course of three days, I heard the most
heart-breaking and horrific accounts of sexual
atrocities reportedly committed in cold-blood out of
a lethal hatred for the Rohingya community based
on their ethnicity and religion. The accounts were
consistent and corroborated by international medical
staff and other service-providers operating in the area.
The acts described were by no means isolated incidents:
every woman or girl I spoke with reported having
either endured or witnessed sexual violence. The forms
of sexual violence I consistently heard about from
survivors and witnesses included rape, gang-rape by
multiple soldiers, forced public nudity and humiliation,
and sexual slavery in military captivity. One survivor
described being held in captivity by members of the
Myanmar armed forces - the Tatmadaw - for 45 days,
during which she was reportedly raped over and over
again. Several survivors still bore visible scars, bruises,
burns and bite marks, attesting to their ordeal. One
woman showed me how she could no longer see out
of her left eye, which was bitten by a solider during a
vicious sexual assault.

There are indications that this pattern of widespread
and systematic sexual violence has been used as a tool
of dehumanization and collective punishment. Women
and girls recounted how, upon the arrival of soldiers
in their village, they were forced to strip naked and
threatened with rape in front of their husbands and
fathers, while their homes were set ablaze. They related
how, in some cases, village leaders were compelled
to sign documents stating that they had set fire to
their own homes, in order to save the women of their
community from rape.

I met a number of profoundly traumatized women
who related how their daughters were allegedly raped
inside their home and left to perish when the houses were
torched. Some witnesses reported women and girls being
tied to either a rock or a tree before multiple soldiers
literally raped them to death. Many reported having
witnessed family members, friends and neighbours
being slaughtered in front of them. The two words that
echoed across every account I heard were "slaughter"
and "rape". Most women I spoke with shared details
of how such brutal acts of sexual violence occurred in
the context of persecution, which reportedly began long
before August 2017, as manifested in looting, torture
and the slaughter of civilians - even newborn babies,
who represent the future of the Rohingya community.
Some women recounted how soldiers drowned babies
in the village well. A few women told me how their own
babies were allegedly thrown in the fire as they were
dragged away by soldiers and gang-raped.

Those shocking accounts indicate a pattern of grave
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law committed against Rohingya women and girls
in the context of military operations. The widespread
threat and use of sexual violence served as a driver and
push factor for forced displacement on a massive scale,
and as a calculated tool of terror seemingly aimed at the
extermination and removal of the Rohingya as a group.
Some rape survivors reported being insulted and told,
"You are not citizens of Myanmar - you must leave".

All of the women I spoke with said they wanted to
see the perpetrators punished. Without exception, they
all demanded justice. Some expressed a desire to return
home, provided they would be granted citizenship and
equal rights. Others said they had nothing left to return
to but ashes. When discussing repatriation with a group
of survivors, an elderly woman told me: "You will sign
our death sentence if you send us back to Myanmar".
The face of that elderly woman haunts me as I reflect
on recent developments to implement a process of
repatriation. While I welcome the ongoing efforts of
the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh to find
a solution that would enable the safe, voluntary and
sustainable return of those displaced, it is imperative
that their basic security and rights be guaranteed.

It is also important that we view the current crisis
in its broader historical and political perspective. The
Rohingya community has been trapped for decades
in a vicious cycle of violence, impunity and forced
displacement. There is a serious risk of that cycle
repeating if the underlying conditions do not change. I
therefore urge the international community to support
the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh to reach
a comprehensive agreement that upholds international
standard and sets out the necessary measures to ensure
that returns are truly voluntary decisions, based on
informed consent and take place in safe and dignified
conditions that pave the way for lasting peace.

I am committed to extending the full support of
my Office, which can include technical assistance
in law reform and capacity-building for the national
armed and security forces to foster compliance with
international standards, including zero tolerance for
sexual abuse. Such support can be provided through
my Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which was mandated by the
Council to help build the capacity of justice and
security-sector institutions.

In addition, I stand ready to mobilize, for the benefit
of the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh, the
inter-agency network that I chair, known as United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which supports efforts to deliver a coordinated,
multi-sectoral response for survivors of conflict-
related sexual violence, including health care and
psychosocial support. At the same time, it is important
to note that United Nations agencies and partners are
facing a dramatic funding shortfall, of approximately
$10 million, to deliver essential gender-based Violence
programmes in the immediate term. That funding can
save lives and help survivors heal. For instance, the
women and child-friendly spaces thatI saw in the camps
run by United Nations agencies and their partners are a
lifeline for survivors and require sustainable resources.

I urge the Council to do everything in its power
to seek a swift end to the atrocities, ensure that the
alleged perpetrators of sexual and other violence are
brought to justice and create conditions for a safe
and dignified future for the survivors. History will
judge our action or inaction. A Security Council draft
resolution demanding an immediate end to violations
against the civilian population in Rakhine state and
measures to hold the perpetrators accountable would
send an important signal. It is critical that the Council
call for humanitarian agencies to be given immediate,
unhindered access to populations in need. Furthermore,
the Council should consider sending a delegation
to Myanmar and Cox's Bazar to assess the situation
first-hand.

Repatriation will not be possible without concerted
efforts to hold the perpetrators accountable for
their crimes. To that end, an impartial, independent
mechanism to support investigation would be an
important step. Those who are found to be implicated in
abuses should be removed from positions of command
responsibility and prosecuted.

Finally, I take this opportunity to commend the
Government and the people of Bangladesh who have
opened their borders and homes to the Rohingya
community, which many have called the most
persecuted people on Earth. I extend my appreciation to
Bangladesh for the lives it has saved, and is continuing
to save, by providing relief and refuge. History will
remember the humanity it has shown. Tragically, the
population exodus - and the abuses that are driving
it - continue. I met rape victims who had arrived
in Bangladesh just four days earlier. I saw refugees
huddling under a tarpaulin who had arrived that very
day. Ethnic cleansing must never be allowed to achieve
its goal. The international community must take swift
and serious action to support the Government of
Bangladesh to accommodate this desperate population
and work with the Government of Myanmar to address
violations against civilians, including sexual violence.
In the face of this humanitarian crisis, which has ripple
effects for regional peace and security, inaction is not
an option.
