Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
The draft resolution before us today is a very important one
at this juncture: we are concerned at reports of the sale or
supply of arms and materiel to former Rwandan
government forces and militias, and at other reports of
continued violence in Rwanda resulting from the illegal
flow of arms of all kinds into Rwanda. This will
inevitably place weapons in the hands of irresponsible
parties, emboldening them and giving them the means to
commit massacres, adding to the huge number of victims
in Rwanda. That is exactly what happened last December,
when this situation led to the murder of civilians,
including refugees, at Mudende.

My delegation wishes to reaffirm the importance of
reactivating the International Commission of Inquiry for
Rwanda established by Security Council resolution 1013
(1995). We pay tribute to that Commission for its
excellent work, which is described in its reports,
especially its final report, contained in document
S/1997/ 1010, and in the supplementary report annexed to
the letter dated 22 January 1998 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document S/ 1998/63.

The mandate of the Commission should consist of
the following elements: gathering information and
carefully examining reports of the sale or supply of arms
and materiel to former Rwandan government forces and
militias in the Great Lakes region of Central Africa;
identifying the parties that have assisted and encouraged
the illegal acquisition of arms, which contravenes relevant
Security Council resolutions; working to put an end to
radio broadcasts and pamphlets that spread hatred and
sow fear among the population of the region; and
recommending the necessary measures to stop illegal
flows of weapons to the region. In this respect, we
request the Secretary-General to provide us with periodic
reports on the reactivation of the Commission and to
introduce his recommendations in this regard. The
International Commission of Inquiry must commence its
work as soon as possible.

My delegation supports the draft resolution before us
today and will vote in favour of it.

