The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs ofNew
Zealand.

New Zealand welcomes today's opportunity to
discuss the serious threat to international peace and
security posed by terrorist targeting of civil aviation.

I thank the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom, Mr. Boris Johnson, for his leadership on
resolution 2309 (2016), which was just adopted by the
Council. Air links are critical to New Zealand. More
than 99 per cent of our international visitors arrive
by air, and around 15 per cent of our exports are
transported by air. The security of international civil
aviation is therefore of vital importance to my country.

As we commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of
the September 11 attacks in New York, we need no
reminding that terrorist threats to civil aviation are
not a new phenomenon. The Council has already taken
action to address the travel of foreign terrorist fighters,
including by restricting their access to planes as a
means of transport. But recent attacks demonstrate that
civil aviation remains an attractive target for terrorists,
and advances in technology have made terrorist threats
to aviation harder to detect.

The international community must remain vigilant
in ensuring that international standards are responsive to
a constantly-evolving threat environment. As countries
gather for the triennial session of the International Civil
Aviation Organization's (ICAO) Assembly later this
month, we encourage them to reflect on the collective
views of this Council in their deliberations. ICAO
remains the primary forum for improving international
aviation security standards and deserves the support of
the international community and of the Council.

New Zealand supports an approach to aviation
security that is risk-based and tailored to different
circumstances. This is particularly important for
States with limited capacities and lower risk profiles,
including the many small island developing States of
our region. It does not make sense to expect the same
systems and approach from Tuvalu as we have from the
United States.

But agreeing to standards is only the first step.
The more challenging and important task is ensuring
that these are effectively implemented. New Zealand
therefore welcomes the focus in today's resolution
on international cooperation, including technical
assistance. We continue to provide significant technical
support in aviation security efforts, in particular to
improve regional air security in the Pacific. However,
enhanced aviation security can only ever provide a
short-term bandage. The far greater challenge lies in
addressing the conditions that motivate and enable
those who commit these acts of terrorism.

In this respect, we need to reflect on the
effectiveness of this organ, which is charged with
maintaining international peace and security. The
Security Council's track record ofdelivering sustainable
resolution of major conflicts is poor, and the resources
of the United Nations are heavily focused on providing
peacekeeping and humanitarian support for victims
of conflict rather than preventing conflict in the
first place, or resolving conflicts before they become
intractable. Major improvements to the United Nations
machinery, including this Council, are well overdue in
these respects. They are matters that all members of
this Council have a responsibility to address.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ignacio
Ybafiez, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain.

