Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We believe that the Council's
deliberations will be successful thanks to your
experience and widely acknowledged wisdom. I would
also like to express our appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of Brazil for the excellent manner in
which he presided over our Council's work last month.
I say "our" Council because it is the Council of the
Organization, of which we are a part.

Morocco attaches great importance to the work of
the Committees established by the Security Council
through resolutions on the subject of terrorism. We are
truly pleased with the President's initiative to hold this
public meeting. That initiative now has a higher profile
thanks to the recent publication of the Secretary-
General's report entitled "In larger freedom: towards
development, security and human rights for all"
(A/59/2005), in which the Secretary-General
emphasizes the need for the international community to
coordinate its efforts at all levels in order to confront
international terrorism in all its aspects. In that
connection, allow me to thank Ambassador Ellen Loj
of Denmark, Chairperson of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Cesar Mayoral of Argentina,
Chairperson of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), and Ambassador Mihnea
Motoc of Romania, Chairperson of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for the
dynamism and inspiration they have brought to the
work of their respective Committees since taking up
their responsibilities.

We are mindful of the very serious threats posed
by international terrorism to international peace and
security - "new threats", as they have been called. In
that regard, my country has always been resolutely and
unambiguously committed to combating terrorism,
which we condemn fully and regardless of its forms,
manifestations or motivations. Any deliberate attack
against innocent civilians that seeks to destabilize any
socio-political system or specific country cannot be
justified in any manner and must be condemned by the
international community and must be punished.

On 16 May 2003, my country was victim of
serious and barbaric terrorist acts that cast a pal] over
the city of Casablanca and the entire Kingdom. Those
attacks did not shake our firm conviction to pursue the
building of a united and democratic society based on
solidarity and imbued with the values of tolerance and
respect for fundamental human rights. We are
convinced that those who wrought terror in
Casablanca, New York, Madrid and Riyadh are all of
the same ilk. Terrorism feeds on xenophobia,
intolerance and other forms of fanaticism. Terrorism is
not unique to any single country, religion or culture.
However, the very extent to which this new scourge
has been organized through a transnational network
makes it necessary to confront it in a spirit of
solidarity, by pooling our information and uniting our
efforts.

Combating international terrorism requires
determined action by the entire international
community, to which every country must contribute
actively. Only cooperation among States will make it
possible collectively to combat this scourge by
implementing a multifaceted and comprehensive
strategy. While States' individual efforts to combat
terrorism indeed represent serious achievements, they
are nevertheless quite insufficient. Morocco has
therefore decided to build upon its national efforts by
adopting and strengthening a regional approach that
includes Euro-Mediterranean partners from our region,
sub-Saharan African countries and countries of the
nearby Middle East. Our approach to combating
terrorism converges with the approaches taken by all of
our other partners and strategic allies. It is built around
the concept of comprehensive security and respect for
shared values and international law.

We believe that, with its universal composition
and the jurisdiction conferred upon it by the Charter,
the United Nations remains the appropriate venue to
marshal energies to combat terrorism. I therefore
believe that the United Nations is irreplaceable. It is
the appropriate framework to express the consensus of
the international community and to develop a
coordinated response by all States in the fight against
terrorism while respecting the purposes and principles
of the Charter.

My country, which has the privilege of presiding
over the General Assembly's Sixth Committee,
welcomes the Assembly's consensus adoption of the
draft International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (General Assembly resolution 59/290). That adoption reaffirms the
Assembly's important role in developing norms of
international law, and thus strengthens respect for the
primacy of law. We also hope that there will soon be
agreement on the definition of the scourge of terrorism,
so that we can adopt a comprehensive convention on
terrorism as soon as possible.

With its unwavering commitment to international
legality, Morocco has acceded to almost all
international legal instruments on terrorism. We have
also taken a series of measures to give form to the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001),
taking appropriate measures to incorporate them as an
integral part of our national legislation. In that context,
Morocco has complied with all the provisions of the
resolutions and has cooperated fully with the
mechanisms established to oversee their
implementation. Morocco has now submitted four
reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), on
27 December 2001, 19 July 2002, 15 December 2003
and 20 October 2004. We also submitted a report to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) on 24 July 2003, as well as a report to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), on 28 October 2004. In accordance with
resolution 1526 (2004), my country has also provided
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) with all the information requested in a list
addressed to the Committee.

We have always fully and promptly cooperated
with the Committees, whose missions may differ but
whose objectives are the same. Indeed, on two
occasions, from 31 October to 4 November 2004 and 3
to 5 April 2005, Morocco received experts from the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
that reports to the 1267 Committee. Furthermore,
pursuant to resolution 1535 (2004), the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), led by
Ambassador Javier Ruperez, whom I welcome here
today, conducted its first assessment visit to Morocco
from 14 to 19 March 2005. It is a fact that, by choosing
our country as the destination of its first mission, the
CTC sought to pay tribute not only to Morocco's
successful efforts to finalize its legislation and
strengthen its administrative counter-terrorism
machinery, but also to our openness to international
cooperation in that field. In that regard, the Moroccan
authorities were gratified by the professionalism and
rigor which the CTED experts demonstrated
throughout their mission.

My country is satisfied with the mission's
assessment of the reliability of the Kingdom's
commitment to combating terrorism and our significant
efforts in that area, undertaken within the framework of
a comprehensive and integrated strategy for the social
and economic development of our country. We are,
moreover, determined further to improve the
effectiveness of our administrative and legislative
system, with the support of the international
community. On behalf of my country, I affirm that we
are at the disposal of the Directorate and the
Committee.

We thank the Executive Director, Ambassador
Javier Ruperez, and his team for the success of the
assessment mission and we encourage more such visits,
which we believe to promote direct and in-depth
dialogue between the Committee and the national
authorities of the countries visited, as well as the
assessment of their needs for technical assistance.

In conclusion, Morocco attaches great importance
to strengthening cooperation among the Security
Council committees working on the various aspects of
counter-terrorism. We welcome the progress made in
that area, and in that respect subscribe fully to the
provisions of resolution 1566 (2004), which explicitly
requests the 1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees to
enhance cooperation among themselves. Morocco
trusts that the working group established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004), chaired by Ambassador Lauro
Baja of the Philippines, will be able to have a positive
and synergistic impact on the three Committees.

The United Nations global strategy for fighting
terrorism, outlined in Madrid on 11 March, must be
further strengthened in order to meet the challenge of
the new threats confronting the international
community, and to do so - as we will continue to
insist - in full respect of international law and
universal norms on the protection of human rights.

