Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): I wish to begin, Sir, by expressing our deep
satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the work of the
Security Council this month, and by wishing you every
success - success which I am sure we shall achieve under
your leadership. We wish also to thank the delegation of
Botswana, and Ambassador Legwaila personally for his
excellent work as President of the Security Council last
month.

My delegation is very pleased to see in this Chamber
today the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.

It is axiomatic to the Russian Federation's assessment
of the situation in Afghanistan that the conflict there poses
a threat to international peace and constitutes a major
humanitarian tragedy. It will require extremely bold efforts
to put an end to the armed conflict and to achieve a
political settlement.

The protracted struggle between the Afghan groups
has reached a stalemate. None is able to achieve the
military advantage over the others that would guarantee its
ability to govern the country by itself. But while there is no
chance of a military solution to the situation, a political
settlement to the conflict is not regarded by all the Afghan
parties as the sole solution. Although there has recently
been an increase in political contacts between various
Afghan groups, we note with regret that at the same time
plans are being laid to intensify the struggle and turn it into
a religious war.

Russia is disturbed to see in Afghanistan a growing
tendency towards separatism, ethnic segregation and
confrontation. Everything possible must be done to stop
this dangerous turn of events, which threatens the
partition of Afghanistan and the deterioration of relations
among States of the region. The United Nations should
stand firm by its position of preserving the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Afghanistan.

The ongoing civil war in Afghanistan poses a grave
threat to the security and stability of other States. We are
concerned to ensure the security of the borders between
Afghanistan and countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and to make certain that the territory
of Afghanistan is not used - as is now the case with
respect to Tajikistan - to carry out acts undermining the
security and stability of Afghanistan's neighbours.

The territory of Afghanistan continues to be the
source of illegal exports of drugs and arms and a base for
training terrorists who are then dispatched to crisis spots
all over the world.

There are vast regions of Afghanistan where
basically nothing is being done to protect the rights and
freedoms of Afghan citizens or even of foreigners. This
was demonstrated by the Taliban movement's seizure of
a Russian aeroplane in August 1995 and its illegal
detention of its seven crew members, for eight months so
far. Despite the pleas of the General Assembly and the
Security Council and the appeals of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and a number of individual States,
the Taliban have refused to release these Russian citizens,
and have made no secret that their detention is being used
to exert pressure on Russia. Their plans have no prospect
whatsoever of success. We View the situation as
absolutely unacceptable, and expect that the international
community will take further, decisive steps to ensure that
the Taliban respect the rules of law, morality and
humanity, and to secure the unconditional release of the
Russian crew, in accordance with United Nations
decisions.

We believe that the United Nations has a
fundamental role to play in the process of achieving an
Afghan settlement. It is essential to step up considerably
the activities of the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan. The Security Council could begin to prepare
a draft resolution that would set out in detail a plan for
United Nations action on Afghanistan.

 

We welcome the efforts along those lines by other
authoritative international organizations to promote an
Afghan settlement in close cooperation with the United
Nations, in particular the efforts of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

We support in principle the convening of an
international conference on Afghanistan. It is clear that for
this to be successful it is essential to secure prior consent
from the Afghan parties to discuss their mutual relations
and the future State structure of Afghanistan, in public and
substantively.

Russia firmly adheres to its policy not to be drawn
into the inter-Afghan fighting and expects that all other
States will act in a similar way. Our country is prepared
together with other members of the international community
to promote a speedy, peaceful solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan.

