Ms. Siider (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking the Ukrainian presidency for organizing
today's important debate on conflicts in Europe. I
am grateful to the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, and Secretary General Zannier, of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), for their briefings, and I also align myself with
the statement delivered by my friend and colleague,
Ms. Helga Schmid, Secretary-General of the European
External Action Service of the European Union (EU),
as well as that to be delivered later on behalf of the
Nordic countries.

The European Union, of which Sweden is a
proud member, has been the single-most important
institutional source of peace and stability in Europe
since the end of the Second World War. With its vision
of a Europe whole and free, based on democratic values
and shared economic prosperity, the EU has been a
vital mechanism for conflict prevention on a continent
where two world wars originated and where millions
of people paid with their lives for the freedom that we
enjoy today. The EU partnership with its neighbours
in support of democracy, prosperity and human rights
has never been a zero-sum game to the detriment of
relations with other countries. On the contrary, deepened
cooperation with external partners is encouraged. In the
western Balkans, for example, the Security Council has
gradually handed over to the EU its responsibilities for
peacebuilding and security in countries that were once
subject to large United Nations operations. Sweden
believes that the more inclusive the EU is, the more
stable and prosperous our continent becomes.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe is a transatlantic body that offers a unique
platform for dialogue on European peace and security,
precisely because it is based on commonly agreed-on
principles and commitments. Only when the OSCE
principles, which are the foundation of the European
security order, are fully respected can we achieve lasting
security and stability. The OSCE is a vital contributor
to sustaining peace in line with United Nations efforts
to that end, and confidence-building measures and
arms control should now be enhanced again, because a
comprehensive concept of security remains a strength
and added value of the OSCE and must be upheld.

Respect for democracy, the rule of law, human
rights and fundamental freedoms remains a
precondition for our common security. The OSCE's
human dimension and autonomous institutions - the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights,
the Representative on Freedom of the Media and the
High Commissioner on National Minorities - should
be allowed to play their full role. They are key assets
across the conflict cycle and today are needed more than
ever as we try to prevent armed conflict. The mandates
and budgets of those institutions must be preserved and
strong candidates selected to lead them.

Sweden is a militarily non-aligned country. As such,
our own security depends on a rule-based international
order under which the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, large and small, are respected
everywhere, globally. Our long-standing commitment
to multilateral cooperation and our staunch defence
of international law are rooted in that realization. It is
therefore with great concern that we note that Europe
is currently facing the most serious challenges to its
security since the end of the Cold War. As we speak,
the ongoing conflict in Ukraine, which has already
cost some 10,000 lives, is causing inhuman suffering
for large groups of innocent civilians. When one State
decides to use military force to invade and annex a part
of another State and threaten its sovereignty, that is a
threat to us all. That is why the European Union has so
clearly and unequivocally condemned those breaches
of international law and attempts to undermine the
rule-based international order and European security
order, as enshrined in the Helsinki Final Act, the
Paris Charter and the Budapest Memorandum, and in
accordance with the rules and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

I would like to point to some specific areas that
require immediate action and joint efforts on the part
of the members of the Council and other relevant
regional actors - the EU, the OSCE and others - in
order to secure Europe's future as a continent of peace
and prosperity and to accord with Chapter VIII of
the Charter. We must ensure that an end is brought
to the Russian aggression against Ukraine - as
demonstrated in its violation of Ukraine's sovereignty
and integrity and its illegal annexation of Crime and
Sevastopol - through implementation of the Minsk
process, with deliberations in the Normandy format,
and through a decrease in violence.

We must act in a manner that is conducive to long-
term stability in the Balkans, and uphold and strengthen
the EU enlargement policy. We must commit to efforts
to move the promising Cyprus peace process forward.
We must resolve the so-called protracted conflicts in
Georgia, Moldova and Nagorno Karabakh, without
delay and in accordance with international law. We
must recognize the importance of peace and security of
the EU Eastern Partnership, strengthen the European
instruments for confidence- and security-building
measures and convential arms control through the
OSCE, actively engage in disarmament to rid the world
of nuclear weapons, and involve women as actors in
all of this. By supporting these goals, we will not only
buttress peace and stability in Europe, but also show
that the elected and permanent members of the Security
Council are committed to defending the rules and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and our
commitment to common gains and security.

