Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the holding of this open meeting
and especially for the very frank analysis given to us
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in the region.

It is obviously no coincidence that this new wave
of acts of terrorism, provocations and reprisals
characterizing this bloody vicious circle is occurring
just when the peace initiative proposed by the Quartet
and expressed in the road map had taken shape in the
political and diplomatic field. There is very clearly a
very wide gap between the purposes verbally expressed
by the Israeli and Palestinian parties to reach a
negotiated agreement, on the one hand, and their weak
political will on the other. To the fragile political will
of the Government of Israel and of the Palestinian
Authority, we must add the openly anti-peace postures
that extremist factions on both sides of the conflict are
taking daily. What has happened in recent weeks is the
true expression of the lack of a genuine and courageous
commitment by the parties to a peaceful way out. As
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Roed-Larsen, said, neither of the parties has made
a serious and genuine effort to attend to the demands of
the other. For that reason, the road map has not taken
off, and now we run the risk that this effort will
founder. The tunnel through which we had been
moving towards the light of peace has once again
collapsed.

We deeply regret that the Palestinian Authority
has not yet had the strength, the cohesion or ultimately
the determination to halt the terrorist attacks and
suicide bombings that have caused so much pain,
horror and bloodshed to the Israeli population,
primarily the innocent civilian population. Indeed, the
great majority of victims of those attacks are innocent
Israelis - children, young people, women and the
elderly - many of them genuinely convinced that
Israel and Palestine should and can live in peace and
prosper together. Each terrorist attack is an act of self-
immolation of the Palestinian cause itself. Each drop of
blood shed on Israel's streets deepens the abyss and
distances the Palestinians from their just dream and
their legitimate vision: the creation of an independent
State. The Palestinian Authority and President Arafat
must understand once and for all that everything they
do to halt and prevent terrorism, everything they do to
overcome hatred and to inculcate among children and
youths, not a thirst for vengeance but a generous spirit
of reconciliation, will benefit their cause. The sooner
an end is put to terrorism, the closer the foundations of
a Palestinian State will be - not the reverse.

Israel gains nothing by going down the path of
disproportionate reprisals, with grave loss of human
life. It gains nothing by making life impossible for the
Palestinians in their own territory. It gains nothing by
creating extreme humanitarian conditions for
Palestinian youths and children. It gains nothing by
carrying out extrajudicial executions. It gains nothing
by building walls. Those measures are very far from
achieving their security objectives; they will not make
Israel more secure. For the Israelis, there can be no
consolation in the fact that, through blood and fire,
they are preventing the carrying out of certain suicidal
terrorist acts, when other acts will follow them.
Experience undoubtedly shows that walls are only open
wounds and that fire is not put out with fire.

Mexico, as a friend of Israel and of its people,
expresses the hope that extrajudicial executions will be
halted, that the Government of Israel will put an end to
reprisals against the civilian population, that the
building of the wall will be suspended and that the
settlements will be halted.

My Government also expresses the particular
hope that measures to expel or confine President Yasser
Arafat will not be taken. He is the legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people, having been
elected by them, and must be respected as such. Israel
will gain nothing by violating the self-determination of
the Palestinian people.

Mexico has endorsed all the various attempts to
resolve this issue that the Council has supported since
the Madrid Conference, the Oslo Agreements and the
various commendable mediation efforts led by the
United States. The path of mediation has led to the
road map proposed by the Quartet. This is not just one
more initiative; in many ways it is the final opportunity
for Israel and Palestine to truly cross the threshold to a
peace in which both sides can live together as
independent nations with secure borders. The road map
has its failings - it does not establish a clear sequence
for mutual concessions and it does not set out a clear
system of penalties for the parties. Nor does not it
establish a clear system for implementation. Those
failings can - and should - be corrected. The
Quartet's road map should not, however, be aborted; it
remains the only way forward towards a viable and
legitimate solution of the conflict.

Together with the efforts of the Quartet, the
Council should consider the adoption of other measures
to strengthen confidence and improve the prospects for
peace so as to put an end to violence and deal with the
deeply distressing humanitarian situation faced by the
Palestinian people. The Security Council has an
obligation to take action. Israelis and Palestinians
should be prepared for the Security Council to become
a part of the solution to this conflict.

Only through the prompt establishment of a
Palestinian State will peace be possible, and this will
not be achieved by expelling Yasser Arafat.

