Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): My
delegation must object to the proposal to allow Mr.
Jovanovie, or anyone else purporting to represent his
Government, to address the Council. We would like to
request a vote on this invitation.

He represents a Government whose senior
leadership has been indicted for war crimes and other
violations of international humanitarian law. The
Tribunal that indicted their leaders was established by
the Council itself, with the full support and
participation of every member of the Council -
including those supporting his participation today.
Allowing any representative of that leadership to
participate in this or any other meeting of the Council
flouts the indictments, undermines the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and sets
us on a dangerous moral and legal course that sends the
wrong message to the world about what this great body
is doing here today and eliminates and undermines the
seriousness ofthis gathering, at which I am particularly
grateful to see Mr. Bildt, Mr. Solana and other major
representatives ofthe world community.

There is no room in this debate for a
representative of this regime, which continues its
repressive tactics at home and its policies of nationalist
extremism abroad and which helped fuel four Balkan
wars over the last decade. It would be inappropriate to
allow a representative of that Government to use the
Council, in a discussion about where we stand on
Kosovo and Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
to support the very policies that forced the United
Nations to intervene.

We recommend that the Council state clearly and
unequivocally that it rejects the policies of hatred and
war espoused by the Belgrade regime; that it does not
tolerate abuses of human rights; and that it fully
supports the efforts of the International war crime
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to prosecute all - I
repeat, all - those who have been indicted.

For this reason, my delegation requests that the
proposed invitation be put to the vote. Of course, our
country will vote no.

