The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council held in the Security Council Chamber
since its renovation, I should like at the outset of the
meeting to express, on behalf of the Security Council, deep
gratitude and appreciation to the Government of Norway,
which has once again provided financial and material
support to have the Security Council Chamber refurbished
in such an admirable way. The Council's appreciation also
goes out to the gifted team of Norwegian craftsmen who
faithfully reproduced the original design, thereby restoring
the Council Chamber to its original splendour. And I
understand that it is the same Norwegian family business
that has been responsible for these wall coverings, and that
it is indeed the son of the original craftsman who
personally supervised this refurbishment.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Establishment of an international tribunal for the
prosecution of persons responsible for serious violations
of international humanitarian law committed in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia

Letter dated 30 July 1997 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1997/605)

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 30 July 1997 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, document
S/ 1997/605.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1997/667, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before
it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1126 (1997).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.40 am.

