Mr. Mardini: After the guns go silent, transitional justice creates a space for truth, accountability and reconciliation. It helps break the cycles of violence and atrocities. Equally important, it plays a humanitarian role. It recognizes wounds and addresses the suffering of individuals, families and communities whose lives were fundamentally changed by the conflict. One humanitarian issue that intersects with transitional justice is the situation of missing persons and their families. If one speaks to families, one hears that their suffering is both acute and haunting. It is the last open wound. As the Security Council meets today to discuss how to improve transitional justice mechanisms, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) would like to make the following three recommendations. First, it is important to include a stated objective on the clarification of the fate of missing persons and support for families for all cases of missing persons, without discrimination. Such mechanisms must involve the families and have due regard for their emotional well- being and security. We encourage the Security Council and United Nations Member States and missions to see transitional justice processes as an important avenue to implement resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons in armed conflict, adopted last year. Secondly, all families looking for a missing relative must be provided an individualized answer and support. That applies even if the case is not part of a judicial investigation under a transitional justice mechanism. People can also go missing in circumstances that might fall outside the scope of the judicial pillar of a transitional justice mechanism. For instance, combatants can go missing in action, or civilians can go missing during displacement or intercommunal violence. Even families in such cases have a right to know the fate and whereabouts of their missing relatives. Thirdly, there must be no impunity for war crimes. Inall types of armed conflicts, States have the obligation under international humanitarian law to investigate and prosecute suspects of alleged war crimes, some of which may include violations that have led to people going missing, including cases of enforced disappearances.The ICRC stands ready to provide expert advice and to support States, United Nations missions and transitional justice mechanisms on ways to: first, include the issue of missing persons and their families in transitional justice processes, whether in truth- seeking, reparations or judicial pillars; secondly, guarantee complementarity between transitional justice processes and any other mechanism set up to clarify the fate and whereabouts of missing persons; and, thirdly, ensure consistency between transitional justice processes and States' obligations under international humanitarian law.
