Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to join
other speakers in thanking the Italian presidency for
convening this meeting. My thanks also go to today's
briefers for their valuable inputs to our discussion. An
especially warm welcome goes to Ms. Azoulay, whom
I congratulate on her recent election as UNESCO
Director-General.

By adopting resolution 2347 (2017), the Security
Council drew the attention of the international
community to a growing problem of destruction of
cultural heritage and trafficking in antiquities, which
has become a feature of numerous armed conflicts
worldwide. The most vulnerable to those threats are the
countries of Syria, Iraq, Libya, Afghanistan and Yemen,
given the involvement of non- State actors such as Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida, the Taliban and
the like. In some cases, the actions of terrorists in pursuit
of easy profit can lead to the wholesale obliteration of
a country's archaeological record. In several countries
where terrorists have suffered major territorial losses,
their ability to conduct such criminal activities in order
to fund their atrocities was limited. Yet, according to
UNESCO estimates, the value of the illicit trade in
artefacts excavated or looted from protected sites and
museums is nevertheless enormous.

As outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/969), resolution 2347 (2017) is far from being
implemented in full, as States may need more time to
adjust their respective legislation. I would like to limit
the rest of my statement to the following measures on
which States can focus, apart from the universalization
of the relevant international treaties adopted under the
auspices of the United Nations or regional organizations.

First is the broader criminalization of offences
against cultural heritage and the imposition of stiff
penalties for illegal activities with regard to antiquities,
such as prison sentences or very high fines. It is
important to increase the latter so that they are not
viewed as simple business expenses for professional
smugglers. That will serve the purpose of bringing
perpetrators to justice.

The second measure is the strengthening of import-
export regimes and the respective national institutional
frameworks. International coordination between
law enforcement and customs agencies will also
contribute to the effective conduct of the investigations,
prosecutions, seizures and returns of smuggled cultural
property. In addition, States must ensure broader
information-sharing on trafficking routes and the
modus operandi of criminals. There must also be active
cooperation at the bilateral and multilateral levels on
exposing and on stopping transnational organized
crime groups, which assist terrorists in exporting looted
antiquities from conflict zones. For those purposes,
liaison with UNESCO, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the World Customs Organization and
INTERPOL, as well as the utilization of their relevant
databases, are also essential.

Thirdly, close public-private partnership is
necessary to track the sale of illegally imported
artefacts. Given that the Internet has become a major
conduit for criminal activities, special attention should
be given to supervising relevant online auctions. In
that regard, the development of self-regulations by
participants in the art market is particularly welcomed.

Finally, the further monitoring by the relevant
United Nations bodies ofthe actual impact of resolution
2347 (2017) on preventing the destruction and smuggling

of cultural heritage is required to assess the dynamics
in that area and to develop lasting solutions.

In conclusion, I would like to pay the highest
tribute to the Italian presidency for the excellent and
professional conduct of our business in November.

