Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We are
glad to welcome the presence here of the Prime
Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Adnan
Terzic. I also wish to thank the High Representative for
his outstanding work in Bosnia and Herzegovina since
he took up his tasks, and in particular for the full report
on what was achieved in the last months of 2003
(S/2004/ 126, annex). Also, I am grateful for Mr.
Guehenno's contribution.

Spain fully supports the statement to be made
later by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.

First of all, my country welcomes the
achievements with regard to establishing the rule of
law described in the report, especially with respect to
the progress toward establishing a single State-level
high judicial and prosecutorial council. This will bring
the country closer to a modern and democratic justice
system, one closer to European standards. I would like
to mention the idea of a setting up a chamber in the
International Criminal Court to deal with war
criminals.

We fully support the donors' conference
organized by the Office of the High Representative,
and we wish to place on record our recognition of such
an opportune initiative, which will contribute to
establishing justice and will make it possible to
establish the bases of national reconciliation.

Secondly, Spain welcomes the closure of the
Refugee and Return Task Force, as scheduled. This is a
recognition of its successes, especially the volume of
returns and more particularly with respect to the
restoration of property.

Thirdly, we think it is important to recognize the
progress represented by the adoption of the law on
defence. It does not simply fill a lacuna; it introduces a
vital element of parliamentary control over the armed
forces and enables the country to come closer to NATO
guidelines so that Bosnia and Herzegovina may in
future succeed in becoming a member of the
Partnership for Peace. We also welcome the efforts to
establish a State information and protection agency.
While there is still a great deal to be done, we feel that
the activities of the High Representative have been
decisive in this regard by setting the right course.

Fourthly, Spain wishes to express its concern at
the economic stagnation. Although there has been
progress in this area - such as the establishment of a
single Indirect Taxation Authority and the suppression
of interior customs administrations - obviously much
still remains to be done, above all in terms of the low
level of investments and the minimal general economic
activity, which, together with a worsening social
situation where unemployment is at disturbing levels,
could place the country in an explosive situation in the
medium and long term.

Lastly, we followed carefully the problems that
have arisen concerning revision by local authorities of
police certification, which revision the International
Police Task Force refused.

I want to state our concern about this issue,
because it undermines the authority of the High
Representative and violates international commitments
undertaken by Bosnia and Herzegovina. My country
therefore urges local authorities to take the steps
necessary to put an end to this situation. We voice our
support for the High Representative in that regard.
Spain would thus favour the Security Council
considering the issue and giving the High
Representative its public support.

