Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): For the past 18 months, we have followed
developments in the Sahel with alarm and concern. We
see there an increasingly clear manifestation of a whole
host of destabilizing factors - arms flows, terrorist
and drug threats, separatist tendencies, severe internal
conflicts and a grave humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation - and they are continuing to get worse. We
are especially concerned by the crisis in Mali, which
has become a serious challenge for neighbouring
States. It has created a credible threat to the stability
and security of the entire region and far beyond. We,
like other international partners, are especially alarmed
by the fact that, in northern Mali, the lead role is now
being played by blatantly extremist forces who are not
hiding their ties to terrorist organizations, including
Al-Qaida. Terrorism has become a significant factor
affecting general security.

Any sustainable solution to the problem in northern
Mali will be political in nature. We are encouraged
by emerging signs of the start of negotiation contacts
between the representatives of the transitional
authorities and some groups. At the same time, an
essential condition for talks must be the severing of all
ties with terrorist organizations and the recognition of
the territorial integrity of the country. It is our View
that any military operation in the north must be seen as
a last resort.

Unfortunately, in the Malian capital there are still
clashes among the political forces. The basis for a
settlement of the internal crisis lies in the launching of
a broad national dialogue aimed at the restoration of the
constitutional order. A key role belongs to the Malians
themselves. It is therefore our view that the general
situation in the region today is such that it is essential
to step up efforts to deal with other conflicts as well.

The people of the Sahel continue to feel the
consequences of the Libyan crisis, which to a large
extent served as a catalyst for the current developments
in Mali. The exodus of the Touareg into the Sahel and
the leakage of a huge amount of weapons has become a
critical factor in the destabilization of the situation in
general, and has led to the unraveling of the situation in
Mali in particular. This urgent problem must continue
to be the focus of our attention. To try to close our
eyes to it, justifying it with the infamous political
correctness, would only exacerbate the situation; we
would be giving up on the search for solutions.

An absolute imperative is strict compliance with
the arms embargo regime against Libya introduced
by resolution 1970 (2011), which remains essential,
and measures to prevent weapons flows from Libya,
including man-portable air defence systems, under
resolution 2017 (2011). The fact that there are supplies
of chemical weapons in the country gives further
urgency to these problems.

We are convinced that a vital role in dealing with
these problems in the Sahel must be played by the
countries themselves. At the same time, it is necessary
to coordinate the efforts of regional and subregional
organizations with the appropriate support from the
international community. An important role in that
context must be played by the United Nations. It is
obvious that its experience and expertise on this issue
will be required on a broad range of issues, from
countering terrorism to implementing socioeconomic
programmes.

In that regard, we welcome the appointment of such
an eminent political figure as Romano Prod as Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel.

The Russian Federation and the countries of the
Sahel are united by close traditional ties of mutually
advantageous bilateral and multilateral cooperation. We
are prepared to continue to give our regional partners
effective multifaceted assistance in areas in which they
show an interest.

