Ms. Mueller: There have been several notable
developments in Syria since the Under-Secretary-
General briefed the Council three weeks ago about the
humanitarian situation (see S/PV.8609). I wanted to
start today with an update about north-west Syria.

On 30 August, the Russian Federation announced
a unilateral ceasefire in the Idlib de-escalation area,
which the Government of Syria later confirmed.
Reports indicate a decline in the fighting compared
with the period since late April, when the military
escalation began. It is critical that this much-needed
respite for civilians continue, unimpeded humanitarian
access be facilitated to all civilians in need and the
protected status of civilian infrastructure be respected.

Worrying signs ofinsecurity are, however, present.
Ground forces have continued to exchange shelling in
southern Idlib and eastern Latakia, and air strikes were
reported in central and northern Idlib over the past
week. At the same time, the listed terrorist group Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham and other non-State armed groups
continue to harass, intimidate and coerce civilians,
including medical workers.

The humanitarian situation remains alarming. An
estimated 400,000 people fled their homes in north-
west Syria in the period from May to August. Many
of those people have been displaced multiple times,
both prior to and during the current military escalation.
These displacements follow familiar patterns, with
civilians largely moving northward, away from
conflict-affected areas, to already densely populated
areas in northern Idlib.

In addition to the needs of those displaced, host
communities are becoming increasingly strained,
leading to additional demands on overstretched
humanitarian assistance. Needs in these areas are
considerable across all sectors: food and non-food,
water and sanitation, health, education and protection.

The shelter situation is of particular concern.
Increased demand and short supply mean that many
families are unable to afford rents in urban areas. A
survey earlier this month found that about 600,000
people live in tents, camps and sites for internally
displaced persons. Humanitarian partners report that
in the absence of viable alternatives, families in some
areas resort to living out in the open.

Following months of intensive fighting, the outlook
in north-west Syria remains uncertain. We know, though,
that winter is coming. Humanitarian organizations are
already planning how to help people in need before
temperatures drop and inclement weather arrives.
Humanitarians estimate that an additional $68.4 million
is required to address expected winterization, shelter
and non-food item needs. Continued donor support is
essential to maintain the current humanitarian response,
but also to scale up operations to meet the expected
needs across north-west Syria in the months ahead.

Humanitarian efforts to assist civilians in need
across north-west Syria depend on more than just
financial support. As the Under-Secretary-General
stressed last month, the people in Idlib are reached
exclusively through the cross-border operation. On a
monthly basis, more than 1.6 million people in need
receive some form of assistance. The renewal of
resolution 2165 (2014) later this year will be crucial
to sustaining the ongoing support to millions of
people in need and to respond to further needs in the
months ahead.

As members of the Council are aware, on
13 September the Secretary-General announced the
establishment of an internal, independent United
Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry to investigate
a series of incidents that have occurred in north-
west Syria. The board will commence its work on
30 September to ascertain the facts of specific incidents
of concern and report to the Secretary-General about
its conclusions. We stand ready to support the Board in
its inquiry.
I have some developments to report about another
intractable humanitarian situation in the Rukban area.
On 11 September, ateam comprised of20 United Nations
staff and 170 staff and volunteers from the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent (SARC) completed a six-day mission to
Rukban, delivering food and nutrition assistance for
approximately 15,000 internally displaced persons.
That joint mission was the second United Nations-
SARC convoy in 2019 to reach the remote area with
humanitarian assistance.

The mission was not without difficulties. Access to
people in the area depended on extensive coordination
with community leaders, armed groups and multiple
Member States, including the Syrian Arab Republic,
the Russian Federation, the United States and Jordan.
Tensions on the ground were high. Moreover, the teams
found that conditions have gradually deteriorated in
the past months, with reports that several children have
died of preventable causes.

The work to support people in Rukban is not over.
United Nations-SARC teams are preparing for the
next phase of their plan, which is to assist up to 6,000
people who have expressed the Wish to depart Rukban
for areas under Government control. Such an operation
depends on the continued cooperation of all parties to
facilitate the United Nations-SARC teams in supporting
the voluntary departure of civilians from Rukban, in a
safe, well-informed and dignified manner. The relevant
parties will also need to make further efforts to find
solutions for the population staying in Rukban, in
consultation with them. On a related note, I welcome
the arrival of Mr. Imran Riza, the new United Nations
Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator
for Syria, who presented his credentials to the Syrian
Government on Monday.

We have frequently reported to the Council about
the desperate situation in Al-Hol camp. As of early
September, some 68,600 individuals were residing
in the camp, 94 per cent of whom were women and
children. Humanitarian organizations continue to seek
ways to improve camp facilities, particularly in the
water and sanitation conditions and the availability of
health care. Their efforts have contributed to a decrease
in reported illnesses in recent weeks. Negotiations
continue with camp administrators to ensure sustained
humanitarian access to civilians in need, particularly
in the camp's annex, where third-country nationals are
accommodated. If agreed, humanitarian organizations
are prepared to provide around-the-clock health services,
which are currently restricted to daylight hours.
Despite those efforts, the situation in Al-Hol
remains extremely challenging and seemingly without
an imminent solution. Children comprise two-thirds of
the camp population. Many of them have been exposed
to extreme violence and trauma under the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. Insecurity and violence continue
to be reported inside the camp. Many households face
uncertainties about their future and remain concerned
about the fate of missing male family members.

In that regard, solutions for foreign nationals need to
be urgently found so as not to prolong their conditions.
We call yet again on all Member States to take the
measures necessary to ensure that their nationals are
repatriated for rehabilitation and reintegration or
prosecution, as appropriate, in line with international
law and standards. Failure to do so now can place
children at risk of future radicalization, which will only
make future action more difficult.

Still in north-east Syria, in Deir ez-Zor governorate,
humanitarian actors are increasingly concerned about
new access challenges. On 13 September, the Syrian
Democratic Forces reportedly closed all crossing points
to areas under the Government of Syria until further
notice, forcing civilians to resort to more dangerous
informal crossings and interfering in humanitarian
operations. Unimpeded humanitarian access remains
essential to ensuring that the estimated 1.2 million
people in need across north-east Syria have access to
essential services and assistance.

I would like to take a step back from those urgent
humanitarian situations, which we brief the Council
about on a routine basis, to highlight two cross-cutting
dynamics affecting civilians across Syria.

The first is food insecurity. Earlier this month, the
World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations reported greater
harvests in Syria compared to last year. Wheat
production, for instance, is estimated at 2.2 million
tonnes, up from 1.2 million in 2018. Even if the overall
production remains a fraction of pre-crisis levels, an
improved agricultural outlook is hopeful news. At
the same time, families in Syria face even greater
challenges in making ends meet. Food prices have
gradually increased nationwide over the past 12 to
14 months, just as the value of their currency has gone
down. Importantly, we know that the most vulnerable
families are the least able to cope with such pressures.

Such conditions only heighten the importance of
ongoing efforts to support the more than 6.5 million
people estimated to need food and livelihood support.
On a monthly basis, humanitarian organizations
deliver food assistance to 4.4 million people in need.
It is important to stress that this assistance is provided
based on assessed needs; almost 75 per cent of that food
assistance reaches districts identified with the most
severe needs.

The second dynamic that I would like to highlight
is the threat posed by unexploded ordnance. Civilians
in Syria face a chronic danger, even in areas where
fighting has subsided. More than 10 million people
in Syria are estimated to live in contaminated areas.
Indeed, incidents have been recorded across Syria
since the end of August. On 8 September, in Deir ez-
Zor, an unexploded ordnance reportedly killed a man
while he was checking on his house in the district of
Abu Kamal. Days earlier, in northern rural Aleppo,
two separate landmine explosions reportedly caused
multiple casualties. On 1 September, a landmine
reportedly injured 11 people, including five women and
three children, in western rural Dara'a governorate.

The indiscriminate nature of unexploded ordnance
makes it a shared challenge. I support standing calls
on all parties to the conflict to allow the clearance of
unexploded ordnance, to safely conduct risk-education
efforts and to ensure respect and safety for the
humanitarian staff conducting clearance activities.

I want to return to north-west Syria to conclude
my briefing. In recent weeks, the fragile ceasefire has
brought into focus an outlook that, for the Security
Council, should be all too familiar. Further fighting
will endanger and displace thousands of civilians.
Further displacement will create even more needs.
Further needs will stretch humanitarians who are
already at their limit. The world is watching in the hope
that a more humane outlook for Syria will be created,
one where civilians are safe, needs are addressed and
humanitarians are protected.

