Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and, more important, for his dedication and
able stewardship of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) under very challenging
circumstances. I also thank Ambassador Leo Merores
for his remarks today.

The Secretary-General's report before us
(S/2010/446) justifies renewed hope about the future of
Haiti. Despite immense human and material losses,
stability was maintained, the country is making
important strides in its recovery and key political
processes were resumed. The Haitian people are to be
commended for such accomplishments. Consolidating
these achievements and facing the challenges ahead
require strong leadership from the Government and
sustained international support in three priority areas:
security, recovery and reconstruction and elections.

The fact that the security situation has remained
stable is encouraging. We were also glad to learn that
the deployment of the additional troops authorized by
the Council is near completion. The surge in police
personnel allowed for the expansion of United Nations
police tasks, which is critical at this stage. In our view,
the level of authorized contingents must be maintained.

It is reassuring that several measures have been
taken, and others are being planned, to ensure the
security of Haitians living in camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs), in particular women and
children. That is of the utmost importance. We
encourage MINUSTAH to continue to focus on the
safety of IDPs, with special attention to protection
from sexual and gender-based violence. That task will
be made easier through enhanced community violence
reduction programmes and quick-impact projects.

Two other important areas merit the Mission's
attention: the increase in the circulation of weapons
and the transshipment of certain drugs. The latter is
especially worrisome in the light of its potential for
undermining institutions upon which Haiti's future
depends. In the long term, those problems can only be
solved through capacity-building and the strengthening
of Haitian institutions. We were therefore pleased that
900 new recruits began training at the Haitian National
Police Academy earlier this month. Efforts must be
redoubled to make up for the quantity and expertise of
personnel lost in the earthquake. We urge the
international community to further support the Haitian
National Police. I am glad to report that the Brazilian
Federal Police has been providing specialized training
to Haitian agents in several areas.

Eight months after the tragedy, it is reassuring
that the most urgent and basic humanitarian needs of
the Haitian population are being met. We are deeply
grateful to all those who worked selflessly and
generously for that to happen. Nevertheless, recovery
is far from finished, and reconstruction remains an
immense challenge. The most pressing need is ensuring
the best protection possible against hurricanes and
flooding. We note that several steps have been taken in
that regard, and we urge the Government and
MINUSTAH to stay focused on this matter.

For recovery to move forward and reconstruction
to gain speed, three measures seem to be of particular
importance: the removal of debris, the identification
and preparation of land for resettlement and the
immediate implementation of reconstruction projects.
Those aspects are interrelated and equally important,
but today I wish to briefly comment on the last one.
7

The setting up of the constitution of the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission and the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund were very important steps, and
we commend all those who made them possible. The
approval of the first batch of projects by the
Commission, surpassing $1 billion, testifies to the
Commission's relevance. What is urgent now is to fund
them, and do so in a way that breaks a pattern of
international assistance that has not so far contributed
to strengthening the Haitian State. In that regard, it is
worrisome that, as reported, less than 10 per cent of the
assistance pledged so far is expected to be channelled
through the Haiti Reconstruction Fund. Brazil has
given $55 million to the Fund, including $15 million in
direct budgetary support. It is important that pledged
resources be disbursed quickly and that they be
channelled in a way that supports Haitian priorities and
institution-building.

While the operational capacity of the Government
is being restored, MINUSTAH's provision of logistical
support and technical expertise to the Haitian
authorities as per resolution 1927 (2010) is of
particular importance. We were pleased to learn of the
steps taken in that regard and of measures now being
planned. In Brazil's view, it is absolutely essential that
all efforts be made to provide such assistance as
efficiently and expeditiously as possible.

The November elections will be very significant.
They will further consolidate the notion of the regular
constitutional transfer of power and allow for the full
restoration of legislative mechanisms and the
completion of urgent constitutional reforms, thereby
helping to create a more favourable environment for
economic growth and investment. For those gains to be
fully realized, the vote must be free, credible and
transparent and held in a calm and secure environment.
We hope and expect that all political parties in Haiti
will act in that spirit.

MINUSTAH, the Organization of American
States and bilateral partners are already working
closely with the Haitian authorities to support their
preparations for the poll. Brazil has donated $500,000.
More financial contributions and constant political
support are needed. We urge all donors to be as
generous and flexible as possible.

Eight months after the earthquake, much has been
achieved and much more remains to be done. The
international community has a unique chance to assist

the people and the Government of Haiti in building an
effective State and further strengthening their nation.
We should seize this opportunity with determination
and from the long-term perspective of our common
interests.

