Mr. Holliday (United States of America): We
would like to thank Ambassador Akram for all his
work on this issue.

We are sponsoring this resolution as a statement
of our strong support of the ongoing efforts of the
United Nations to ensure peace and stability in Liberia
and the region, and its recognition that premature
lifting of sanctions at this time would threaten the re-
emergence of armed conflict.

We share the desire of other Council member
States to see Liberia's timber sector restored quickly as
a source of legitimate revenue for the National
Transitional Government. However, to accomplish that
objective, we believe there must be security,
transparency and accountability in the timber sector. At
present, Liberia lacks the necessary institutional and
financial mechanisms to ensure that forest resources
are used for legitimate development.

Consistent with its desire to help Liberia quickly
re-establish the conditions under which forest
resources can be used for the benefit of the Liberian
people, the United States Government has allocated
$4 million and is working closely with the Government
and other donors to implement reforms in the timber
sector through the Liberia Forest Initiative.

It is critical that Liberia make a strong effort to
implement those needed reforms, and I am pleased
that, in the resolution adopted today, the Council has
underlined the need for the Government to act boldly
and quickly in instituting those reforms. Unfortunately,
Liberia's Forestry Development Authority has not yet
implemented the reforms that have been called for.
With the full cooperation from Liberian
authorities, we believe that substantial progress can be
achieved over the next six to eight months in many of
the most important aspects of the reform effort.

In coordination with other donors, we have
outlined a critical path timeline of necessary actions
and donor resources intended to fulfil these aims and
address the principal concerns of the Council. We urge
the National Transitional Government of Liberia to do
its utmost to cooperate in this endeavour.

In closing, the United States Government is
actively engaged in assisting the Liberian authorities to
restructure both Liberia's timber and diamond sectors
as a means to expedite, and not retard, the eventual
lifting of sanctions, once necessary and appropriate
control mechanisms have been established. It is
essential that these key resources and the revenue
derived from their export be used responsibly in the
future to improve the lives of the Liberian people and
not to perpetuate conflict, as in the past.

