Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset, Madam
President, I should like to thank you for having
organized this important debate.

Today terrorism has become one of the gravest
threats to international peace and security. Kyrgyzstan
condemns and rejects terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. As a global, transnational phenomenon,
it should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group, and can be
successfully countered only through the strengthening
of international cooperation. In this regard, Kyrgyzstan
reiterates its resolute support for all measures and
legal instruments adopted within the framework of the
United Nations to combat international terrorism and
violent extremism.

We should firmly continue our efforts to implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which has provided a solid foundation for
a comprehensive response to international terrorism
and violent extremism at all levels. In that context,
we welcome General Assembly resolution 68/276, on
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Review, adopted in June this year. To achieve our
goals, it is important to keep the Strategy relevant and
strengthen coordination in the light of emerging new
threats and evolving trends in international terrorism
and violent extremism.

The current situation in the world demonstrates that
acts of terrorism and violent extremism are increasing
and negatively influencing stability, security and
development. We witness atrocities committed by
terrorist groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front and Boko Haram and
their attempts to influence conflicts. The Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities estimates that more
than 13,000 foreign terrorist fighters from over 80
Member States have joined ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front
cannot but cause serious concern. The participation of
such fighters in terrorist groups on an unprecedented
scale is aggravating not only the conflicts themselves,
but the humanitarian, social, economic and human
rights situations as well. There is no doubt that after
returning to their home countries, those terrorist
fighters will continue to present a serious danger.

In that regard, resolution 2178 (2014), adopted at
the Security Council summit on 24 September (see S/PV.7272), on addressing the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters was timely and very important.
Kyrgyzstan fully shares the need to take both urgent and
preventive measures in the long term to deal with the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. Kyrgyzstan
is taking steps to implement resolution 2178 (2014) in
accordance with Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. We consider it crucial to mainstream measures
relating to the implementation of the resolution's
paragraph 14, which calls for building the capacity of
States to address the threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters.

The modern world is going through a difficult
period characterized by increasing instability both
at the regional and international levels. Our region
is no exception in that regard. In his address to the
Permanent Council of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe on 6 November, Secretary
General Ban Ki-moon emphasized that the impact of
the transition in Afghanistan on Central Asia is also a
leading concern. We fully agree with that assessment of
the situation in the region. Today, strengthening regional
security is a priority in Central Asia, where terrorist and
narcotic threats emanating from Afghanistan are major
destabilizing factors, especially with the withdrawal of
the International Security Assistance Force.

The situation is worsening with the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. It will require more
effective regional cooperation and the development of
more coordinated and practical measures within the
framework of anti-terrorist structures of such regional
organizations as the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and the Commonwealth of Independent States.
We believe that strengthening regional cooperation
will make a practical contribution to global efforts to
counter terrorism and violent extremism.

Kyrgyzstan supports the activities of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia, upon which we call to draw special
attention to these issues. It should also explore the
possibility of assisting the countries in the region in the
implementation of resolution 2178 (2014) on effectively
addressing the threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters. At the same time, we clearly understand that
in order to eradicate the phenomenon of terrorism,
including foreign terrorist fighters, we must address its
underlying causes. It is well known that the emergence
of terrorism and extremism is fuelled by poverty, social
injustice and the absence of the rule of law as well
as low literacy and unemployment, especially among
young people. Therefore, there is a need to take those
aspects into account in our strategies and programmes.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our strong
commitment to carrying on the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism on the national, regional and
global levels. We firmly believe that it is the obligation
and responsibility of all States Members of the United
Nations and the international community to remain
mobilized to prevent the further spread of and eradicate
this global menace.

