Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to start by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Mariano Fernandez, for his briefing and commending
him for his excellent work at the head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement read out
by the Head of the Delegation of the European Union. I
will make some additional comments in my national
capacity.

Spain continues to follow with concern the new
political crisis affecting Haiti after the resignation of
Prime Minister Garry Conille. It is a potential source of
instability and a serious obstacle to the reconstruction
of the country and the use of economic opportunities
for its development. We trust that the crisis will be
resolved as soon as possible with the appointment of a
new Prime Minister who can carry out the intuitional,
economic and social reforms needed in Haiti in order
to effectively accomplish the task of reconstruction.
Cooperation from all political actors, particularly an
understanding among the legislative and executive
branches, is vital at this critical time.

Two additional measures that will certainly assist
in restoring political stability are, on the one hand, the
promulgation of the constitutional reforms and, on the
other, the holding of partial legislative and municipal
elections through the establishment of a credible
electoral council.

Means must be found to effectively channel
international aid to Haiti, in particular after the
expiration of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission
this past October. We must effectively undertake the
vast responsibility of channelling such aid and ensuring
that it leads to better conditions for the people of Haiti,
and of establishing a foundation for sustainable and
durable economic development. It must not be
forgotten that while three-quarters of the people live on
less than $2 a day, approximately half of the people
live on less than $1 a day.

I have two thoughts on the issue of security. First,
Spain expresses its great concern and condemns the
emergence of armed groups that have increased the
atmosphere of instability and insecurity. The high
potential number of incidents involving those groups or
irregular militias remains of concern. We trust that
there will be an appropriate response from the Haitian
authorities, in particular from the Minister of the
Interior. Secondly, Spain believes that prioritizing the
security sector will promote the strengthening of the
Haitian National Police (HNP). My country considers
it a priority that the HNP be able to assume full
responsibility for security as soon as possible. In that
respect, we share the concern of the Secretary-General
and the Security Council, as expressed in its report on
the mission in Haiti, over the slowdown in recruitment
efforts. The current pace is insufficient for meeting the
target in 5 years and increasing the current 10,000
police to 16,000 by 2016, in compliance with the HNP
Development Plan 2012-2016.

Finally, with respect to MINUSTAH, I will limit
myself to two comments. First, my country believes
that the partial reduction of the post-earthquake surge
carried out under resolution 2012 (2011) adopted in
October 2011, must be continued until its completion
in June. Secondly, we also trust that the response to the
cases of misconduct of which Mission staff have been
accused will be dealt with correctly in accordance with
the zero tolerance policy of the United Nations.
Internal investigations have started and disciplinary
measures have been promptly taken.

My country remains firm in its commitment to
providing assistance. Spain is the third-ranking
bilateral donor to Haiti. When President Martelly
visited my country last July, we set up a fund of
€50 million for small and medium-sized enterprises. I
am pleased to inform the Council today that the fund is
already available.

