The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for European and International
Affairs of Austria.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General and all other speakers for their presentations.
The numerous challenges in the protection of civilians
highlighted today show the urgent need to intensify our
efforts. The protection of civilians is central to the
mandate of the United Nations and the mandates of its
peacekeeping missions. It is of the utmost importance
that Security Council mandates for the protection of
civilians are effectively implemented by missions on
the ground. This requires that the Council address the
protection of civilians in its daily work in a systematic
manner.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union. Let me just add a few additional
points.

All parties to armed conflict must strictly comply
with their obligations to protect civilians under
international law. This applies to all parties in any
conflict in the world, be it in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Darfur, Afghanistan or Gaza. Austria has
reaffirmed on several occasions its position that serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law need to be thoroughly investigated.
Accountability for serious crimes must be ensured by
taking concrete measures to promote the rule of law,
prevent future violations and seek sustainable peace,
justice, truth and reconciliation. This requires action at
the national and - where necessary - international
levels. The Security Council has an important role in
ending impunity.

Austria is also greatly concerned about the
detrimental effects of small arms and light weapons on
civilians. They prolong conflicts, they endanger
civilians and they undermine security, peace and
stability. Parties to armed conflict need to take all
required measures to protect civilian populations from
the effects of landmines and cluster munitions. Victims
require enhanced protection and assistance.

Persons with disabilities are particularly affected
by armed conflict and have so far not received
adequate attention. The United Nations system has to
address more effectively the protection and assistance
needs of this vulnerable group.

It is clear that the primary responsibility to
protect civilians rests with national Governments. This
is reaffirmed by the concept of the responsibility to
protect civilian populations from war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. The Security Council,
as the United Nations organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, has an important role to play. The
focus must be on saving lives through timely and
decisive action taken at the national, regional and
international levels.

We look forward to continuing this important
debate on the protection of civilians, and I would like
to underscore Austria's full commitment to working
with other Council members and all relevant
stakeholders to implement resolution 1894 (2009),
adopted today, in order to ensure the protection of
those who are most vulnerable in situations of armed
conflict.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I now invite the representative of Sweden to take
the floor.

