Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Gambari for his briefing on the situation in the Middle
East.

In political, economic and humanitarian terms,
the situation is a source of serious concern. Now more
than ever before joint efforts by the international
community are needed to prevent an escalation and to
establish appropriate conditions for progress in the
political settlement process in the region.

Over several weeks, the Security Council worked
hard to find a way out of the Lebanese-Israeli crisis.
The outcome of that intense activity was the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), which
if properly implemented would, beyond the Lebanese
dimension, have great significance in reducing tension
in the entire Middle East region.
We are generally satisfied with how the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) is
proceeding. The Lebanese army is gradually taking
control of territory in the south of the country, while
the Israeli army is withdrawing from areas it had
occupied. The main task now is not to allow any
disruption of this process, to ensure that the cessation
of hostilities is maintained and becomes a lasting
ceasefire, and to prevent attempts to undermine
agreements that were so difficult to achieve.

While working to enhance positive developments
in the Lebanese-Israeli settlement, we must not lose
sight of what is taking place in Palestinian-Israeli
relations. The situation in the Palestinian territories
continues to be extremely unstable. Israel has not
ended its use of force in Palestinian Authority areas,
and this has led to an increasing number of victims
among the civilian population. What is also
destabilizing the situation is the practice of arresting
heads of Palestinian self-governing bodies and
members of the legislative body, which is leading to
paralysis in the work of the autonomous governing
structures.

Such developments once again confirm that it is
impossible to fully resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict if a
solution cannot be found to its root cause - the
Palestinian problem. In the absence of such, the
Security Council will continue to deal with chronic
Middle East conflicts and to react to new challenges
that constantly arise in the region. Therefore it is
necessary to resume as soon as possible the
Palestinian-Israeli political dialogue, which should aim
at finding a constructive solution to all existing
problems in relations between the parties.

Russia, through its contacts with the parties to the
Arab-Israeli conflict, members of the Quartet of
international mediators, countries of the region and the
League of Arab States, continues actively to support
effective, collective efforts by the international
community to achieve lasting progress on a Middle
East settlement in all its dimensions and on the basis of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, the principle of land for peace, the
provisions of the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002.

