Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to extend to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Security Council our thanks and
appreciation for your prompt response to the request
made by the non-aligned countries for the convening of
this meeting in order to consider the question of the
return of international inspectors to Iraq.

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
an extremely important issue - the case of Iraq and
the resumption by the international inspectors of their
mandated task to destroy all weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq and to monitor and verify that Iraq
is free from such weapons. This debate is of special
importance given the threat of military action against
Iraq, which would undoubtedly have dire consequences
not only for that country, but also for the Middle East
and international peace and security, particularly in the
light of the grave events taking place in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

In welcoming the wise decision of the Iraqi
Government on 16 September to allow the international
inspectors to return to Iraq, my delegation believes that
it came as the result of concerted regional and
international efforts to spare Iraq and the entire region
from the destruction of war. Undoubtedly, the
successful negotiations between Iraq, on the one hand,
and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on the
other, held in Vienna on 1 October 2002, demonstrated
the willingness of the Iraqi Government to remove all
obstacles and to allow the international inspectors to
resume their work in that country.

In the light of all this, and in appreciation of the
moral and political responsibility ofthe members ofthe
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter, we
sincerely hope that the Council will shoulder that
responsibility by approving the immediate return of
UNMOVIC in order to assess the situation on the
ground in Iraq and to submit a report to the Security
Council on Iraq's cooperation with the international
inspectors in the removal of all weapons of mass
destruction, if such are found. We believe that any
prolongation of the issue would only hinder the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the compliance by Iraq with its
obligations under those resolutions, which, we believe,
are quite sufficient at the present time. There is no need
to adopt new resolutions that would include an
automatic approval of military strikes, a matter that
would take us back to the root causes of the events of
1998, when military action took precedence over
diplomatic endeavours. That would contradict the
purposes of this international Organization.

We welcome once again the positive decision
taken by the Iraqi Government to demonstrate its total
and unconditional willingness to cooperate with the
international inspectors and the IAEA.

Nonetheless, we call on the brotherly
Government of Iraq to enable this positive approach to
succeed by resuming its cooperation with the Tripartite
Commission and by working with the same positive
spirit to finally close the humanitarian case relating to
Kuwaiti prisoners of war and missing persons, and
nationals of third countries, and to return all Kuwaiti
property in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We would also call on the Security
Council to take the necessary measures to put an end to
the suffering of the Iraqi people and to protect its
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity and to work towards closing the Iraq issue in
the Council, once Iraq has complied with all its
obligations towards the international community.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate the necessity to expeditiously dispatch the
international inspectors to undertake their tasks, hoping
that Iraq will respect its promises with regard to
unconditional cooperation and the removal of all
obstacles to the work of UNMOVIC and the IAEA. We
would also call upon the Council to explore every
peaceful means and diplomatic manoeuvres for the
implementation of all relevant resolutions in the
interest of international peace and security.

