The President: I shall now speak in my capacity as
the representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
More than 6,000 people live in Katanika camp,
in eastern Congo. My Foreign Trade Minister Sigrid
Kaag visited the camp with Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock last week. There she met a woman whom I
will call Francoise. Francoise had lost her husband and
child in a militia raid. Ms. Kaag was deeply touched
by her ordeal. It is women like Francoise who continue
to bear the brunt of this crisis. It is for women like
Francoise that we come together here. Today, I will
highlight three points. The first is the need to step up
our immediate response; the second, to address the root
causes of the crisis; and third, to intensify engagement
with the region.

My first point concerns the importance of an
immediate response. More than 13 million Congolese
are in need. That number has doubled over the past two
years. More than 2 million children are severely and
acutely malnourished. They cannot be forgotten. They
need our help. We are also concerned about increasing
attacks on humanitarian workers. The security situation
directly affects humanitarian access. The Congolese
authorities and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) must protect humanitarian
actors against kidnappings and attacks on their assets.
This month, we have the chance to give MONUSCO
the mandate and the means it needs to be able to
prevent escalation. The Security Council must increase
its efforts, and we should discuss this situation more
frequently. The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore
strongly supports organizing a Security Council visit
this year. We must act now to prevent further escalation.
The situation in Ituri in particular has our full attention.

My second point is that we must address the root
causes of this man-made crisis. The escalation that has
occurred since 2016 is directly linked to the political
crisis. The people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must regain hope and trust in their country. A
renewed commitment to the New Year's agreement by
all parties is therefore urgently needed. Despite some
progress, the conditions conducive to credible elections
are not there yet. In the current circumstances,
hundreds ofthousands ofpeople will not be able to fully
participate in the elections simply because they are too
scared, because they are on the run from widespread
and unpunished human rights violations, or because
they are women - women like Francoise. Without
women's meaningful participation in the elections,
nationally, provincially and locally, there will be no
peace. We call on the Congolese authorities to ensure
women's participation in the electoral law. All political
actors must increase their efforts to engage women in
the elections.

Thirdly, I want to discuss the role of the region.
The crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
long ceased to be merely a Congolese issue, if it ever
was. It is the largest displacement crisis in Africa, and
it has direct consequences for the region. The peaceful
involvement of regional stakeholders is essential to a
sustainable solution. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
commends the efforts of the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community and
individual Member States to find a peaceful solution.
We call on them to increase their efforts, as we call
on the Council to increase its efforts. We welcome
the presence today of so many representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's neighbours and
other countries in the region.

In conclusion, as our briefers have highlighted,
only the concerted efforts of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and their
neighbours and regional and international partners can
make a definitive difference for good. The relevant
humanitarian partners require $1.7 billion this year
alone, as Mr. Lowcock explained earlier. On 13 April,
therefore, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, together
with the United Nations, the European Commission
and the United Arab Emirates, will organize the first
ever humanitarian donor conference for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It will take place in Geneva.
Only a concerted effort will enable the mobilization
of sufficient humanitarian relief. We hope that all
States Members of the United Nations will support that
humanitarian conference. We must work together, all
of us, for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and for people like Francoise.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I would like to once again remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

