Mr. Ward (Jamaica): The Jamaican delegation joins
in expressing condolences to the Government and the
people of Tunisia on the passing of former President
Bourguiba. He was indeed an icon of the developing
world.

At this, our first formal meeting for the month of
April, allow me on behalf of the Jamaican delegation to
say how pleased we are to see you, Sir, the Foreign
Minister of Canada, presiding over the deliberations of
the Security Council. My delegation would like to express
its appreciation to Ambassador Chowdhury and to the
delegation of Bangladesh for the efficient way in which
the work of the Council was conducted during the month
of March.

We welcome to the Council Ms. Angela King,
Assistant Secretary-General. We thank Mr. John
Renninger for briefing us on this very important issue,
and we also thank Ambassador Listre for his report on the
work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999).

The humanitarian situation and the plight of
vulnerable populations in areas of conflict require our
vigilant attention. In this instance, the situation has
become chronic, and my delegation wishes to place on
record its deep concern at the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan. Achieving a political settlement of the
conflict is the first step towards alleviating the
humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan. Jamaica therefore
reiterates the call for a negotiated political settlement to
this conflict. It is important that the parties continue
dialogue which could lead to the creation of a broad-
based coalition government representative of the various
ethnic and religious groups. It is critical for this process
that the Taliban take its seat at the negotiating table. We
believe that the future of Afghanistan lies in this
approach.

It is our firm view that the humanitarian efforts of
the United Nations must be supported, and that the
necessary resources must be allocated to deal with the
crisis that has emerged. We are also concerned about the
difficulties that humanitarian agencies face in gaining
access to the most vulnerable members of the population.
The deplorable activities of the Taliban have led to the
withdrawal of international staff from Kandahar, and we
call on the Taliban and on all other parties to ensure the
safety and security of United Nations personnel working
in Afghanistan. My delegation takes this opportunity to

 

commend the efforts of United Nations personnel, who
remain dedicated in the most challenging of circumstances.

We reiterate our position that there must be respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law, and we
feel that those who target civilians and individuals who are
most vulnerable must be brought to justice in order to deter
gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

The continued violation of human rights in
Afghanistan is of great concern to us, especially with regard
to the treatment of women and girls. The problems they
face are very well known, and include restricted access to
education, restricted access to employment outside the
home and inadequate access to proper health care. They
also suffer from depression and stress due to social
displacement, and from increased impoverishment as a
result of more than 20 years of conflict. These problems
affect the entire population, but have a greater impact on
the most powerless members of the society.

We have heard reports of some minor improvements
in the treatment of women and girls, and in that regard we
would appreciate it if the Assistant Secretary-General,
Ms. Angela King, could elaborate on the following: first,
the likelihood of further progress being made in the
conditions of women and girls; secondly, the steps being
taken to safeguard the human rights of Afghan women,
including those guilty of human rights violations to justice;
thirdly, the existence of programmes designed to promote
awareness of human rights among Afghan women; and
fourthly, the status of the implementation of
recommendations made by United Nations organizations
geared towards improving the situation of women and girls
in Afghanistan.

We are extremely concerned about the Afghan drug
trade and the debilitating effects it has on the population,
and about the resulting deterioration of the social fabric that
is likely to result. With the range of problems that women
and girls face on a daily basis, and with the lack of access
to information on the harmful effects of drug use, they are
at high risk of dependency and addiction. The use of opium
as a medicine to relieve common ailments and other health
problems, and to fight depression, is a worrying trend. Nor
can we ignore the effect that this problem has on
neighbouring countries and on the region as a whole. The
situation calls for immediate regional and international
action.

We agree that the "six plus two" group could make
a useful contribution to drug-related problems and that the
United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention should play a key role in facilitating its
activities in this respect. Their exchange of views on how
best to address the drug-related issues in a coordinated
manner, with a view to eliminating drug production and
trafficking out of Afghanistan through a comprehensive
and balanced regional action plan, is one which we
support.

In this regard, Jamaica fully supports the draft
presidential statement before us today.

