Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing
today.

The United States remains deeply committed to a
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
agreed to by the parties. As President Obama said after
his recent meeting with Israeli President Peres,

"With the winds of change blowing through the
Arab world, it is more urgent than ever that we
try to seize the opportunity to create a peaceful
solution between the Palestinians and the
Israelis".

We continue to consult with the Israelis and the
Palestinians, as well as to work with the Quartet and
our partners in the region, towards our shared goal of a
two-State solution. Negotiations between the parties
remain the only path to a solution that resolves all
issues and establishes a sovereign State of Palestine
alongside a secure State of Israel as a key part of a
comprehensive peace among Israel and all of its
neighbours.

In that regard, let me say a word about
settlements. Like every United States Administration
for decades, we do not accept the legitimacy of
continued Israeli settlement activity. We have long
urged both parties to avoid actions, including in
Jerusalem, that could undermine trust or prejudge
negotiations. The fate of existing settlements must be
dealt with by the parties along with the other
permanent status issues.

We will continue to work with the Palestinian
people as they lay the foundations for a future
Palestinian State. At the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians held in Brussels on 13 April,
the United States welcomed the progress the
Palestinian Authority has made on the crucial task of
building public institutions and capacities and
improving conditions for economic growth. We also
underscore the importance of moving forward on the
other track - political negotiations that will result in a
future Palestinian State. Palestinians deserve the
dignity and justice of a State of their own and the
freedom to chart their own destiny, and Israelis deserve
to live in security, at peace with their neighbours and
confident in their future.

We condemn in the strongest possible terms
recent attacks on innocent civilians. We are deeply
concerned by the escalation of rocket and mortar fire
from Gaza into southern Israel. We are particularly
disturbed by reports indicating the increased use of
advanced weaponry, including rockets, in attacks
against Israeli civilians. After enduring dozens of
rocket attacks on civilian targets in southern Israel,
including the deeply disturbing use of an advanced
anti-tank missile in a fatal attack on a yellow school
bus, Israel responded by exercising its inalienable right
to self-defence.

We must work together to stop Hamas and other
violent extremists from launching terrorist attacks and
bringing increased misery to the people of Gaza. Let
there be no doubt: there is no justification for targeting
innocent civilians, and those responsible for these
terrorist acts must be held accountable. We also call
again on Hamas to immediately release Israeli soldier
Gilad Shalit, abducted and held by Hamas since 2006.

The United States remains concerned about
conditions in Gaza. We note that the humanitarian
situation has improved over the past year, including
increases in the range and scope of goods and materials
moving in, an increase in international reconstruction
activity and a gradual expansion of exports. We will
continue to work with Israel, the Palestinian Authority
and others to do more to ensure that the needs of the
people of Gaza are being met. That includes increasing
the flow of commercial goods and construction
supplies while taking appropriate measures to ensure
that they do not fall into the wrong hands.

We strongly condemn Iran's recent attempts to
export advanced weapons and munitions in violation of
several resolutions, including resolution 1947 (2010).
The interception of Iranian weapons in Turkey, along the
Egyptian-Sudanese border and aboard the M. V Victoria,
which was carrying sophisticated anti-ship cruise
missiles and other munitions, all clearly demonstrate
that Iran is trying to flout the Council's will,
dramatically increasing the risks of conflict and
instability in the region. We urge all Member States to
make clear to Iran the consequences for regional
security of its reckless behaviour. All countries have
obligations under Security Council resolutions to
prevent illicit trafficking in arms and ammunition.

We are also deeply concerned about reports that
groups are organizing another flotilla that will attempt
to sail to Gaza, ostensibly to deliver humanitarian
assistance. The recent seizures of advanced weaponry
underscore that Israel has clear security interests
regarding cargo bound for Gaza. There are existing
mechanisms to deliver goods to Gaza and there is no
justification for attempts to sail directly to Gaza. We
therefore strongly urge all those who wish to deliver
goods and assistance to Gaza to do so through existing
mechanisms and avoid any provocative actions. That
will ensure that the Palestinians' humanitarian needs
are addressed and that Israel's legitimate security needs
are met. We also urge all Member States to reinforce
this message with their nationals and organizations,
and to use every legal means at their disposal to
discourage additional flotillas to Gaza.

As colleagues know, the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48) is back in the news. We have long said
that the issues that it raised should be resolved through
credible domestic investigations and follow-up. Israel
has the democratic institutions and the ability to carry
out serious investigations and is doing so. Justice
Goldstone recently concluded that Israel had
undertaken an appropriate review process and made
changes in its combat doctrine.

As we made clear when the Goldstone report was
first presented, we did not see evidence that the Israeli
Government had intentionally targeted civilians.
Justice Goldstone has now reached the same
conclusion. He also concluded that Hamas had "done
nothing" to investigate the allegations of its war crimes
and possible crimes against humanity. The United
States urges the United Nations to end once and for all
its actions in relation to the Goldstone report.
Let me now turn to Lebanon. We continue to urge
that Lebanon's constitutional process be followed as it
forms its next Government. We encourage all parties to
avoid threats or other actions that could cause
instability in Lebanon and the region. The Council and
the international community as a whole must remain
firm in their support for Lebanon's sovereignty and
independence, resolute in their commitment to all
Security Council resolutions related to Lebanon, and
vigilant to threats to international peace and security.

We likewise continue to support the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon, and we reiterate our call on all
parties to refrain from any interference or attempts to
influence its work. The United States is pleased that,
during the 14 April incident along the Blue Line, both
parties demonstrated restraint, and the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) immediately
dispatched patrols to defuse tensions and prevent
escalation. We continue to urge both parties to
cooperate with UNIFIL in swiftly marking the entire
Blue Line to help prevent such incidents. The parties
must respect the Blue Line in its entirety.

We are deeply concerned by continuing violence
and arrests in Syria, where the Government's brutal
crackdown on political protests has already resulted in
more than 200 deaths and hundreds of arbitrary arrests,
according to credible human rights organizations. We
are particularly disturbed by reports that medical
personnel have been targeted while attempting to help
people injured at the hands of their own Government,
and by reports that the injured fear seeking medical
attention at hospitals owing to the presence of Syrian
secret police. We urge the Syrian Government to allow
foreign media, diplomats and human rights
organizations to independently verify humanitarian
conditions throughout all of Syria. Finally, we urge the
Syrian Government to respect the human rights of its
people and to implement meaningful political reforms
that meet their legitimate aspirations.

Let me close by restating my Government's
deeply held commitment to promoting and protecting
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
people in the region and around the world, including
the freedoms of expression and association. We
demand accountability wherever those freedoms are
violated. We urge all Governments to create an
environment in which journalists can carry out their
work free from fear and intimidation. We call on all
Governments to protect civilians, not to attack them,
and to respect their citizens' rights to peaceful
assembly and free expression.

