Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (interpretation from French): I should like at the outset to state that I am
speaking on behalf of the countries members of the
Organization of African Unity.

It is much to the credit of the Security Council that it
has taken the initiative to hold this debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. This step demonstrates the
importance that the United Nations attaches to, and its clear
awareness of, its mission, which unquestionably is to
guarantee international peace and security, and also, in
particular, to provide safe conduct and act as a shield for
civilian populations that fall victim to war and violence. It
also attests to the importance of the subject before us today,
a subject that has been under discussion in recent days.

Conflicts today are distinguished by the fact that they
no longer take place, as they did in centuries past, on
battlefields, where only the belligerents faced off. Because
of their sophisticated, ultra-rapid and devastating nature,
and also because of their sometimes anarchic or fragmented
character, present-day conflicts are no longer confined to
territory that is more or less delimited. War creeps into
cities, into homes and even into families. Unfortunately, it
therefore involves civilian populations, regardless of age
and sex. If the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees is to be believed, 90 per cent
of the victims of such conflicts are civilians.

It is very distressing to say so, but in this gloomy
picture it is Africa that is paying the highest price, in the
first place because of the number of wars that are taking
place there. From north to south and east to west, passing
through Central Africa, the clash of arms and the sound
of bombs effectively beat out the rhythm of daily life in
that ailing continent. Furthermore, because of economic
problems, the populations that have become victims -
displaced persons, refugees, those who have been
repatriated, etc. - experience the difficulties of
reintegration, not to mention the torment of hunger, thirst,
separation and unspeakable suffering.

It also must not be forgotten that it is in Africa that
the large-scale and alarmng development of the
phenomenon of child soldiers is taking place.
Furthermore, their recruitment is directly proportional to
the proliferation of light weapons.

In this regard, the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) - which, let us recall, has had a Convention on
refugees since 1969 - has taken to heart the problem of
the protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts
by putting forward a series of initiatives. Thus, with the
assistance of Member States, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
governmental and non-governmental organizations, it has
sent missions to several African countries to investigate
the overall situation of refugees and repatriated and
displaced persons. The resulting report is alarming: there
are approximately 6 million refugees and 20 million
displaced persons, the majority of whom are women and
children.

At the same time, the OAU secretariat has organized
regional meetings on this issue in order to make policies
more sensitive to this matter and to raise awareness
among African populations and the international
community. It should also be noted that since 1992 a
cooperation agreement has linked the ICRC and the OAU.
Finally, it must be stated that in December 1998, the
OAU Commission on Refugees met in Khartoum, in the
Sudan, and recommended a number of appropriate
measures and solutions.

However, we are not dismissing the issue. The
problem of the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
remains complex. It brings into play humanitarian

 

concerns and political considerations, and sometimes it even
brings sovereignties and vulnerabilities into conflict.

The protection of victims in most cases implies the
duty of intervention, which many Governments often
associate with interference in their internal affairs.
Examples abound of cases in which humanitarian
organizations have been turned back on grounds of their
partiality or have even been victims of violence. In some
cases they have even suffered losses of life. Hence, there is
this other problem: how to protect humanitarian personnel
in their mission of assistance. Or, in other words, what
should be done to avoid the growing recurrence of
violations of international humanitarian law?

The following possible solutions, inter alia, have been
formulated by the OAU: taking into account humanitarian
aspects in drawing up policies for the settlement of
conflicts through a clear definition of appropriate measures
to ensure the security of humanitarian personnel and to
allow them to carry out their mandate; the need to teach,
publicize and implement international humanitarian law; the
ratification of or accession by all States to the Geneva
Convention of 12 August 1949 relating to the Protection of
victims of international armed conflicts, their Additional
Protocols of 8 June 1977 and the Geneva Convention of
1951 on refugees.

More generally, better protection of civilian
populations in armed conflicts hinges on a solution to the
situation of child soldiers. During the last decade, according
to Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, more than
2 million children have been killed and more than 6 million
have been wounded or maimed. Such a holocaust calls for
appropriate measures to be taken at the international level.
We therefore support and strongly encourage the efforts of
the United Nations Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, as well as the actions of a good number of
non-governmental organizations aimed at raising the
recruitment age to 18. Even then, the matter would not be
fully resolved, since it involves rebel groups, which, by
definition, are not subject to international law and are not
bound by any convention.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts also
requires that States rapidly accede to the Convention on the
total prohibition of anti-personnel mines, given the
devastation caused by this treacherous and insidious
weapon. Let us also emphasize the urgent need to ensure
security for actions by humanitarian non-governmental
organizations and other bodies. These must always follow
a code of conduct, as humanitarian assistance must
remain neutral and impartial.

In conclusion, I would like simply to emphasize that
Africa is very aware of the actions carried out on the
continent by humanitarian assistance organizations,
including UNHCR, the ICRC and other non-governmental
organizations. Africa pays tribute to them for their
dedication to the service of victims of conflicts.

