Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Foreign Minister Trujillo Garcia to the
Security Council.

Since the signing in 2016 of the historic Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, Colombia has taken several
important steps and has become an inspiration for
peace, not just in the region but around the world.
The United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
has been vital to that success, and we welcome the
Colombian Government's continued support for the
United Nations. Colombia's implementation of the
accord is now at a critical juncture, and much of the
most difficult work lies ahead.

Effective Government agencies that provide
security and Government services in remote areas
are critical to sustained peace. We support the
Government's efforts to expand its presence in the
conflict-affected areas to keep illegal armed groups
and criminal organizations from taking the place of the
Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and creating new sources of
violence. We also urge the Government to strengthen
institutions and programmes to prevent the recruitment
of children into armed groups.

We too remain deeply concerned about the
continuing attacks on social leaders and human
rights defenders, and we encourage the Government
to redouble its efforts to protect these vulnerable
members of society and to continue to protect, support
and empower recently displaced Colombians. Ensuring
meaningful justice for victims and accountability for
the crimes committed during so many years of armed
conflict is also vital to reconciliation. We welcome
efforts to strengthen accountability for war crimes and
human rights violations and abuses. Colombia must
ensure that those responsible are held accountable,
including, when appropriate, by the prosecution and
imposition of sentences proportionate to the crimes
committed. All who committed crimes f whether the
FARC-EP, paramilitaries or State agents, including the
Colombian military - should be held accountable. The
United States considers the accord's transitional justice
system, including the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
to be critical to meaningfully addressing war crimes
and human rights abuses in Colombia. We welcome
the Colombian Government's efforts to ensure that the
law implementing the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
complies with the 2016 peace accord and Colombia's
Constitution, democratic institutions and obligations
under international law. We reaffirm the importance of
ensuring that Colombia passes a statutory law on the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace as soon as possible in
order to ensure that it has a solid legal framework in
which to operate effectively and independently.

The partnership between Colombia and the United
States has never been stronger. The United States
continues to work with the Colombian Government
to dismantle criminal organizations and curtail
narco-trafficking, including by halving coca cultivation
and cocaine production in Colombia by the end of
2023. Colombia has also demonstrated its strength as
a regional leader by supporting the legitimate interim
Government in Venezuela led by Juan Guaido in
hosting more than 1.5 million of the Venezuelans who
have fled the man-made crisis in their country. More
than 700,000 of those Venezuelans have been granted
temporary residency permits, facilitating their access
to social services and granting them the right to work.
We are grateful for those efforts.

The people of Colombia know better than most that
peace is precious but fragile. The United States stands

firmly with the people of Colombia as they build a
strong and prosperous future.

