Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak as the representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union (AU) on a very
vital issue for Africa whose historic significance and
value cannot be overstated. We have indeed been
fortunate that the initiative of African Heads of State
and Government - no matter how disappointing,
as we have seen, the result may have been - has
coincided with your presidency and, prior to that, with
the presidency of Azerbaijan, to which we are equally
indebted. We salute both presidencies, on behalf of our
continent, on whose behalf our leaders speak.

I would like to thank our colleagues on the Security
Council for having strengthened our confidence in the
unity of our great continent and for having demonstrated
the indomitable spirit of the people of Africa in ensuring
that their voice is heard and that their ownership of
their policies and strategies, including for achieving
peace and security, is respected. We have absolutely
no doubt in our mind that the reason why the three
African members of the Security Council stood firm
and remained united under difficult circumstances was
their conviction that what they had was a just cause
and what African leaders were requesting was far from
difficult for the Security Council to meet. The Council
was simply being asked to discharge its responsibility
under the Charter. It failed to rise to the occasion. It

failed to demonstrate that it takes seriously ownership
by Africa of its present challenges and its future.

Let me reiterate, this is not now a Kenyan matter. It
is an African issue.

I would also like to express profound appreciation
to those members of the Security Council that felt that
African Heads of State and Government know what is
best for Africa better than most, and decided to support
us on the request for deferral. At the minimum, those
members of the Council must have concluded that
African Heads of State and Government, some ofwhom
are the original founders of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), deserve the benefit of the doubt. That is
what has been denied them by the rest of the Council
members, in some of which we had great confidence
indeed that they would contribute to raising the level of
trust between Africa and the Council. The argument that
there are other alternatives cannot be taken as a serious
argument. What Africa has asked is for the Council to
exercise its authority and carry out its responsibilities.
The African case for deferral was made by our
Ministers in the Contact Group when they had the
opportunity a while ago to engage the Security Council
in an interactive dialogue. The African case was
presented by them in a sincere manner and with passion.
That is what one does when one is earnestly committed
to a cause. They tried to convince the Council that this
was not a Kenyan matter but an African one, which has
given rise to a great deal of concern with respect to the
peace, stability and security of Kenya and the region.
Our Ministers emphasized that, given the delicate
situation in the region in connection with the continuing
terrorist threat, the distraction of the attention of the
two Kenyan leaders from their leadership obligation
would represent a grave threat to regional peace and
security.

The position of African leaders is that the
continuation ofthe ICC process itselfconstitutes a threat
to the peace and security of the region in Kenya. The
logic is compelling, as the representative of Pakistan
said earlier so eloquently. It cannot be questioned that
African leaders are closer to Kenyan leaders than most
others. No doubt, what Africa was asking was within
the law. Article 16 of the Rome Statute gives authority
to the Security Council to secure deferral of cases under
the ICC remit for a period of 12 months by exercising its

power under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. There is no doubt for us in Africa, who live
next door to Kenya, that the situation in Kenya and the
region merits a favourable response from the Council.

At the risk of boring members, because this was
also said by my Minister when he addressed the Council
in the interactive dialogue, the Security Council,
in its press statement issued on 21 September, while
condemning the Westgate terrorist attack in Nairobi,
said:

"The members of the Security Council reaffirm
that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security." (SC/11129)

During times such as these, the Commander-in-Chief
of the Kenya Defence Forces ought to be given support,
rather than distracted by a body whose track record
on African matters has not exactly been the kind that
inspires confidence. The African request could not be
rejected on legitimate grounds. Let us not kid ourselves;
abstention under the circumstances amounts precisely
to that - rejection.

I want to go back and talk a little bit about what I
said earlier with respect to the failure of the Council to
give even the benefit of the doubt to African leaders.
Obviously, what we see here is essentially the question
of trust being the elephant in the kitchen. The lack of
trust in the ability of Africa to strike the proper balance
between security and justice must be suspected to be
the major source of the problem. How else would the
Security Council tell African leaders that their concern
about the peace and security of Kenya and the region
has no legitimate basis? The empirical reality supports
African leaders, and recent developments have in fact
accentuated the concern.

Have African countries been found wanting when
it comes to the question of justice and combating
impunity? If truth be told, although we are not perfect,
our recent performance in that regard makes us second
to none. The fact that we put our money where our
mouth is has been confirmed time and time again.
The AU is not a State-centric organization that allows
sovereignty to be used as a shield for impunity. One of
the solemn obligations of member States is to allow

"the right of the Union to intervene in a member
State pursuant to the decision of the Assembly
in respect to grave circumstances, namely, war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity".

"Africa tolerates impunity" is the mantra of those
who still want to engage Africa as teachers, not as
equals - a throwback to an earlier period that we all
want to forget, but must draw lessons from.

The AU may not be, for obvious reasons, strong
enough to address all the challenges Africa is facing
in ensuring peace and security in the entire continent.
That is why we remain grateful to all those who have
been helping us to make progress in that area. We are
not unmindful of those contributions, including, most
significantly, the contributions of those in the Council
who felt that on the critical question of deferral they
should not be with us. They are wrong, and they have
offended Africa, an Africa that has not only expressed
its commitment to fighting impunity and to fidelity
to constitutionalism, but has demonstrated those
commitments in practice. In other words, for African
leaders not to be trusted - and that is what the decision
of the Security Council amounts to - is a paradox
that perhaps highlights the challenge we still face in
creating effective international cooperation to secure a
peaceful world.

We do not want to be misunderstood here. We do
not claim that there has been no cooperation between
us and that Africa has not benefited from it. It has,
and it is indebted for that. But support, no matter how
important, should not lead to loss of ownership. There
is no doubt that Africa has also shown how much it
is prepared to handle its problems. But it is through
effective partnership that we can thrive. The progress
achieved in Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan, Mali
and others would not have been happened without that
partnership.

Over the past few weeks, as a continent, we tried
to ask, in a spirit of partnership, that we be understood,
and that the united calls of all African nations be
heeded on a matter of great importance to Africa's
peace and security. The response we just received is
bound to make Africa draw the logical conclusion as to
how quite a few in the Security Council have difficulty
in seeing Africa exercise ownership of its policies and
strategies for peace and security of the continent. That
does not make anyone hopeful about the future.

It is for African leaders, in their wisdom, to draw
the proper conclusions from this episode, which cannot
be seen as a proud chapter in relations between Africa
and the Security Council - not that we have had
too many proud chapters, anyway. That Rwanda, as
a member of the Council, together with its two other
African brotherly countries, Morocco and Togo, has
spearheaded that effort is indeed another paradox.

But we do not lose hope easily. We will persevere
and our unity is our strength - the strength we want
to use to advance the principles of democracy in
international governance, including in the area of
security.

