Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Mr. President, we
welcome amongst us the presence of Mr. Svilanovic,
Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. We believe his presence in the Council
contributes to the involvement of the new Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia Government in support of the
Council's efforts to achieve an early resolution of
outstanding problems in Kosovo.

I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Minister Svilanovic for his initiative in
setting up a truth commission on the war crimes
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
We also appreciate the briefing and update given by
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi.

A number of important issues have been
discussed in the report of the Secretary-General in
document S/2000/ll96. In today's meeting, I will focus
on the following four points. First, the security
situation. It is encouraging that the situation in
Mitrovica, a hotbed of inter-ethnic tension for a long
period, has considerably improved. There was also a
noticeable drop in violence in Kosovo in the pre-
election period, but the improvement has not been

S/PVAZA')

 

sustained. We are concerned about the incidents in the
Presevo Valley in mid-November which triggered an
influx of almost 5,000 people. We are, however,
encouraged by the commitment of the authorities in
Belgrade to work towards the return of the displaced
persons and by their commitment to adopt measures for
reducing discrimination against ethnic Albanians
through their integration in the local police and
political structures.

Secondly, detained and missing persons. The
Secretary-General's report says that there are still 800
detained outside Kosovo and about 3,500 are still
missing. This is a very high number. Efforts aimed at
solving the cases of missing persons, irrespective of
their ethnic origin, should be intensified. We welcome
the establishment, in October, of the Bureau for
Detainees and Missing Persons. The fate of detainees is
likely to improve with the passing of legislation in the
Yugoslav Parliament, which we hope will pave the way
for their release. We continue, however, to remain
concerned that an unacceptably high number of persons
are still missing from Kosovo. We would urge that
initiatives be redoubled to determine the whereabouts
of these unaccounted individuals.

Thirdly, the local government. Following the
successful holding of municipal elections in October, it
is now necessary to focus on the building of
institutions for governance and administrative capacity
at the municipal level. This should be accompanied by
gradual transfer of authority to the municipalities.
Training provided by the Institute for Civil
Administration, which opened in Kosovo last
September, will be helpful in this regard. All political
parties and sectors of society should be prepared to
extend assistance in discharging the responsibilities of
the elected officials. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) also has
the special responsibility in ensuring that the local
population is progressively involved in the bodies of
interim administration.

Finally, civil society. We support the continued
efforts of UNMIK to create a favourable environment
for non-governmental organizations, other civil society
structures, and local women's organizations in Kosovo.
The recent opening of the ninth non-governmental
resource centre by the institution-building pillar of
UNMIK is a further step forward. The full involvement
of civil society is indispensable in lending effective
support to the efforts of the local administration.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
generated a difficult and sometimes impossible set of
tasks for the special representative of the Secretary-
General in Kosovo. We have seen over the years the
determination and dexterity of Mr. Kouchner in
handling those issues. The Security Council mission to
Kosovo in April, which I had the honour to lead, saw at
first hand the activities and initiatives of Mr. Kouchner
with regard to the future in Kosovo.

His mission has been extremely challenging and
came at the most difficult moment. With his leadership
and statesman-like vision, he has done a laudable job
in Kosovo. We congratulate him for his success and we
wish him the best in his future endeavours.

