Mr. Thoms (Germany): I should like to thank the
Lithuanian presidency for the preparation of this open
debate and the Secretary-General for his instructive
briefing.

At the outset we align ourselves with the statement
made by the delegation of the European Union.

As a country that has experienced the disastrous
consequences of disregarding the most basic rules
and standards, Germany today strongly reaffirms its
commitment to support all efforts to strengthen and
promote the rule of law as an essential contribution
to peace and security. Strengthening the rule of
law is a priority in our foreign policy, both bilateral
and multilateral. Within our conflict-prevention
management activities we are currently providing
rule-of-law assistance in a number of crisis and post-
conflict situations around the world.

We welcome the growing awareness that the rule
of law and peace and security are interconnected and
mutually dependent. We also welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General to mainstream the rule of law in all
areas of the work of the United Nations, and especially
the growing focus of peacekeeping and political
missions on strengthening institutions for the rule of
law.

Germany pursues a holistic approach in its conflict
prevention and management efforts. We apply an
integrated set of measures of which efforts to strengthen
the rule of law institutions are a key pillar. Let me just
mention three important fields in this regard.

First, in close cooperation with Department of
Peacekeeping Operations Office of the Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, we support and promote the global
exchange of experiences of United Nations experts in
the area of the rule of law. In past years, our Centre for
International Peace Operations and the United Nations
System Staff College in partnership organized a
dialogue series for deputy special representatives of the
Secretary-General in United Nations peace operations
and the focal point for the rule of law, and we are
committed to continue our support in coming years.

Secondly, supporting United Nations policing is
another key pillar of our engagement in the United
Nations. An international police conference held
in Berlin in October 2012 led to the establishment
of the group of friends of United Nations police. As
was rightly pointed out in the concept paper for this
debate (S/2014/75, annex), we need to ensure the
sustainability of our efforts in the area of the rule of
law in peacekeeping missions. Rule-of-law institutions
for training and support must be made more consistent
with the development of standards and guidance
through more systematic training of police officers
and civilian experts in missions and through longer-
term commitments of police-contributing countries to
specialized areas of training. Germany stands ready to
continue its support for the Office of the Rule of Law
and Security Institutions in that endeavour.

Thirdly, we support the establishment of the global
focal point for the rule oflaw, inter alia, with a seconded
expert. We are confident that the appointment of the
global focal point will contribute to the promotion of
the rule of law by the United Nations through better
and faster coordination. In addition, it should make our
efforts in the area of the rule of law more sustainable by
ensuring better transitions from peacekeeping missions
to the United Nations country team in post-conflict
situations.

Lastly, truth-finding efforts and the fight for
accountability and against impunity are crucial for the
establishment of lasting peace in post-conflict settings.
They are fostered by the work undertaken by national
and international justice mechanisms, especially the
International Criminal Court.
Current crises such as in Mali, South Sudan and the
Central African Republic have shown the importance
of building rule-of-law institutions in crisis and
post-conflict situations. Strengthening rule-of-law
institutions should thus be at the centre of our efforts
for peacebuilding and conflict prevention.

