Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): My
delegation is honoured to see you, Mr. Minister,
presiding over this open meeting of the Security
Council. This confirms once again Bangladesh's
unswerving commitment to peace and prevention of
armed conflict. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for the high-quality report he has
presented to the Council, and Ms. Frechette for her
important statement in introducing this document.

Our debate today is very important because it
concerns the prevention of armed conflict, a topic that
takes us to the core, to the very heart of the
prerogatives of the United Nations and its mission, to
its raison d 'etre of protecting humanity from the
scourge of war and armed conflict. At the dawn of the
twenty-first century, the prevention of armed conflicts
remains a burning topic, and after 5 5 years of existence
the United Nations, the indispensable instrument of
such prevention, is today endowed with a wealth of
experience that will enable it to fine-tune its role in
order better to respond to the requirements of the
modern world.

The Security Council has already undertaken a
careful consideration of the question of prevention, to
which it devoted two presidential statements. It has
also dealt with the topic in other texts that emphasize
related areas such as peace-building, to which a
presidential statement, inter alia, was devoted in
February, during the Tunisian presidency, under the
topic "Peace-building: towards a comprehensive
approach".

Today there is real awareness in the Security
Council, in the United Nations system and in the
international community as a whole of the need for a
real change in the perception of the role of prevention
and in the understanding of its rightful place in
maintaining peace and security in their broadest
meaning.

The Security Council is intensely active in the
field of prevention, in particular by setting up
peacekeeping operations, which are preventive
operations par excellence. The General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council are also exercising
their respective prerogatives in this field. We are
gratified to see that the report is also addressed to the
General Assembly, for it addresses many of that body's
concerns.

Ever since he acceded to his lofty responsibilities
at the head of the Organization, the Secretary-General
has promoted conflict prevention into an enduring
feature of his efforts for peace, and he has defined the
principle of the need to progress from a culture of
reaction to a culture of prevention of armed conflict.
Over the past few years, other actors within and outside
the United Nations have also made efforts in this
direction. It is now clear that the time has come to
develop a comprehensive and coherent strategy that
will enable the international community to make
conflict prevention an essential component of its
strategies and policies to maintain international peace
and security and to promote economic and social
development. In short, this is the moment to take a
substantive step towards making prevention a central
element of international initiatives for peace and
development.

It is in this context that the report of the
Secretary-General assumes its importance. The analysis
it contains is pertinent and piercing, and includes
the ten principles that he has proposed to
support promotion and prevention efforts. The
recommendations are rich, diverse and certainly very
useful. On the whole, we support them. The path he has
traced towards the goal is clear. Therefore the Security
Council should undertake, without delay, a careful
examination of this document - bearing in mind,
however, the need for a reasonable period of time for
our Governments to study the report and formulate
clearly articulated positions. We therefore propose the
establishment of a working group of the Security
Council whose mandate would be to study the report in
detail and make suggestions on specific decisions and
actions that the Council could take to follow up the
report of the Secretary-General.

Tunisia will actively participate in the work of the
Council and the other bodies of the United Nations on
this report because a consideration of all aspects of
prevention should now become a priority for us.

