Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Luxembourg on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and for its considerable efforts and
excellent organization of the Council's work in a very
busy month, thereby setting an example of the effective
role that non-permanent members of the Council
can play. I am also pleased to welcome Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), and to thank him for his
briefing highlighting his team's efforts to achieve the
mission's mandate and objectives in assisting Iraq at
this delicate stage.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's most
recent report to the Council (S/2014/190), our citizens
in Anbar province have been subjected for months to
a vicious attack conducted by the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant. That group, which is affiliated with
the Al-Qaida terrorist organization, has infiltrated
and ravaged Ramadi and Fallujah, blocking roads,
terrorizing citizens and committing massacres against
civilians. The Iraqi armed forces, in cooperation and
coordination with tribes of the region and the local
police, have confronted the terrorists, expelled them
and regained control over most of the areas outside the
cities where they were based.

Out of concern for the lives of civilians, Iraqi forces
have refrained from setting off a military confrontation
in Fallujah. They have besieged the city to prevent
terrorists from escaping and have sought the help of
local authorities in confronting terrorists in order to
minimize civilian losses and abide by international
humanitarian law. Meanwhile, the Iraqi Government,
in coordination with UNAMI, has provided assistance
to the affected citizens in Anbar province who were
displaced from the areas that were targeted by terrorist
organizations. It has also helped them to return to their
homes while moving forward with its operations in
Anbar.

Our bitter experience over the past few years has
taught us that mere military confrontation will not
stop terrorism or resolve the issue of the factional,
ethnic and regional divisions that are being exploited
by violent terrorism. We are therefore working to
end the causes of discontent and frustration that the
terrorists are exploiting. To that end, Iraq has adopted a
comprehensive multifaceted strategy for a constitutional
system of Government to ensure that all sectors of
society benefit from economic development. In the
past few months, we have also allocated an economic
assistance package worth $1 billion for rebuilding and
developing Anbar province.
In the past few years, Iraq has been dealing
with vicious and wide-scale attacks from terrorist
organizations aimed at derailing the country's political
process and institutions through indiscriminate killing,
which affects all Iraqi communities and groups. As
terrorism knows no borders, it will spread unless
it is checked. In mid-March, Iraq hosted 50 States
and organizations participating in the first Baghdad
International Counter-Terrorism Conference, in an effort
to eliminate a scourge that has caused Iraq significant
suffering. We mobilized every means possible for
that effort. In his statement to the Conference, Prime
Minister Nuri Al-Maliki stated that Iraq had repeatedly
warned of the spread of terrorism and extremism and
that their continued existence in Iraq and Syria would
eventually lead to their spread throughout the region
and around the world ~ terrorism knows no borders
and no State is immune to its threat. The Prime Minister
also called on the international community to cooperate
in combating terrorism. In that we regard, we would
like to express our thanks to the Security Council
for supporting the efforts of the Iraqi Government in
fighting terrorism through its most recent presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/l).

We would also like to thank the Head of the
European Union delegation in Iraq, Ms. Jana Hybaskova,
who, in her statement at the opening of the Baghdad
Conference, said that the European Union's 28 States
members supported Iraq's ongoing efforts against
terrorism. She also called on States to mobilize and
take speedy deterrent measures, such as security and
intelligence coordination among the countries of the
region, with a view to dismantling terrorist networks,
and to work collectively to cut off terrorism's financing
sources, impose sanctions and ban activities promoting
terrorist ideologies. We are fighting terrorism on behalf
of all those present here. We therefore look forward to
the Council's constructive and systematic assistance
in preventing the spread of terrorism and, ultimately,
eliminating it.

Three years ago, we said that the absence of a
solution to the conflict in Syria would lead to the
expansion of terrorist organizations' activities in the
region. Terrorism eventually reached Iraq and other
neighbouring countries, and it continues to spread as
the second Geneva Conference on Syria has failed.
From this Chamber, we would like to reaffirm the
urgent need for finding a political solution to the
Syrian tragedy, which, according to many observers,
has become the worst of this century.

In spite of the security challenges Iraq faces and
the difficult humanitarian situation in Anbar, we are
currently hosting more than a quarter million Syrian
nationals. We would therefore like to appeal to the
Security Council to punish States that allow terrorist
fighters to mobilize in their territories and force them
into other countries, in a dirty war against humanity,
stability and development.

The security and humanitarian difficulties have not
prevented Iraq from pursuing its path to democracy.
All political forces active on the Iraqi scene stress the
importance of taking part in the next general elections.
The Independent High Electoral Commission is working
tirelessly to conduct the elections on the scheduled date
of 30 April. The Commission is intent on holding free,
fair and constitutional elections under the oversight of
international observers, as has been the case in the past
three elections.

In that vein, based on our firm conviction of the
important role that women can play in the prevention
and settlement of conflicts and in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, we have launched a national plan for the
period 2014 to 2018 purusant to resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security. Iraq has thereby
become the first country in the Middle East and North
African region to have launched such a plan.

Iraq continues to pursue a foreign policy based
on common interests and non-interference in internal
affairs, respect for international law and commitment to
its obligations. Over the past few months, we have been
able to strengthen cooperation with fraternal Kuwait
to unprecedented levels. Many bilateral conventions
have been signed, including in the areas of investment
security and tourism. Iraq and Kuwait have also jointly
deposited with the Secretary-General a bilateral
convention on joint administration of navigation in the
Khor Abdallah waterway. Iraq continues to to make
tireless efforts to find the remains of missing Kuwaiti
nationals as well as that country's national archives.
We are resolutely striving to achieve tangible results on
those two issues.

In addition to Iraq's success in restoring ties with
the State of Kuwait, we have also been able to reach
agreement with our neighbour the Islamic Republic of
Iran on the demarcation of land and river borders in the
Shatt A1-Arab region. Once we conclude an agreement,
Iraq will have settled all outstanding border issues with
neighbouring countries, thereby opening the way for
developing ties and cooperation with all our neighbours
in all areas. In that regard, we would like to welcome the
decision by the Islamic Republic ofIran to grant amnesty
to hundreds of its nationals from the Mojahedin-e-
Khalq terrorist organization currently residing at Camp
Hurriya in Baghdad and allow them to return to Iran.
We call upon the international community to assist Iraq
in relocating the remaining members of that terrorist
organization to other countries and putting an end to
their illegal presence in Iraq for more than two decades.

In conclusion, we highly value the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq in
providing advice and support to the Iraqi Government,
particularly with regard to the comprehensive political
dialogue among Iraqi factions and in providing technical
assistance to guarantee that the parliamentary elections
are free and fair. We would be remiss if we did not
stress our appreciation and gratitude to Mr. Mladenov
and his team for their dedication. We wish them further
success in assisting Iraq.

