Ms. Lee (Singapore): The conflict in the Middle
East has entered a dangerous new phase. The cycle of
violence has reached alarming levels and appears
poised to spiral out of control. The grave situation is a
matter of concern to the entire international community
and demands the urgent attention of the Security
Council.

Singapore deplores in the strongest terms all acts
of terror. We are deeply disappointed that the violence
and provocative acts have continued unabated and
indeed escalated, despite the various mediation efforts,
including that of the Secretary-General. Now more than
ever, the parties need outside help to climb down from
the cycle of violence.

Singapore is prepared to listen to any proposals
that help to ease tensions, lead to the cessation of
violence and hostilities, bring both parties back to the
negotiating table, and ultimately advance the prospects
of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.

We believe that the report of the Sharm el-Sheikh
Fact-finding Committee, the Mitchell report, represents
the best hope in providing the parties with a common
framework to take reciprocal steps to ease tensions and
cease hostilities. It is comprehensive, fair and
objective. More importantly, both parties have
embraced its recommendations.

Unfortunately, the glimmer of hope provided by
the Mitchell report has waned as violence becomes
more entrenched. What is needed is an urgent and
renewed effort to kick-start its full and immediate
implementation.

Singapore believes that the Security Council
should examine what it could do to help implement the
Mitchell report. There are already intensive ongoing
efforts by key parties, including the United States and
regional countries, and the Security Council should
support and bolster these efforts. The Council should
consider asking the Secretary-General, who was
instrumental in convening the Sharm el-Sheikh
meeting, to assist in the implementation of the Mitchell
report.

For the Security Council to make a real and
constructive impact on this volatile situation, we
strongly believe that it is important for it to act in a
unified manner on this critical issue. The credibility of
the Council is at stake. An unequivocal and unified
message from the Council would exert the strongest
possible influence on the parties involved.

At the end of the day, it is the parties involved
that must make their own strategic decision to eschew
violence and return to the peace track. There is clearly
no alternative to discussing issues of security, borders
and statehood except through negotiations on the basis
of the principles of non-acquisition of territory by the
use of force and of the right of States to live within
secure and recognized borders. The further the parties
stray, the more these principles would be undermined.
The faster we help the two sides implement the
Mitchell report, the sooner we can stop the violence
and end the senseless loss of life.

