Mr. Silva (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important debate. The Sri Lanka delegation
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

The world must not forget the dire humanitarian
situation of the Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, especially in Gaza, where conditions are
unsustainable. We stress the urgent need for the
leadership to end the marginalization and oppression
of Palestinians in their own land. International
humanitarian law requires the protection of the civilian
population in the occupied territories. It is regrettable
that unethical practices continue that could erode the
likelihood of a two-State solution.

The settlement activities run counter to article 49 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention (1949) and are therefore
a factor in the recurrence of violence in the region.
The international community has repeatedly called for
a freeze on settlement activity. The Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the
Economic and Social Council and the International
Court of Justice all have condemned the settlement
activities as illegal. Ending those practices, which
contribute to much human suffering and continuing
friction in the occupied territories, are essential steps
that need to be taken to improve the situation on the
ground as well as for confidence-building.

The blockade imposed on Gaza has resulted in
approximately 80 per cent of families in that location
being dependent on humanitarian aid from the United
Nations for their survival. Restrictions on imports and
exports are stifling economic growth. Those restrictions
need to be lifted within the framework of resolution
1860 (2009), as that would contribute significantly to
the economic advancement of Gaza and the well-being
of the people.

Sri Lanka also supports the work of the United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which
keep the majority of the people in Gaza supplied with
the bare necessities.

Both parties to the conflict must create the
environment necessary to facilitate peace. There is an
urgent need for mutual confidence-building measures
in support of efforts to resume dialogue and substantive
negotiations. Israel must protect the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied territories and desist from
actions that are contrary to the established rules of
international law and practice. We are also mindful of
the security needs of Israel. The indiscriminate attacks
against Israeli civilians, including the firing of rockets
from Gaza into Israel, will widen the gap between
the parties. We encourage both parties to exercise the
utmost restraint for the sake of the safety of civilians
and for the greater goal of peace.

It is important to remain engaged in the process of
finding ajust and durable solution to the situation in the
Middle East. Sri Lanka supports the implementation
of the General Assembly resolutions regarding the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to statehood
and the attainment of a two-State solution on the
basis of the 1967 borders. The viability of the two-
State solution will depend on the political unity and
economic advancement of the Palestinian people, and
we are confident that Palestinian internal reconciliation
efforts will continue. The progress made by the
Palestinian Authority despite the severe political and
economic constraints is commendable.

Sri Lanka supports Palestine's application for
admission to full membership in the United Nations,
and it is our hope that the Security Council will give it
favourable consideration.

In conclusion, Sri Lanka welcomes the declaration
made in solidarity with the Palestinian people and State
of Palestine adopted at the recent special meeting of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, held in Caracas.

