Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
our important debate today. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for introducing the subject in
exactly the right tone.

The Council adopted a presidential statement in
November on the prevention of armed conflict and the
statement which you, Mr. President, will deliver today
marks a further step forward, which the United
Kingdom fully supports. The Council needs to continue
to show real progress if we are to deliver practical
results in this vital area, but that means converting our
fine words into action.

Our success in this area has been partial only. Too
often, Security Council intervention comes too late to
prevent widespread conflict and destruction. The
consequences of such failures are only too obvious: too
many belligerent groups targeting the innocent and the
defenceless; massive numbers of refugees forced to
flee for safety; gross and systematic violations of
human rights perpetrated. The primary responsibility of
this Council - the maintenance of international peace
and security - requires us to do better.

Today's presidential statement will have value
only if it is the catalyst for a more systematic and
professional approach to the prevention of conflicts.
The statement sets out a number of ways in which we
can achieve this step change. I should like to highlight
three: the importance of the right kind of early warning
and of building structures in the Secretariat to achieve
this; the importance of earlier and more effective
consideration of potential threats to the peace by the
Security Council well before conflict is imminent; and
the importance, in order to achieve this, of coordinated
efforts throughout the United Nations system.

First, as to early warning, the Secretary-General
needs to be given the resources he needs to make the
early-warning capacity of the Secretariat effective in
real life. We want the Secretariat to be able to produce
clear-sighted analysis, comprehensive and integrated
planning and well-resourced implementation. The
initiative of the Department of Political Affairs on
early warning and preventive measures is welcome. It
needs now to be placed on a sound financial footing.

There also needs to be better marshalling of the
Secretary-General's existing resources. Links with the
competent bodies in the economic and social fields will
be essential. The United Nations inter-agency
Framework for Coordination is doing good work in
promoting coordinated analysis and information-
sharing on countries at risk of falling into conflict. This
concept now has to be strengthened, under the
Executive Committee on Peace and Security, to take a
more systematic approach to potential conflicts in all
regions of the world. And when the framework teams
are agreed that a situation merits further attention, we
encourage the Secretary-General to act on his
convictions and to bring the matter to the Council's
attention, under his prerogatives under Article 99 of the
Charter.

Secondly, the Security Council has its own
responsibilities. Our first objective should be to contain
threats to the peace, but we often appear hamstrung in
undertaking actual preventive measures well in
advance of the outbreak of violence. Our capitals are
wary of committing resources and we slip too easily
into a focus only on the immediate causes of conflict.
There are, of course, sensitivities about sovereignty
when the problem lies within the borders of a State, but
the prevention of serious conflict anywhere has become
an international matter. The empirical evidence of this
is overwhelming. It is not just a matter of subjective
moral duty, but of the United Nations responsibility for
peace and sustainable development. We need to make
the psychological leap to addressing conflicts at their
roots - their economic, social, structural and political
roots, what the Secretary-General has just called "the
structural faults that predispose a society to conflict".

Having made that leap, we also need to show
more imagination in drawing on the box of tools at the
Council's disposal to deal with potential conflict. Too
often we believe that a presidential or press statement
will do the trick, but too often, our finely drafted words
are ignored. We have made good progress in the last
year in using other instruments. Ambassador Fowler's
imaginative work on implementing the sanctions
against UNITA is to be applauded, and we have built
on that in our approach to the current crisis in Sierra
Leone. The Council has despatched missions to East
Timor, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Kosovo. Let us continue to think imaginatively and to
come up with new mechanisms that make a difference.
I fully endorse the Secretary-General's call to us this
morning to use the Articles of the Charter more
proactively.

Thirdly, it is time now to be making a real effort
to improve coordination and information flow
throughout the United Nations system. The United
Kingdom has just done that in its own government
system by establishing a common Conflict Prevention
Fund across all the ministries concerned and by
establishing coordinated action in the use of it. The
United Nations now needs an improved system-wide
approach that will consolidate the expertise of all
relevant bodies without stifling the capacity of any one
of them to do the work that it does best.

I have already said that the Executive Committee
on Peace and Security and the Framework for
Coordination need to be strengthened. The Secretary-
General should be able to assert his authority
throughout the United Nations system so that
coordination becomes a reality. We have to ensure that
our own coordination with the Economic and Social
Council and the relevant United Nations agencies
begins to work more naturally, and we need to forge
operational links between the regional organizations
and the Security Council that can bear the weight of the
work we have to do together.

This week in Japan, the Group of Eight is
showing us the way to a more professional approach to
conflict prevention by adopting an integrated initiative
on five key issues: small arms and light weapons,
conflict and development, the illicit trade in diamonds,
children in armed conflict, and international civil
police. We in the Council need to examine their work
carefully and see what lessons we can draw for the
United Nations system, because the United Nations
cannot afford to fall behind the game. The report which
is being prepared by Ambassador Brahimi and his
panel on United Nations peace operations offers a well-
timed opportunity to rethink our approach in this entire
area. I am sure that Ambassador Brahimi is going to set
us an ambitious agenda.

Before I conclude, I want to emphasize that
careful consideration of the needs of ordinary people
has to be at the heart of all our conflict-prevention
strategies. We have to remember that civilians, so often
the tragic victims of conflict, are individuals with the
same rights as the rest of us, but caught up in adverse
and specific circumstances. Their particular protection
needs, whether they be children, women or other more
vulnerable groups, must be properly identified and met.
For their sake above all, the international legal
framework needs to be upheld, and the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court and the Ottawa
Convention on anti-personnel mines must be signed
and ratified by all of us. We need to reinforce
government by consent and the rule of law, and we
need to take new strides to combat the proliferation of
small arms and the use of child soldiers.

This concept of security for individuals should
guide us in our work. It will play an intrinsic part in the
wider goal of security for States. When individuals are
protected and their human, economic, social, political
and cultural rights are upheld, international stability is
consolidated.

All of this is an ambitious agenda for the United
Nations system. It means hard work on a sustained
basis for all of our delegations. There is no other way
for the Security Council to meet its responsibilities in
the circumstances of today and tomorrow. The United
Kingdom will play its own part.

