Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing. I must confess that I do
not know ifI should thank him for his report, because
it was brutal. He exposed a landscape of cruelty and
violence and sometimes ignorance is bliss when faced
with a reality like the one he presented with so much
strength and passion. In any case, I thank him for
thoroughly shaking us up.

Uruguay has followed with extreme concern the
recent events in the serious crisis generated by the
sectarian violence against the Rohingya minority. As
my delegation has already stated, the gravity of the
situation of the Muslim minority in Myanmar, which
is persecuted and discriminated against, warrants the
immediate attention of the international community
and especially the Security Council, as an organ that
guarantees international peace and security.

For Uruguay, the close link between the successive
human rights violations and the creation of conflicts and
their ability to become threats to international peace
and security is clear. That is why we joined the Human
Rights Caucus initiative, which puts human rights at the
centre of conflict prevention. I would like to emphasize
that, beyond the religious affiliation of the Rohingya
people, we are facing a protection of civilians issue.
Civilians must be protected unconditionally, without
any distinction. Consequently, applicable norms of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law must be respected.

The crisis that was unleashed on 25 August in
Rakhine state, the origins of which date back several
decades, not only caused an exodus of thousands of
people fleeing violence under difficult humanitarian
and security conditions, but it also caused another
crisis - the fastest growing refugee crisis in the world.
More than half a million Rohingya have crossed into
Bangladesh on foot or in makeshift vessels in less than
four months, and they have lost everything.

Uruguay is committed to promoting, protecting
and respecting human rights. Respect for human
rights is the cardinal rule for maintaining fundamental
freedoms and democratic life in all nations. Yesterday
in this Chamber (see S/PV.8130), we said the same
thing with regard to another item on the agenda of the
Security Council and we reiterate it once again today.
For Uruguay, there are no limits or exclusions as to the
forums in which human rights can be discussed, nor does
Uruguay accept sovereignty or domestic jurisdiction as
an excuse for attempts to prevent the consideration of
the situation of human rights in Member States.

The crisis in Rakhine state can be resolved only
through a human rights-based approach. The human
rights of all people must be respected unconditionally,
as that is the only way to achieve true national
reconciliation. The Government of Myanmar must
address all the deep-rooted causes of the crisis in
Rakhine state, put an end to repression, adopt measures
necessary to ensure accountability and bring to
justice those who have directed and carried out these
deplorable violent acts.We recall that the primary
responsibility of protecting the civilians of Myanmar
falls to its authorities.

We endorse the observations made by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein, that the systematic and widespread repression
of the Rohingya minority in Myanmar is characteristic
of genocide. It is therefore necessary to undertake
an international criminal investigation into the
perpetrators of violence against the Rohingyas. Those
responsible for the abhorrent atrocities committed in
Myanmar must be held accountable for serious crimes
and violations of international law committed with
total impunity. All complaints must be investigated
comprehensively, transparently and independently.

In that context, Uruguay calls on the Government
of Myanmar to grant all the necessary guarantees that
the fact-finding mission established by the Human
Rights Council resolution 34/22 can successfully carry
out its duties. At the same time, we urge it to implement
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, led by former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan.

Finally, Uruguay recognizes Bangladesh for its
generosity in providing security, food and shelter
to hundreds of thousands of refugees, of whom an
estimated 60 per cent are children. We also commend
the work of various humanitarian actors in providing
assistance to victims who have left everything behind
and have nothing but their suffering and trauma,
in the hope that some day they will be able to enjoy
their fundamental rights, which are inherent in all
human beings.

