Mr. Kubis: I will shortly mark my first full year of
representing the United Nations in Afghanistan. It has
been both a challenge and a privilege.

From Kabul, the international media's relentless
depiction of Afghanistan almost solely as a place
of conflict and terror is disconcerting. However,
Afghanistan today is about so much more. In my travels
around 22 provinces this past year, I have seen girls
and boys getting an education unthinkable a decade
ago, bustling and industrious towns and villages and
Government institutions slowly becoming increasingly
capable, with Afghans determined to take their destiny
into their own hands. Any transition is, by definition,
a delicate period. Certainty and sustained partnership
with Afghanistan is what is required now, ensuring
that the Afghan people have the confidence to focus on
building a better future.
The Chicago and Tokyo conferences provided a
solid foundation. Sound and representative governance
is central to the concept of transition and underpins
sustainability. This includes a credible and widely
accepted constitutional transfer of power with the
2014 presidential election. The Independent Election
Commission has now namedthe date- 5 April 2014. The
second part of the electoral indicator is the development
of a credible and robust electoral architecture by early
2013.

Just as important as what is agreed is how it is
agreed, with commitment to a transparent, inclusive and
consultative process. Vital issues such as the electoral
system, appointments to the management bodies,
and a dispute resolution mechanism are currently the
subjects of vigorous debate. I am closely following the
progress of the two electoral laws, which will require
compromise on all sides.

The Council of Minister's support for building a
system of voter identification and eligibility based

on two pillars - the issuance of electronic national
identity cards and a series of fraud-mitigating
measures - requires a coherent approach across

Afghan institutions, with strong Afghan leadership
in driving the implementation of the national
identification programme. Such arrangements must
respect and reinforce the different constitutional
roles and responsibilities of the various institutions,
including the constitutionally mandated authority of the
Independent Election Commission in the compilation
and finalization of the voter list. They must ensure the
broadest possible enfranchisement of Afghan actors
across the country and create conditions for the fullest
possible participation of the Afghans, men and women
on election day throughout the country.

Given the necessary realignment of electoral
assistance, a United Nations needs assessment mission
made an initial visit to Kabul in December. Following a
second visit in early 2013, the team will advise United
Nations leadership on appropriate parameters for
support to Afghan-led and managed electoral processes.

In ensuring the legitimacy of institutions,
anti-corruption efforts are also high on the agenda.
I welcome the robust reporting of the Independent
Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee on the Kabul Bank crisis. A public inquiry is
a valuable step towards public accountability. Decisive
Government action to strengthen the country's financial
sector is now required to ensure that such events are
never repeated.

Closely correlated with corruption is the corrosive
effect of the narcotics industry. The increase in both
cannabis and opium cultivation reported in this period
must be a wake-up call, with the illicit economy being
an active impediment to institutional development
and sustainable growth. Greater attention to tackling
this scourge - including on the part of international
donors - is required across all lines of effort, including
the use of such platforms as the counter-narcotics
confidence-building measure of the Istanbul Process.

Finally, on the issue of ensuring a sound
institutional framework, I note the protracted delay in
making a number of senior appointments. This includes
the constitutional requirement for a new Chief Justice.
Meanwhile, civil society continues to be concerned at
the extended process of appointments to Afghanistan's
Independent Human Rights Commission. As was made
clear at Tokyo, the protection of human rights is vital
to state legitimacy and a cornerstone of sustained
international engagement. The gains made over the
past decade - particularly in the rights of women and
girls - must be reinforced and expanded.

Progress in implementation of the Law on the
Elimination of Violence Against Women can be seen
over the past three years, but application remains
uneven. Only a small number of cases are ever reported.
I am, however, encouraged by what appears to be
increased confidence in approaching authorities, and
by successful prosecutions. The human rights unit of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) conducted research in 16 provinces over the
course of a year, and found that in 470 reported cases of
violence against women, prosecutors filed indictments
in 163, with convictions in 100.

The challenges women who take an active role in
public life still face were starkly highlighted in this
period. On 1 December, Anisa, a young woman in
Kapisa who was an active volunteer in vaccination
initiatives was killed. Ten days later, on Human Rights
Day, the acting head of the Department of Women's
Affairs of Laghman province was murdered, her
predecessor having been killed a few months earlier.

Civilians overall are bearing the heaviest burden
of the conflict and, as the Secretary-General's report
notes, it is the insurgency that is behind the majority of
cases. The Taliban leadership has reacted strongly to
our assessments on civilian causalities. We stand by our
verification systems and international legal definitions
of civilians. To account fully and most precisely for all
incidents, regardless of their perpetrators, UNAMA has
been investigating all claims, including those presented
by the insurgency. We continue to be ready to cooperate
with all parties in order to contribute to the reduction
and prevention of civilian causalities and to provide as
precise and correct reporting as possible.

I welcome increased attention to the
professionalization of the police with a law enforcement
role distinct from the military, in line with Tokyo
commitments. The new Minister of the Interior
has reiterated the importance of community police
initiatives in building public confidence.

National accord, reconciliation, peace, good
governance and justice are Afghanistan's greatest
needs. The High Peace Council's work is enjoying
renewed momentum following its positive visit to
Pakistan, facilitated logistically by UNAMA. High-
level engagement and concrete outcomes were
highlighted in the joint statement. Consistent dialogue
between the neighbours can now help build upon mutual
understandings, facilitate peace and reconciliation
efforts, and engage the insurgency.

In support of Afghan-led efforts, encouraged by the
Afghan parties and in line with its mandate, UNAMA
is ready to facilitate an inclusive infra-Afghan
dialogue, eventually bringing the series of dialogue
meetings to Afghanistan. On 8 and 9 December, initial
consultative meetings were held amongst diverse
Afghan stakeholders to help define the focus, agenda,
participation and modalities of such a process. The first
track-two inter-Afghan dialogue under the UNAMA
umbrella is planned to take place in Turkmenistan in
February 2013.

I welcome the adoption of resolution 2082 (2012),
which defines a strong role for the Afghan Government
and provides for increased flexibility in the mechanism
to secure travel ban exemptions for those insurgents
who are willing to contribute towards these aims.
Exploratory dialogue requires contacts with recognized
interlocutors, and that resolution establishes a less
onerous means to ensure compliance.

Afghanistan is increasingly embedding itself
in regional consultative processes, partnership
agreements and regional organizations. The Istanbul
Process has moved into practical work on the agreed
confidence-building measures. I look forward to the
endorsement of implementation plans at the next senior
officials' meeting, to be held in Baku in February.

Afghanistan now enjoys observer status in
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. In a new
development, UNAMA has also institutionalized
dialogue with the organization to help seek support for
a stable Afghanistan within the region.

On the security transition, the Afghan Government
is seeking to assert a greater lead to smooth the many
associated processes. I urge cooperation from Member
States in that regard. Soon, the start of the fourth
tranche of security transition will be announced by
President Karzai. Afghan authorities and communities
need to be better engaged on the closure of provincial
reconstruction teams. So far, communication and
coordination on assets- and tasks-transfer has varied
enormously.

There have been some appeals to the United Nations
to assume new functions and projects from other parts of
the international community. However, the very core of
transition is that the Afghan Government is in the lead.
That must be the first port of call. Where requested by
the Afghan Government, the United Nations will look
to assist. I emphasize, however, that tasks and efforts
must be part of agreed Afghan national priorities and
strategies, and be in line with United Nations mandates
and capacities.

Amid that focus on building the sustainable
development systems for the future, immediate
humanitarian needs must not be forgotten. Contributions
forthisyear's consolidatedhumanitarianappeal-at48 per
cent ofthe requested $448 million - were disappointing.
I hope donors will strengthen their support in the coming
year.

As I end my presentation, I would like to thank the
Permanent Mission of Germany, under the leadership of
Ambassador Wittig, for its support and contribution to
the work of all ofus as the penholder on the Afghanistan
portfolio. I would also like to thank all the outgoing
members of the Security Council for their support and
hard work.

