Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Madam President, for
welcoming me to the Council for the first time.

(spoke in French)

It is with great pleasure that I address the Security
Council for the first time since my appointment at the
head of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
In this regard, I wish to pay tribute to my predecessor,
Mr. Herve Ladsous, for his devotion and untiring efforts
to the benefit of peace. Council members may rest
assured that I will take up the challenges that have been
entrusted to me with determination and conviction, and
it is with great candour and transparency that I intend
to work with the Security Council.

About two weeks ago, I had the opportunity, together
with Mr. Herve Ladsous, to visit Mali and speak with
its authorities, including President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita; the members of the Government, including
Minister Abdoulaye Diop; the international mediation
team, led by Algeria; and the staff of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
country team, who are doing remarkable work under
difficult conditions.

As underscored in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/271), which was submitted to the
Council last month, positive progress has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation. Despite the despicable attack on the
camp of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in
Gao on 18 January, the operationalization ofjoint patrols
in Gao have been taking place since 20 February. After
Gao, Kidal and Menaka, the Agreement Monitoring
Committee announced the day before yesterday the
establishment of interim authorities in Taoudenni and
Timbuktu by 13 April. These developments point to
the gradual return of State authority in northern Mali
as a result of interim arrangements, and MINUSMA,
through its good offices, is doing everything in its power
to help parties achieve tangible results on the ground.

We must, however, ensure that the new authorities
and joint units are provided with adequate resources to
fulfil their political and security responsibilities and
that basic services are quickly made available to the
people. In addition, it is key that we clarify the duration
of these interim arrangements in view of their late start,
as well as the status of dissident groups vis-a-vis the
Coordination des mouvements de I'Azawad (CMA) and
the Platform within the framework of the monitoring
mechanism. The Malian authorities have indicated to
us that these issues are being discussed.

In this sense, the National Accord Conference,
which ended on Sunday, 2 April, was a unique
opportunity to bring together the various segments of
the Malian population, as well as the signatory parties.
Despite the delayed participation of some key actors,
such as the Coordination of the Azawad Movements and
the political opposition, Malians from various regions
of the country were able to speak to each other for the
first time since the crisis began in 2012. We hope that
the progress made during these five days will serve as
a basis for the drafting of a charter for peace, unity and
national reconciliation and will enrich the process of
constitutional review in accordance with the provisions
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation.

However, with the 2018 elections looming on
the horizon and despite of the advances over the past
few months, we cannot ignore the significant delays
sustained and the fragility of the gains that have been
made. Overall, the implementation of the Agreement
is still slow. The national strategy on security sector
reform is also not yet finalized. The criteria for
integrating the combatants from the signatory groups
have not yet been determined and the eight cantonment
sites built by MINUSMA remain empty. Longer-
term institutional and security reforms are needed, in
particular with regard to the future of the reconstituted
national army. This lack of clarity in the institutional
framework hampers efforts on the ground and is not
conducive to building a climate of trust between the
parties. This situation is leading to a splintering of the
security and political landscape and further complicates
our work for peace. Therefore, it is more important than
ever for MINUSMA to vigorously pursue its political
role and support the peace process.

The security situation remains worrying. Attacks by
terrorist groups continue and are becoming increasingly
sophisticated. In that regard, I want to pay tribute to
MINUSMA and in particular to the troops who have
lost their lives while serving this operation. I also want
to pay tribute to the memory of the French soldier in
Operation Barkhane, who lost his life yesterday. As the
Council knows, a new partnership, bringing together
the most active terrorist groups in Mali, was created
under the banner of Al-Qaida and under the leadership
of Iyad ag Ghali, the leader of Ansar Eddine. Da'esh,
meanwhile, is slowly making its presence known in
the Sahelo-Saharan strip. This convergence of threats
is particularly alarming in a context in which the
presence of the State is weak and sometimes even
non-existent, and in which the implementation of the
peace agreement still has to be translated into tangible
results on the ground.

In addition, the centre of the country remains the
scene of intense tensions fueled by extremist groups
that, defying the authority of the State, carry out
targeted assassinations and force the closure of schools
in some localities, depriving children of educaiton. In
response to this situation, the Malian authorities have
drawn up an integrated security plan for the central
regions, which I welcome. This multidimensional
approach is necessary and welcome, and MINUSMA
will continue to support it.
In the background, cross-border criminal networks
remain very active. The revenue generated by this illicit
trafficking are a financial boon for terrorist groups
operating in northern Mali. The delays in the peace
process and the often insufficient presence of State
authority provide an opportunity for the enemies of
peace to satisfy their economic interests. This situation
is untenable and must cease. Given the cross-border
nature of these networks, a regional approach is needed.

We welcome the efforts of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to set up a regional force, with
a first step of strengthening cross-border cooperation.
We are exploring how we can effectively support
this initiative so that it contributes positively to the
work of MINUSMA and the French Force Barkhane.
However, let us not lose sight of the need to include
peace-stabilization efforts in the framework of the
peace agreement. Complementarities and opportunities
exist between peacekeeping efforts and the regional
initiative of the G-5 Sahel, and we will try to articulate
them with our partners. In the immediate future,
MINUSMA will strengthen support for the Malian
armed forces and the implementation of the reforms
envisaged in the field of defence and security.

In that context, MINUSMA will continue to play
a major political and security role, particularly as one
of the main providers of stability in the north and part
of the centre of the country. To that end, MINUSMA
is taking the necessary steps to adjust its priorities
and posture according to the stakes and progress made
on the ground, in accordance with its mandate, while
taking into account the security of its staff and the
objective of providing the best possible support.

We are also pursuing our mobilization efforts
with contributing countries, exploring innovative
partnerships and concepts in order to fill our operational
gaps. If we are still unable to deploy the 2,049 military
personnel and 480 police personnel authorized by
resolution 2295 (2016), there are very real prospects
for progress and we are determined to do our all to
ensure that they materialize as quickly as possible. The
deployment of the rapid reaction force of the United
Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire to Mali, originally
planned for February, should take place between May
and October. As for the logistics combat battalion, Sri
Lanka will deploy a company in July and Egypt will
deploy three companies between the months of July and
December. We are also continuing our efforts to deploy
other capabilities, including transport and attack
helicopters, among others.
(spoke in English)

In conclusion, there are at this stage three important
points. First is the need to continue to strongly encourage
the parties to redouble their efforts to accelerate
the implementation of the peace agreement and to
clarify the next steps once the interim period expires
in June. Secondly, we need to address the scourge of
international and transnational organized crime and its
impact on the peace efforts. On this particular aspect,
the Security Council has already expressed its intention
to consider targeted sanctions against spoilers. We
believe that it is time to consider establishing such a
sanctions regime. Finally, in the light of the prevailing
political and security situation, MINUSMA continues
to adjust its priorities and posture, within the existing
mandate, in order to provide the best support. We
will revert in due course if any adjustments to the
MINUSMA mandate are required, in particular in our
next end-of-mandate report.

