Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
successful steering of the work of the Security Council
in the month of July. I thank Under-Secretary-General
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her comprehensive briefing
this morning.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Uganda on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

We are holding this meeting at a time when the
cause of Palestine has been experiencing unprecedented
existential challenges, particularly owing to the absence
of any serious political and legal actions by the Security
Council to end Israel's illegal, decades-long foreign
occupation of the occupied Palestinian territory. In
particular, Israel's recent attempt to disfigure historical
realities by opening the so-called Jewish Pilgrims Road
extending from the Silwan pool to the Al-Buraq Wall
constitutes blatant contempt and systematic violations
of international law and numerous United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Illegal
demolition by Israel of approximately 70 apartments
of Palestinians as recently as yesterday in Sur Baher
displacing some several hundred Palestinians is yet
another flagrant violation.

My delegation condemns those unfortunate
developments. The limitless aggression, indiscriminate
killing of innocent Palestinians, including children,
intensification of Israeli settlement policies, ongoing
assault on Islamic and Christian holy places, particularly
Al-Aqsa, changing the demography of East Jerusalem,
and all other provocative and outrageous actions by
Israel, the occupying Power, in defiance of Security
Council resolutions make peace in the Middle East
as elusive as ever. In this regard, we recall the open-
ended extraordinary meeting of the OIC Executive
Committee held at the Foreign Minister level in Jeddah
last week and fully endorse its final communique
reiterating, inter alia, its condemnation of any attempt
to undermine the legal and historical status of the city
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

Israel's illegal blockade, escalation of military
aggression and raids are making the already volatile
situation more perilous, thereby exacerbating the
humanitarian catastrophe of the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories. Increasing numbers of
Palestinian civilians are being made homeless or forced
to live under disastrous circumstances.

Another grave concern is the socioeconomic
downturn of the people of Palestine. The realization
of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is facing
serious challenges in the Palestinian context. The Israeli
occupation has been contributing directly to prolonged
poverty, unemployment and humanitarian crisis in the
occupied Palestinian territory. The achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals would fail miserably if
we left our Palestinian brothers and sisters behind, to
suffer in their political, social, economic and cultural
hardships. We urge the international community's
prompt intervention to compel the Israeli authorities to
lift the blockade, facilitate the freedom of movement
of Palestinian civilians and ensure their access to
basic supplies.

Israel's continuous acts of aggression have given
rise to an egregious culture of impunity, which is
undermining the viability of the State of Palestine and
jeopardizing the prospects for realizing the two-State
solution. In this situation, we believe that the Security
Council cannot remain passive. With the Security
Council at the forefront, the international community
must fulfil its responsibility to ensure accountability
for all Israeli violations, uphold the rule of international
law and provide protection for the Palestinian people in
the occupied territory.

We reaffirm our support for the accession of the
State of Palestine to international organizations and
treaties and reiterate our call on the Security Council
to recommend and positively consider its admission
as a full member of the United Nations. We also urge
the Security Council to do its utmost to implement in a
timely manner relevant Council resolutions to end the
Israeli occupation, which is the bedrock of achieving
lasting peace in the Middle East. The implementation
of the road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
efforts of the Quartet are also crucial.

Vulnerability and deepening poverty are increasing
the number of Palestinian refugees, which calls to mind
the year 1971 when millions of our people had to take
refuge in neighbouring India. Knowing full well the
pain of distressed humankind, we have opened our
doors to host 1.2 million Rohingyas fleeing atrocity
crimes in Myanmar. Recognizing the dire need to
ensure enhanced, predictable and sustainable funding
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, we will continue
our modest contribution to the Agency.

Compelled by our constitutional and moral
obligations and the avowed principle of Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh will continue to
unwaveringly support the cause of Palestinian struggle
until the State of Palestine is established on the basis
of a two-State solution and pre-1967 borders with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

