Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my delegation endorses the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of
the States members of the Non-Aligned Movement.

I congratulate you once again, Sir, on your
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
commend you for having organized this important
debate to review developments in the implementation
of the measures set out in the note by the President of
the Security Council contained in document
S/2010/507 of July 2010. Those measures were
proposed to boost the effectiveness and efficiency of
the Council's working methods and to achieve more
transparency, which is the aspiration of all United
Nations Member States, in accordance with the Charter
principles related to the mandates and prerogatives of
the Council in maintaining international peace and
security. I take this opportunity to once again
congratulate Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco,
Pakistan and Togo on becoming new non-permanent
members of the Council for the next two years. We
wish them great success in their work and in the
Council's deliberations.

In our view, reforming the working methods of
the Council is a major component of comprehensive
reform. Security Council reform would ensure
equitable geographical representation for all
continents, especially Africa, which is home to 54
countries. It is worth recalling that some 67 per cent of
the items on the Council's agenda involve Africa.

Given that today's meeting is focused specifically
on procedural questions that are necessary to enhance
the Council's capacities, we wish to highlight some
elements of the final document of the sixteenth
Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement,
held in Bali in May (see s/2011/407, annex I). In
particular, that document refers to improving the
Council's working methods and to implementing the
measures set out in presidential note 507, in particular
the publication of the daily programme of Council
deliberations in the Journal of the United Nations and
making it available to all. In addition, the monthly
programme of work should be circulated at the
beginning of every month for consideration by all
Member States. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
of some Member States, when presiding over the
Council, to ensure that all Member States are informed
about the programme of work by keeping them abreast
of items on the Council's monthly agenda in a
transparent and objective manner.
In regard to the briefings and information offered
by Secretariat representatives and subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council, we call for the texts of those
briefings to be distributed among all countries. Copies
of the slides or other visual material that are sometimes
used during the briefings should also be distributed.

Council documents, especially reports of the
Secretary-General on peacekeeping operations, should
be circulated in advance, before the Council considers
them, in all official languages of the United Nations.
Very often, a version of the report is distributed to
Council members only, but is not circulated as an
official document to all Member States until the day of
the meeting and occasionally even thereafter.

In regard to meeting formats, we are mindful that
the number of public meetings and open debates is
growing every day. However, we all agree that most
Council meetings involve consultations behind closed
doors, in which only Council members, some
Secretariat representatives and other staff members
participate. Nevertheless, in the interests of objectivity
and transparency, the country concerned should be
allowed to participate in those consultations. We
reiterate the importance of enhancing consultations and
cooperation between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations, with which we must
organize consultative meetings. This is consistent with
the provisions of paragraph 170 (a) of the Outcome
Document of the 2005 World Summit (resolution 60/1)
on the implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals, in which the relevant regional organizations are
invited to participate in both open and closed Security
Council meetings, whenever needed.

We recall the three rights of all Member States
under the Charter and the Security Council's
provisional rules of procedure, specifically rules 37
and 39 regarding the participation of all Members in
public meetings. We welcome the efforts of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, but we still hope that its
activities, conclusions and recommendations on
reforming the working methods of the Council will be
included in the annual report of the Council to the
General Assembly so that all Member States might
participate and contribute to those recommendations
and conclusions.
In conclusion, we are very mindful of the
importance of coordination and complementarity
among the various organs of the United Nations when
required, such as coordination between the Presidents
of the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. Under no circumstances,
however, should we undermine the exclusive mandate
and prerogatives of those organs with respect to the
objective consideration of agenda items and the
measures taken in that regard.

