Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Italy's initiative in convening today's
open debate and welcomes Under-Secretary of State
Amendola, who has come to New York to preside over
the meeting. I thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his briefing, as well as Executive Director Fedotov,
Commissioner Chergui and Special Rapporteur
Giammarinaro for their statements.

At present, protracted regional hotspot issues and
unceasing armed conflicts have led to increasingly
rampant activities by armed groups, terrorist
organizations and transnational-organized-crime
groups. Crimes in conflict situations, trafficking in
persons included, are on the rise, posing a threat to
people's lives and dignity. China supports international
cooperation in addressing trafficking in persons in
conflict situations.

First, we should enhance efforts to solve hotspot
issues and help achieve peace, stability and sustainable
development in conflict-affected areas at an early date.
The international community should have a greater
sense of urgency in seeking political settlement of
hotspot issues, follow the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and assist countries in
conflict in promoting peace and national reconciliation
and settling disputes peacefully through dialogue
and consultations.

Meanwhile, the root causes of conflicts must be
addressed. The countries concerned must be supported
in capacity-building for sustainable development,
thereby creating a sound external environment for
addressing trafficking in persons in conflict situations
and protecting women and children in such situations.

Secondly, we must resolutely combat terrorism.
All countries must follow a uniform standard and use
comprehensive political, economic and cultural means
to steadfastly combat all the terrorist organizations
listed by the Security Council and totally cut off
terrorists' chains of funding fuelled by trafficking
in persons. Effective measures must be taken to stop
terrorist organizations from using the Internet to spread
terrorists' audio- and video-messages or to conduct
recruitment and incitement and to prevent people
from being misled by terrorist and extremist ideology,
thereby falling victim to human trafficking.

International counter-terrorism efforts must bring
into full play the leading role of the United Nations and
the Council, adhere to the purposes and principles of
the Charter and other recognized fundamental norms of
international relations, and enhance coordination.
Thirdly, we should properly address the situation of
refugees and migrants facing the mixed challenges of
terrorism, regional conflicts and the mixed movements
of refugees and migrants. The international community
must make joint efforts to address the refugee problem
within the international law framework of the 1951
Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol. More
support must be given to refugee host countries;
xenophobia and discrimination against refugees must be
eliminated; root causes must be addressed; and greater
development assistance must be provided to developing
countries in order to create conditions for the return of
refugees and promote the stability and development of
the countries of origin of refugees.

Fourthly, we should foster the capacity-building of
the countries concerned and international cooperation
to establish synergy in combating trafficking in persons
in armed conflicts.

Countries in conflict have a primary responsibility
for protecting their people and combating trafficking
in persons, but they also face difficulties, such as
inadequate resources and capacities. The international
community must, while respecting national sovereignty
and at the request of the countries concerned, provide
constructive assistance in such fields as counter-
terrorism and border control. Countries of origin, transit
and destination must strengthen cooperation on border
control, financial monitoring and judicial assistance.
Relevant international and regional organizations
should also play their unique roles in accordance with
their own mandates, strengthen coordination and make
joint efforts to address trafficking in persons in armed
conflicts.

China will continue to support the international
community in its efforts to address trafficking in
persons and strengthen the protection of vulnerable
groups, such as women and children in armed conflict
areas. We remain committed to helping to achieve
peace, stability, security and development in conflict-
affected areas.

