Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting
of the Council on Kosovo. I also thank Michael Steiner
for his briefing, which was very detailed and specific,
as usual. It painted an uncompromising picture of the
situation in Kosovo, though without any unnecessary
pessimism. I also express our thanks for the presence
of the Secretary-General at the start of the meeting.
This meeting comes two months after the
Council's mission to Kosovo. I think that all those who
participated in it were able to see what a good idea that
mission was. I would especially like to thank
Ambassador Peter Kolby of Norway for his leadership
of the mission.

Bulgaria, an associated country of the European
Union, fully supports the statement that will be made
shortly by the representative of Greece on behalf of the
European Union. I shall therefore limit myself to a few
brief comments in my national capacity.

Bulgaria is convinced that the excellent work
done by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and by Mr. Steiner must
continue and that the transfer of responsibilities to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government must
continue exactly in the manner just described by
Mr. Steiner. The Constitutional Framework is our basic
reference point; it contains the benchmarks ensuring
the necessary dynamic for this process. For the transfer
process to be a success, the Kosovar institutions must
continue to expand their administrative and
management capacities while ensuring equitable
participation by the various ethnic groups. The set of
rules of procedure governing the functioning of the
administration is indispensable.

Speakers who preceded me spoke of certain acts
and of certain ideas, as well as of certain political
officials - including representatives of the Kosovo
Assembly and the Kosovar Government, but also
others elsewhere - who have exceeded their mandates
as established by the Constitutional Framework and
who have assumed powers falling within the
competence of the Special Representative. Those
attempts are a source of concern for Bulgaria. We
continue to believe that the policy established by the
United Nations - "standards before status" and based
on the benchmarks - is fundamental to a sustainable
resolution of the problem of Kosovo. Like previous
speakers, we consider that all those attempts could
destabilize Kosovo and prevent the international
community from achieving a solution to the problem
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999).

Bulgaria is also concerned by recent acts of
Violence, including those perpetrated against Orthodox
churches, to which Ambassador Thomson referred a
moment ago. These acts of Violence must cease. They
are likely to discourage the Serb community from
integrating into the life of Kosovo.

The idea of Serb military representatives and
police returning to Kosovo will not likely contribute, in
our View, to stabilizing the situation and could have
consequences that are hard to predict. Bulgaria believes
that the authorities of both Belgrade and Pristina must
refrain from hasty political actions that could only
aggravate the situation and destabilize Kosovo.

Bulgaria welcomes the establishment of the
UNMIK administration in northern Mitrovica. That is a
positive sign that may improve life in that city and in
the entire region.

The dialogue between the authorities of Pristina
and those of Belgrade must be strengthened;
Mr. Steiner spoke of this. They must focus on practical
issues that can improve the daily life of Kosovars and
can thus create the climate for a lasting solution to the
problem. We also welcome the results achieved in
dialogue between the Belgrade authorities and
UNMIK.

Bulgaria wholeheartedly supports the efforts of
the Special Representative to combat organized crime
and trafficking in human beings and to assist Kosovo in
relaunching its economy. As Mr. Steiner said a short
while ago, what is of interest to Kosovars is the
improvement of their daily life. That is where the
international community is needed, and that is where
the success or failure of the efforts of the Security
Council and of the international community will be
able to be measured. In that connection, my country
believes that Kosovo has not yet reached a level of
economic and social development, nor political
development, that would enable it to address the
problem of definitive status within an immediate time
frame. In that context, the presence of UNMIK and
KFOR in Kosovo continues to be a key factor for
stability and a guarantee of peace and stability.

Bulgaria will continue to participate in the
peacekeeping operations in Kosovo and to work within
the regional framework so that this problem can be
addressed with the utmost care. In 2003, even more
attention should be focused on dealing with problems
related to the shadow economy, organized crime and
corruption.

I should also mention the importance that my
country attaches to the regional aspects of the Kosovar
question, which is of paramount importance for the
countries of the region. Bulgaria would like to reaffirm
its position that the implementation of regional
infrastructure projects - in particular in the fields of
telecommunications and transportation is the
genuine answer, not only to the problems of Kosovo
but also to those of the entire region.
