We welcome the participation in today's discussion of the Indonesian Foreign Minister and other dignitaries who spoke earlier. We thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting and welcome it. We also wish to express our appreciation to today's briefers- Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary- General and Deputy Chair of The Elders; as well as Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation of New York University, for assessing and providing information on the impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. One of the speakers used today's debate to introduce a topic that is completely extraneous to the subject of today's discussion. We would encourage you, Mr. President, to discourage speakers from abusing Security Council meetings and call on all to limit their remarks to the announced agenda. We are seeing the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impact the humanitarian situation in armed conflict and post-conflict countries. That leads to a wide range of challenges, including food insecurity, the degradation of national public health systems, difficulties in peacekeeping and special political missions and a slowdown of peace processes. We recall that in its response to the Ebola outbreak several years ago, the Security Council introduced specific measures into resolutions on Liberia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo that contributed to containing the dissemination of the virus and mitigating its consequences, with the assistance of the United Nations and the international community. That proves the effectiveness of the Council's country-specific, rather than global, responses to pandemics. Professional response, mitigation and recovery efforts should be made by the competent United Nations bodies responsible for those aspects. In particular, we wish to underline the crucial role of the World Health Organization (WHO) in ensuring the coherence of the multilateral response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact, especially the medical aspects of the global response to the outbreak of the coronavirus disease. We believe the international community should jointly support the work of the WHO. Undoubtedly, the implications of pandemics impede the ability of some countries to fully implement their planned peacebuilding programmes and policies, and the gains achieved prior to the COVID-19 outbreak are at risk of being reversed, due specifically to unpredictable long-term socioeconomic consequences. In his March 2020 report entitled "Shared responsibility, global solidarity: Responding to the socio-economic impacts of COVID-19", the Secretary-General proposed specific measures concerning the response to the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We supported most of those measures. We have also fully supported the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. At the same time, we are concerned by reported attempts of illegal armed groups trying to take advantage of the pandemic situation to obtain benefits on the ground and undermine peace processes. In particular, increased terrorist activity was reported in the Sahara-Sahel region. It is therefore important that the humanitarian pause and cessation of hostilities do not apply to counter-terrorism operations, in accordance with resolution 2532 (2020). We appreciate the Secretariat's efforts to promote the health and safety of United Nations personnel in the field, thereby contributing to the domestic COVID-19 response and recovery efforts in countries emerging from conflict. It is necessary to ensure the continuity and effectiveness of the United Nations peacebuilding efforts, while strictly adhering to the applicable public health guidance. In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) could help in mobilizing financial support to strengthen overstretched national health systems, at the request of host Governments. A comprehensive analysis of the adverse socioeconomic impact of the pandemic and its possible implications for the overall situation and humanitarian needs in a specific country on the PBC's agenda, conducted in conjunction with the national authorities, could also be valuable. One of the urgent measures set out in the Secretary-General's report on shared responsibility is the need to waive sanctions, which seriously limit the capacity of the affected countries to respond to challenges related to the pandemic. We reaffirm our support for the proposals of the Secretary-General and wish to stress the dangerous and aggravating socioeconomic effects of unilateral sanctions on sustaining peace, primarily in developing countries. Such restrictions impede the ability of countries to finance their peacebuilding and development activities. Lifting such sanctions would allow those countries to respond more effectively to the challenges posed by COVID-19. We propose that the Secretariat prepare a policy brief on the impact of sanctions on the fight against COVID-19, which could include an assessment of the negative consequences of coercive measures for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Russia continues to contribute to the global efforts to counter the current pandemic and its consequences. We are working with the World Health Organization in order to financially support its COVID-19 responses and promote compliance with the International Health Regulations. Our country also collaborates with the World Food Programme and the United Nations Development Programme in that respect. Through multilateral channels, Russia has allocated more than $30 million to foster responses to the pandemic. We also continue our bilateral assistance to countries in need by providing personal protective equipment, test systems and laboratory supplies and sending medical teams upon request. Yesterday the Russian Federation officially registered the first COVID-19 vaccine in the world. Clinical trials have shown its high levels of effectiveness and safety. Several other promising vaccines are being prepared for clinical trials. In addition, several Russian antiviral drugs for the treatment of COVID-19, as well as diagnostics, have already been registered in our country. We are ready for international cooperation with all interested partners in developing and introducing vaccines and medicines to ensure a coordinated global response to the spread of COVID-19 and a joint victory over the pandemic.
