Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, let me
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Libya.

South Africa continues to support resolution 1970
(2011), which calls for a cessation of violence against
civilians and mandates the ICC to investigate war crimes
and crimes against humanity. We also urge non-State
parties to the Rome Statute to support the Prosecutor
of the ICC in discharging her responsibilities. While
South Africa is concerned about the apparent lack of
movement in some of the cases, it is encouraged by
Libya's efforts to try cases domestically and urges that
justice be carried out as expeditiously as possible.

South Africa welcomes the Office ofthe Prosecutor's
increased focus on cooperation and coordination with
Libya and other relevant States in order to support
national investigations and prosecutions. South Africa
ardently supports strengthening complementarity
through the development of domestic institutions to
investigate and prosecute crimes.

South Africa remains concerned about the current
ongoing fighting in Libya, which is not conducive
to finding a political settlement that will bring an
end to Libya's long transitional period. We condemn
the continued loss of civilian lives and crimes being
perpetrated against migrants. We call on all parties to
fully respect international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
We appreciate the commitment of the Office of the
Prosecutor to monitor and expand its investigations,
with a view to potentially prosecuting new crimes within
its jurisdiction. At the same time, we call on all parties
and stakeholders to recommit to building durable peace
in Libya on the basis of inclusive political dialogue as
the only viable means to achieving sustainable peace
in Libya. We also acknowledge and emphasize the role
of the Security Council in promoting political dialogue
and supporting all efforts to bring about a peaceful
settlement of this conflict.

