Mr. Babaa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, I should like, on behalf of my
delegation, to extend congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. As has been your custom whenever your
country has presided over the Council, you have given
ample evidence of your experience, competence and
effectiveness.

I also wish to express our appreciation for your
laudable initiative of concentrating, during your tenure of
the presidency of the Council this month, on the discussion
of African conflicts and on attempts to find solutions
thereto. I cannot but thank you and all the members of
the Security Council for affording my delegation the
opportunity to speak on the conflict plaguing the sister
African State of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I also Wish to convey our gratitude to the Council
for convening this open meeting so that its deliberations
may be known to all, not held behind closed doors. We
would wish and request that all the Council's activities be
as open as they were in the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s and
1980s, before the international balance was disrupted
earlier in this decade.

To Secretary-General Kofi Annan, we convey our
greetings and appreciation for his strenuous and serious
efforts, despite all the obstacles and difficulties he has
encountered, in the service of the causes of peace and
security in the world in general, and in Africa in
particular.

My delegation feels that this debate on the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is of special
importance because it gives the opportunity to members
of the Council, the States Members of the United Nations
and the international community to play a decisive role in
support of African efforts to find a settlement to the
regrettable and painful conflict, that has long raged on
that continent and to affirm the need to step up efforts to
end it and to achieve national reconciliation with the
participation of all parties. On this occasion, we cannot
but applaud the efforts of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), and especially those of the President
of Zambia, to achieve a peaceful settlement of this
conflict, which threatens stability, peace and security in
the region and has had terrible humanitarian
consequences.

My country is convinced that the social, political and
cultural problems that we Africans suffer are but the
normal outcome of the factors and facts of history and
geography. Politics are but one expression of such factors,
since Africa's recent history is one of foreign occupation
and domination and because Africa's political geography
was invented by foreign occupiers and embodied in
conventions that they concluded among themselves,
defining the borders of States to conform with their own
interests. Africa's regional and domestic conflicts are but
the natural and inevitable results of these events. The
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, deeply cognizant of this, has
devoted its full attention to this problem in order to
achieve a fair, equitable and just solution that would
 

restore political stability to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo based on consensus and social harmony. Such a
solution must be achieved within the context of the OAU
and free from any foreign influences, which seek only to
impose hegemony in Africa, monopolize its wealth and
markets in order to serve their interests for as long as
possible, and to foment further regional and domestic
problems.

In pursuit of this objective, brother Colonel Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, leader of the Revolution, has convened
numerous bilateral and multilateral meetings in Libya.
Many summits and conferences have been held for
numerous African leaders in the Jamahiriya, enjoying the
participation in particular of those African leaders of the
States most directly concerned, in full coordination with the
chairmanship of the OAU. One of these encounters was a
mini-summit held in the city of Surt in late September,
attended by the Presidents of Uganda, Chad, Niger and
Eritrea, which issued a statement calling for the formation
of African forces to replace foreign forces present in the
Congolese territories and designating brother Colonel
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, in his capacity as Chairman of the
group of Sahel and Saharan States, as coordinator of the
peace process in the Great Lakes region.

As a result of these Libyan initiatives, brother Qadhafi,
with the cooperation of the parties concerned, managed to
overcome one of the largest obstacles to achieving a final
solution by convening a direct meeting between the
Congolese parties in Libya. This encounter was an essential
turning point in the search for a solution to this problem.
The most important achievement of the meeting was
breaking the deadlock and opening a direct dialogue
between the parties concerned. In pursuit of these efforts,
the leader of the Libyan Revolution recently initiated
intensive contacts with the current Chairman of the OAU
and a number of other African Presidents in an attempt to
call an emergency African summit to take up the problem
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other armed
conflicts in Africa. Had this emergency summit met, it
would have allowed this problem to be considered at the
highest African level in an attempt to find effective
solutions thereto. We are confident that the coming regular
African summit, scheduled to be held in Algeria in July,
will redouble the efforts to achieve this objective.

Several regional African meetings have been held in
good faith, with the participation of all parties, in order to
find a solution to this problem and to stop the bloodshed in
the Great Lakes region. These meetings, however, although
they demonstrated the readiness of all parties to halt the
bloody conflict, did not achieve the necessary ceasefire.
My country's position and endeavours to find a
peaceful solution to this conflict can be summarized as
follows.

First, the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must
be respected.

Second, all conflicts between African States must be
solved through dialogue, negotiation, arbitration and the
non-resort to force in the settlement of disputes.

Third, all African States must refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of other States.

Fourth, an African solution to this conflict is
required in the context of the OAU so as to prevent
foreign intervention in Africa's affairs.

Fifth, an African force must be established to serve
as a peacekeeping force in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, to guarantee its borders, to prevent massacres
among the inhabitants of the region, and to provide
security guarantees to neighbouring States.

Sixth, a peace conference among all States
concerned should be convened to conclude agreements on
good-neighbourliness and friendship.

Seventh, the United Nations together with the OAU
should play a major role in finding solutions to the
humanitarian problem of refugees and displaced persons.

Eighth, the United Nations should lend its support to
solutions agreed upon by the OAU by, inter alia,
providing material support of all kinds.

African meetings should continue - at any time, in
any place and at any level - to follow up on previous
efforts and to continue the dialogue among the parties to
the conflict. Liaison committees should be set up to work
on ways to involve the parties concerned in the peace
process with a view to agreeing on an immediate
ceasefire and on a just and lasting solution to this conflict,
which has been tearing the African continent apart. Such
a solution must stop the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation of the peoples of the region. We welcome
President Kabila's declared readiness to engage in a
national dialogue, with the participation of all concerned

 

parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, aimed at
achieving national reconciliation as a necessary step
towards the restoration of comprehensive, lasting peace and
security in the region.

