Mr. Quinlan (Australia): First, I must thank
Ambassador Peter Wittig and the German Mission for
their leadership on Afghanistan in the Council over the
past two years. I also recognize Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for his ongoing
leadership in-country at such a critical juncture and
also all the personnel of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I must also
acknowledge and thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for
his leadership, tenacity and collegiality here in New
York.

The year 2012 has seen serious progress in
strengthening the partnership between Afghanistan
and the international community and in establishing an
essential, comprehensive international framework for
supporting Afghanistan beyond 2014. The year 2013
will now bring important preparations for the period
after transition is complete and when the Government
of Afghanistan will have full responsibility for security.
International political and diplomatic efforts to support
peace and stability in Afghanistan and in its region will
be central to ensuring the irreversibility of progress
made during the transition.

I would like to highlight two key issues in the
Secretary-General's quarterly report (S/2012/907) that
will be crucial to long-term stability in Afghanistan:
political settlement and the conduct of national
elections. The revitalization of the High Peace Council
and its efforts to work towards a political solution is
obviously very welcome. The international community
has made it clear over the past 12 months that it remains
absolutely committed to securing Afghanistan's future
stability, a fact that we should underscore to all parties
in Afghanistan by emphasizing the need to end violence
and join a political settlement. We have said that before.
We have made it clear. The Council's recent adoption of
resolution 2082 (2012), renewing the sanctions regime
on the Taliban, was a positive example of the Council
further enabling the reconciliation process.

Recent visits to Pakistan by High Peace Council
Chair Rabbani and Foreign Minister Rassoul
demonstrate promising cooperation and concrete
outcomes. It is worth recalling that both sides appealed
to the Taliban to participate in an Afghan-led, Afghan-
owned reconciliation process. It is essential that this
momentum be sustained to build the foundations
for reconciliation and a durable political settlement.
UNAMA itself has an important role to play in
facilitating an Afghan-led process, including through
its good offices and innovative track-two mechanisms.

The international community can and should assist
in preparing for elections. Credible, inclusive and
transparent elections in 2014 and 2015 will play a decisive
role in Afghanistan's decade-long transformation.
As hard as they are, accelerated efforts and further
reform in preparation for the elections remain critical.
We encourage the Afghan Government to leverage as
much assistance as possible from UNAMA and the
international community, particularly following the
conclusion of the needs assessment mission, which
will help to define the areas where assistance is needed
more closely.

Despite progress, the Secretary-General's report
does outline some worrying trends. While there has
been a decline in overall levels of violence, the rise
in civilian casualties is obviously of great concern,
particularly the significant increase in deaths from
insurgent attacks. That trend demonstrates the
ruthlessness of the insurgency. The Taliban remains
capable and determined. The continued targeting of
civilians remains a serious strategy of the Taliban and
highlights the need for in-depth training for the Afghan
security forces and sustained international support for
the Afghan Government.

Australia welcomes efforts to mitigate the threat
from insider attacks, which, as we know only too
well, have claimed lives recently, including those of
Australian personnel. The broader strategic threat of
insider attacks comes not from the attacks themselves,
but from the risk that we do not respond to them
correctly. The best evidence that we will prevail against
the threat from insider attacks is that we have not
allowed and must not allow them to disrupt our training
and operations in Afghanistan.

I must say that continued violence against women
remains a serious concern for all of us. We welcome
Afghan Government efforts to implement the Law on
the Elimination of Violence Against Women. Of course,
more remains to be done, and in that regard we look to
the recommendations of UNAMA's recent report on the
Law on the Elimination of Violence Against Women.

The Secretary-General's report notes the
establishment of a police women mentoring programme,
aimed at building the capacity of female police officers
to help address violence against women and raise
awareness among male officers of the importance
of integrating women into the police force as equal
members. Such initiatives are to be encouraged. They
will build a stronger police force, develop community
confidence and enhance equality.

Much progress has been made over the past
decade, and we are confident that international
resolve to support Afghanistan through transition and
beyond 2014 will remain strong. The United Nations
continues to play a critical role in that project. Australia
welcomes the ongoing commitment of the United
Nations and strongly supports UNAMA's mandate. We
appreciate UNAMA's efforts to right-size its mission
in the context of mandate review and significant fiscal
constraints, while maintaining an important network in
Afghanistan's provinces. But we must ensure that those
constraints do not compromise the essential ongoing
work of UNAMA or of other United Nations agencies
in Afghanistan, such as the Office ofthe United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees .

To conclude, as Australia itself prepares to serve on
the Security Council in 2013 and 2014, Afghanistan will
remain a major area of concern for us. We look forward
to working with all Council members and interested
parties during this critical time in Afghanistan's
transition. Australia remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan in assuming full responsibility for its own
security, and to bringing enhanced opportunities for its
people to improve their livelihoods in a safe and secure
environment. One would expect no less, and that is
what we will try to do.
