Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank the
representatives of Brazil and Sweden.

New Zealand welcomes this opportunity to discuss
the annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/2015/ 174). We support the report's recommendations,
in particular those focused on increasing the
interactivity between the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Security Council. New Zealand believes
there is great value in improved information flows
between the two bodies, especially in order to improve
the management of United Nations mission transitions.
Most importantly, there should be more effective
cooperation and coordination by United Nations actors
on ground. We look forward to discussing these ideas
further this afternoon.

New Zealand also commends the report's
recommendation that a strategy be developed to
strengthen gender perspectives in country-specific
engagement. We believe that broader engagement
with women will have far-reaching, positive effects on
peacebuilding efforts and that this should go beyond
extractive engagement.

There are important lessons to be learned from
recent and current drawdowns. We would like to
highlight four.

First, we believe peacebuilding is a process, not an
event, which must accompany and not simply follow
peacekeeping. The goals, milestones and priorities
should be aligned as much as possible.

Secondly, effective transition planning must be
linked to peace operations mandates and therefore must
be considered at the earliest stages of mission planning.
Measurable benchmarks can play a helpful role in
objectively assessing progress, although those must be
jointly owned and flexibly applied.
Thirdly, missions tasked with targeted capacity-
building can play an important role, but face challenges
in ensuring effectiveness and sustainability of
outcomes. There is much we can learn from recent
experience - for example, regarding options for rapidly
sourcing the necessary expertise as well as mechanisms
for enabling meaningful national ownership and more
sustainable outcomes.

Fourthly, transition management should proceed
in partnership between the United Nations and the
host Government in close consultation with bilateral,
regional and international partners and development
actors. The focus of such efforts has to be in-country.

Finally, we note the broader review of the
peacebuilding architecture and the reviews of peace
operations and resolution 1325 (2005). New Zealand
strongly supports those reviews and believes that
through them we can strengthen the United Nations
management of peace operations and peacebuilding.

