Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me first congratulate you, Mr. President, and the people of the People's Republic of China on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for March. I pledge my delegation's support and cooperation in your work. We would also like to thank Belgium for its excellent presidency in February. We would like to thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAM]), for her briefing and, through her, her colleagues on the ground for their steady work in very difficult circumstances. Iraq has been ravaged by numerous cycles of conflict, crippling sectarianism and, most destructively, the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Following the military defeat of ISIL, Iraq continues to face severe security challenges as a result of violent extremism and the transnational nature of the threat. The mandate of UNAMI remains crucial in coordinating United Nations efforts to support Iraq. South Africa supports the mandate of UNAMI in assisting the Government's efforts and the electoral processes in Iraq. South Africa welcomes the reforms proposed by the Government of Iraq to improve governance structures and the implementation of service delivery to its people. We also support the drive for an inclusive Government that will bring together the diverse elements of Iraqi society in governance structures. We believe that national reconciliation and unity in Iraq are vital to promoting lasting and sustainable peace in the country. With regard to the security situation, South Africa joins others in condemning the recent incidents that occurred in Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah al-Din, resulting in casualties and the destruction of crops. That is indicative of the deadly threat that persists in the country, which requires continued support and sustained efforts by the international community to bolster the Iraqi Government's efforts to gain full control of the security situation in the country. Peace and security are fundamental prerequisites for Iraq to develop and grow its economy and provide basic services to all its citizens. In that regard, South Africa supports the full consolidation of control by the Iraqi army over its territories and the efforts of the Government to eradicate the threat posed by ISIL. South Africa urges continued cooperation between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government in order to promote peace and stability throughout the country. On the important role of women during the political transition in Iraq, South Africa welcomes the new electoral law and the appointment of a female Chief Executive Officer of the Independent High Electoral Commission. Women in Iraq continue to play a vital role in calling for political and economic reform. We welcome the upsurge in women's activism in Iraq, as this augurs well for the future of the country. South Africa also joins the Secretary-General in encouraging the Council of Representatives to disseminate the text of the electoral law and to clarify all outstanding issues regarding the text. South Africa welcomes the latest developments regarding missing Kuwaitis, and all efforts to identify any potential mortal remains of Kuwaiti citizens are highly appreciated and help to bring closure to and end the pain of the Kuwaiti people. We congratulate the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the Iraqi Government for efforts to identify such mortal remains. The situation in Iraq has improved substantially in the past 17 years. The country was devastated by a conflict that resulted from misguided military misadventures. Today the country is going through a period of reconstruction and development as it rebuilds itself, which will require support on the part of the international community. The international community must do its part to assist Iraq on this journey while respecting the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country. For their part, the people of Iraq must strive for an inclusive political process that will set the country on a path to lasting peace, prosperity and development.
