Mr. Tuwei: I wish to thank the President of the
Security Council for granting me this opportunity to
brief the Council on the threat posed by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) and the progress being made
to counter the threat under the African Union-led
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of
the LRA. I also wish to thank Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily,
Special Representative of the Secretary General and
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa for enabling me to give this briefing Via video
teleconference.

The LRA remains a threat to vulnerable civilians
in the remote parts ofthe south-eastern Central African
Republic, the north-eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. The latest
information revealed by seven personal body guards
of Joseph Kony, who reported to the AU Regional
Task Force (RTF) in mid-June 2015, indicates that
the strength of the LRA is estimated at 230, made
up of about 120 armed fighters - 33 of them newly
recruited - and 110 dependants. The main group,
under the command of Joseph Kony, continues to
operate from safe havens in the extreme north-eastern
part of the Central African Republic, outside the reach
of the AU RTF. A second LRA group is in the Garamba
National Park, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with the primary task of poaching elephants for ivory
to be delivered to Kony. Meanwhile, a third group is
operating in the Central African Republic and serving
as a conduit for receiving ivory from the second group
and delivering it to Kony.

Currently, the LRA is operating in survival mode,
trafficking and trading in gold looted from mines in
the Central African Republic and ivory poached from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, so as to sustain
itself and its leadership. The LRA uses money obtained
from the sale of those items to buy food, arms and
ammunition, drugs and other essential items. LRA
fighters are continuing to ambush traders and travellers
in order to loot food and other essential commodities. It
has also continued abductions, mainly in the Haut and
Bas-Ue'le districts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular to carry looted items but also to
serve as sex slaves and fighters.

In the Central African Republic, the number of
LRA-related incidents has been relatively low in 2015,
due to sustained military pressure by the Regional
Task Force, a military component of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the LRA and joint protection
measures by local communities with international
non-governmental organizations. That reduction is also
partly the result of the opportunistic relationship the
group has established with ex-Sele'ka leaders and local
communities in order to peacefully obtain food and
safe passage from the north-eastern Central African
Republic to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
vice versa.

Despite the number of LRA-induced internally
displaced persons (IDPs) dropping significantly from
about 369,000 in mid-2013 to 131,000 in mid-2014,
abductions have remained high in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the number of IDPs and
refugees in that country is again increasing, reaching
about 200,000 by June 2015, according to an April-
June 2015 report of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Therefore,
the lives of thousands of civilians in the border areas
continue to be at risk due to fear of possible attacks
from the LRA. That calls for urgent efforts to address
the emerging challenge of civilian displacements.

In an effort to eliminate the LRA, the AU RTF,
supported by United States special forces in the Central
African Republic and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, continue to conduct operations targeting the top
leadership of the group. The operations also focus on
the protection of civilians and facilitating the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to populations in need in the
affected areas. Those efforts have continued to weaken
the LRA and to degrade its fighting capacity.

On the political and diplomatic front, from 12 to
15 September, I led an AU delegation to Khartoum
and engaged with the Sudanese authorities on the LRA
problem. The mission was undertaken pursuant to the
Government of the Sudan's invitation on 14 May 2014
to the AU Commission and the Peace and Security
Council to verify allegations made in the report of
the Secretary-General that month about the presence
of the LRA in Kafia Kingi (S/2014/3l9). The trip was
also a follow-up to my discussions with the Sudanese
Government delegation at the margins of the second
meeting of the heads of intelligence and security
services of East Africa, held in Kampala in mid-July.

While in Khartoum, my delegation also interacted
with the United States charge' affairs, the European
Union Ambassador and the Deputy Force Commander
of the African Union/ United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. Our engagements have enhanced cooperation
between the Government of the Sudan and the AU
Commission in confronting the LRA problem, as
evidenced by the green light given by the Sudanese
authorities for joint fact-finding on the LRA in Kafia
Kingi. I commend the Government of the Sudan for that
spirit of cooperation against the LRA and assure the
Council that the Commission will take all the necessary
steps to ensure that the joint mission is undertaken.

Secondly, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Abdoulaye Bathily and I have continued to
work in close partnership in order to sustain the recent
momentum against the LRA. From 17 to 20 November,
we undertook ajoint mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo where, in Kinshasa, we exchanged views
with the Secretary-General of the country's Ministry
for Foreign Affairs and with the Minister of Defence,
as well as with the Deputy Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and MONUSCO's
Acting Force Commander.

On 19 November, we met in Dungu, in the north-
east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the
Commander of the MONUSCO Moroccan battalion,
the commander of the Congolese troops in Bas-Uele,
the Assistant Commander of the United States special
forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
representatives of the RTF headquarters from Yambio
and local authorities in Bas-Uele. The meetings were
an opportunity to obtain a first-hand assessment of the
tempo ofthe ongoing operations as well as the attendant
operational and humanitarian challenges on the ground.
We were pleased to note that the forces were actively
engaged in operations against the LRA.

Despite its weakened state, the LRA continues to
pose a significant threat to the population in the affected
parts of the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan - all the more
so because of the volatility of the situation in eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan and because
of other emerging security threats on the continent
that continue to provide opportunities for the LRA
to survive. Those threats tend to divert our national,
regional and international efforts away from the LRA
threat. The reported emergence of a new rebellion
in South Sudan's Western Equatoria state is already
interrupting the delivery of logistics and supplies to
the RTF by road from Uganda to the Central African
Republic via South Sudan. It also poses a direct threat
to the personnel ofthe RTF headquarters in Yambio. As
long as Joseph Kony is in charge of the LRA, the group
will continue to exploit such situations to try to survive
and rejuvenate itself in alliance with other violent
extremist groups or mutate into a regional nuisance,
worsening the security and humanitarian conditions.

Our efforts are also being impeded by the
inadequacy of troops required for the RTF to track the
LRA in a vast territory. The RTF is currently operating
at only 50 per cent of its authorized force strength of
5,000 troops. Moreover, some of the contingents are
lacking the required logistics to combat the LRA.
The existence of armed militia groups such as the
ex-Se'leka, janjaweed and other poaching groups also
constitutes a challenge to counter-LRA operations, as
those groups are collaborating with the LRA against
the RTF. All those challenges are being compounded
by the unpredictability of funds for supporting the fight
against the LRA.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation for the cooperation between the African
Union and its partners, namely, the United Nations,
the European Union and the United States, and call
for closer operational coordination as well as mutual
support among all the forces engaged in countering
the LRA. I appeal to the African Union's partners to
enhance their logistical and financial support to the
RTF and to devote more efforts to curtailing the LRA's
logistic supply chain in order to hasten the end of this
terrorist group.
Finally, I request the Security Council to closely The President: I thank Mr. Tuwci for his briefing.
monitor the unfolding situation in the Western
Equatoria state of South Sudan in relation to the LRA
threat, as well as to remain seized ofthe matter until the . .
LRA is eliminated. important toptcs.

The meeting rose at 10.45 am.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on these
