Mrs. Simati (Tuvalu): It is indeed an honour for
Tuvalu to participate in this Security Council open
debate on small island developing States (SIDS).
I thank our leaders from the Pacific, the Council
members and the United Nations membership for their
insights and leadership on an issue that is dear to our
hearts - climate change and the security of our island
nations.

At the outset, Tuvalu would like to associate itself
with the statements delivered by the representatives of
Tonga, Chair of the Pacific Small Island Developing
States, and the Maldives, Chair of the Alliance of Small
Island States.

Tuvalu is grateful to the Government of New
Zealand, as President of the Security Council for the
month of July, for its initiative in holding this meeting
and instituting a dialogue on issues related to peace
and security in the Pacific and SIDS in general. As we
exchange views here on those issues, we are always
grateful for recognition of SIDS' special situation and
context.

Climate change is the greatest challenge facing
Tuvalu, threatening as it does the livelihoods, security
and well-being of all Tuvaluans. It is a security,
development and environmental issue. During the
discussions of the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals, many Security Council members
noted that climate change is a cross-cutting issue. It is
very much so, and therefore we cannot consider it as
something that can be treated as a silo. We recall the
urgency with which the Ebola epidemic was considered,
and how so many United Nations institutions, including
the Security Council, collaborated to address the
issue as a security threat. We need to focus that same
attention and urgency, on the part of all United Nations
institutions, including the Council, on the impacts of
climate change. Climate change causes sea-level rise,
which inundates many island coastlines; it floods
plains and deltas in larger, heavily populated countries;
it damages food crops and displaces many people. It is a
security issue that is urgent and inter-generational. And
it is an existential issue for Tuvalu and other Pacific
countries.

Tropical Cyclone Pam, which hit Vanuatu and other
Pacific countries, devastated Tuvalu early in March.
Given Tuvalu's low elevation and small size - 24 square
kilometres of land surrounded by a vast ocean - and
despite the fact that Tuvalu was hit only by the periphery
of Cyclone Pam, the devastation was significant, further
confirming our high vulnerability to the increasing
occurrences we are seeing of natural disasters, rising
sea level and other climate-change-related events. It
is estimated that approximately $92 million is needed
for recovery efforts and to better protect the people of
Tuvalu from future disasters. Yesterday, on Wednesday,
29 July, on its capital island, Funafuti, Tuvalu held
its first high-level dialogue on Cyclone Pam with its
development partners, aimed at responding actively with
the goal not only of recovery but also of strengthening
the resilience of the people, communities and islands of
our tiny nation.

The seriousness, reality and urgency of the
climate-change problem demands more than our
heartfelt conversation; it simply needs us to act now. We
need the Security Council to recognize climate change
as a global security threat, put the issues of climate
change and environmental security on its agenda and
take immediate steps to address them. Tuvalu and other
atoll-island countries in the Pacific may be the first to
feel the brunt of the impacts of climate change, but the
whole world is bound to feel them if nothing is done
urgently.

While we debate and talk, lives are being affected
and our coastal areas are disappearing. In fact, four
small islets in Tuvalu have disappeared since 2000, two
of them as a result of Cyclone Pam in March. They were
here one day and gone the next. That is how fast our
islands could disappear, in the blink of an eye, ifnothing
is done to address climate change. Tuvaluans rely on
the country's meagre land mass for the basic needs for
their survival, food and shelter. If their land begins to
disappear, the people of Tuvalu will find themselves
restricted in their access to their basic survival needs
and their right to live comfortably in their God-given
homeland. Unfortunately, although human lives were
not lost, other living organisms that made their home
on those islets lost their lives. The higher tides and
the effects we are seeing do not lie; they tell us that
somehow, somewhere, the chain of events that causes
sea levels to rise demands our urgent attention and
action. We cannot continue along this path.

SIDS issues are now legislated in the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,
and we must cooperate in order to genuinely address
SIDS' resilience and vulnerabilities. The support of
partners in financing for adaptation to climate change
cannot be the total answer to this universal problem. We
need moral reform; we need science and new technology
to help keep the average rise in temperatures well below
1.5° Celsius; and we must reach a credible agreement
at the 2015 Paris Climate Conference of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The Security Council should review its mandate so
that it can fully embrace the concept of environmental
security. The post-2015 agenda seeks to respect, protect
and fulfil all human rights, for all peoples; please, let
us cooperate to achieve that with dignity and honour.

