The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Georgia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chikvaidze
(Georgia) took a place at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General in Abkhazia, Georgia, document
S/ 1995/342.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1995/384, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Security Council to the following revision to be made
to the text of the draft resolution contained in document
S/ 1995/384 in its provisional form.

Operative paragraph 6 should read as follows:
"Reiterates its call to the Abkhaz side to

accelerate significantly the process of the voluntary
return of refugees and displaced persons by
accepting a timetable on the basis of that proposed
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and to guarantee the
safety of spontaneous returnees already in the area
and regularize their status in accordance with the
Quadripartite Agreement;".

The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Georgia, His Excellency, Mr. Alexander Chikvaidze.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome him and
invite him to make his statement.


