Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak in Austria's capacity as Chairman-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). My statement will be very brief.

Three days ago we witnessed peaceful and
orderly elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
OSCE Mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina had
meticulously prepared this election, which required
well-coordinated efforts on the part of the international
community. The OSCE Chairperson-in-Office,
Austrian Foreign Minister Benita Ferrero-Waldner,
expressed her gratitude and appreciation to the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Office of
the High Representative, the Stabilization Force, the
European Community Monitoring Mission and other
international agencies involved.

Although the OSCE retained overall
responsibility for the elections, the local municipal
election commissions and the more than 4,000 polling
station committees carried out most of the work on the
ground. In addition to more than 750 international
supervisors and 200 international observers, the
elections were monitored by nearly 5,500 domestic
observers in polling stations throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina. All in all, more than 40,000 Bosnian
citizens assisted in the organization of these elections,
and the local police successfully ensured that they were
peaceful.

The local interest in and support for the election
is documented by the satisfactory voter turnout and by
the smooth voting procedure. Only minor incidents
were reported. Nearly all polling stations opened and
closed on time. The voter lists appeared to be generally
correct. There are indications of certain problems in
Srebrenica, the only municipality in which municipal
elections were also held. In general, however, the
observers agree that the voting procedure was a success
with a majority of the population voting in a fair and
free manner. It is now up to the authorities to ensure an
efficient and orderly transfer of power and to guarantee
that the public resources and funds of the country are
protected during the transitional process.

This is not the place and time for the OSCE Chair-in-
Office to comment on the results of the elections. The
official results have yet to be released. Clearly, the
international community hopes that the outcome of the
elections will strengthen the Dayton Process. Let me
reiterate in this respect that the OSCE will continue its
efforts to strengthen civil society and support the economic
reforms, the rule of law and the return of refugees in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Irrespective of the outcome, however, it is
necessary to emphasize that the elections constitute a
milestone in the realization of the concept of ownership
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 11 November the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina demonstrated that
they are prepared to shape their political destiny in a
democratic, free and peaceful manner. It is up to the
newly elected officials to prove that they are worthy of
the trust placed in them.

