Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me begin by thanking
the Senegalese presidency for organizing this open
debate on water, peace and security. For small island
developing States such as the Maldives, this is a
particularly important issue that merits discussion.

The briefers who spoke today already painted
a striking picture of the gravity of the increasing
pressures being placed both on limited water supplies
and on national authorities to meet that growing
demand. They highlighted the need for cooperation at
the national, regional and global levels to counter the
potential threats to international peace and security.

For the Maldives, a country made up of 1,192
islands across 26 atolls, at first glance it would seem
that water supply would be the least of our problems.
Indeed, we in the Maldives have long spoken of the
threat posed by too much water - in the form of rising
sea levels - far more than we have of too little. Being
seawater, however, the oceans that surround us are not
suitable for human consumption or agricultural use.

Traditionally, our water needs have been met by
rainwater and the limited amounts of groundwater
accessible by wells, but a growing population and
increased urbanization have meant that those sources
are no longer sufficient to meet demandToday, much
of the water consumed in the Maldives comes from
desalination. Furthermore, while groundwater supplies
are recharged by rainfall, environmental pollution and
waste mean that that water often becomes contaminated
and must be treated before consumption, adding to
already high costs and likewise creating dependence on
water treatment plants.

The vulnerability of small island developing States
in relation to water is immense. In the Maldives, for
example, during the dry season each year, desalinated
water has to be supplied from the capital to far-flung
islands, ramping up costs and logistical difficulties
for the Government. Similarly, in much of the Pacific
this year, drought - largely caused by the naturally
occurring El Nifio phenomenon, whose effects and
impacts are exacerbated by climate change - wreaked
havoc on agricultural lands and livelihoods, impacting
water and food security. It is often the case that the
countries that are most affected are the least able to
cope with the impacts and therefore most in need of
support and partnerships.

Those unique constraints, however, have led my
country, the Maldives, to explore compensatorypractices
and proactive responses to service interruptions. When
a fire shut down the sole desalination plant in the capital
island, Male, in 2014, for example, the Government
responded by distributing bottled water, water from
temporary desalination plants and from mobile water-
carrying vehicles, with special care taken to address the
needs of vulnerable and at-risk populations. That was a
huge cost to the Government, but we were fortunate to
have the assistance of our international partners.

In 2014, the Government established the Male
Water Crisis Management Fund, with a view to dealing
with future crises and strengthening the resilience of
the existing system. Additionally, we found that in that
crisis regional cooperation, as well as support of the
international community at large, was necessary in
helping the Government meet peak demand during the
water shortage and for contributing to the Fund. The
lessons from our experiences are threefold.

First, robust national mechanisms should be in
place to meet water needs in times of demand spikes
or supply shortages. The most effective measure in that
regard is to ensure the regular water supply system is
resilient and, where possible, decentralized, and that
it utilizes a variety of sources. Moreover, clear steps
should be in place for times of crisis.

Secondly, international cooperation and the sharing
of best practices can provide much-needed insights and
assistance in dealing with the challenges of meeting
national water needs. The Security Council and the
General Assembly can serve as invaluable forums for
the exchange of relevant knowledge and policy tools.
Water, by nature, is a cross-border, intercontinental
force, and therefore requires truly international
approaches and solutions.

Thirdly, the matter of water supply extends beyond
the immediate issue of water. Climate change threatens
to significantly reduce already strained sources of
fresh water in regions all over the world. If we are to
meet the objectives of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, it is imperative that we effectively slow
the pace of climate change and related water depletion.
On a more local level, small-scale pollution, salinization
and poor sanitary measures can threaten the quality of
existing water supplies and necessitate costly treatment.
Awareness and education in water and sanitation,
including management of services, can therefore have a
larger-than-expected effect on water supply.

By taking those various elements into account,
we may bring our nations closer to meeting the
Sustainable Development Goals' targets on water and,
in doing so, build more resilient, secure and peaceful
societies. Today, an integrated, coordinated and holistic
approach is required - one that spans the traditional
divide between security and peace, development and
humanitarian needs - in order to meet the changing,
multifaceted nature of the challenges confronting
our time.

