Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and Mr. Diakite' for
their briefings.

The Russian Federation shares the growing concern
around the world for the problem of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. Each year thousands
of innocent people become its victims. These types
of weapons are widely used by terrorist, criminal and
illegal armed groups in order to achieve their illicit ends.
To prevent these weapons from reaching black markets,
the coordinated efforts of the entire international
community are necessary, while maintaining the
central role of the United Nations.

We attach great importance to the implementation
of the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. Today, it remains
the only universal specialized international instrument
in the area of combating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. It provides for a broad range of
measures for States to implement at the global, regional
and national levels for the purpose of combating the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, preventing
their being diverted into illicit trade, reaching terrorist
organizations, organized crime syndicates or States
subject to Security Council sanctions.

At the same time, we are convinced that the
potential of the Programme of Action is far from
exhausted. Much remains to be done to enhance its
practical impact, especially at the national and regional
levels. The implementation in practice of the approach
proposed by Russia to strengthen national controls on
transfers of small arms and light weapons will make
it possible to strengthen the security of individual
countries and whole regions coping with the severe

consequences of the use of illicit small arms and light
weapons.

It would be possible to significantly reduce the
risk of uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and
light weapons by strengthening national controls over
all phases of the life cycle of such weapons, from
their production to destruction. Among the various
necessary measures being sought is the introduction of
a ban on the delivery of all types of small arms and
light weapons to unauthorized State entities, as well
as the strict regulation of brokering activity, a ban
on unsanctioned re-export of weapons, and an end to
pirated production * that is, the production of weapons
without licences or based on expired licences.

Measures aimed at significantly lowering the risks
of the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons are scarcely included in the draft resolution
currently being put together. Furthermore, the draft
text in its current form does not reflect our approach on
this topic. Bearing this in mind, the Russian Federation
would not be able to support the draft resolution, if it
were put to a vote.

At the same time, we have to admit that we are
surprised at the methods of work of the authors of the
draft, who have basically disregarded our concrete
proposals. The final version of the text lacks balance on
the most topical issues related to combating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. Furthermore,
unlike resolution 2117 (2013), adopted in September
2013, which we believe remains valid, the current draft
has a number of substantive innovations that infringe
on the sovereignty of States, in particular the attempt to
draw up some sort of blueprint for the future expansion
of the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions in the area of control small arms and
light weapons, although the main responsibility for
fulfilling these functions within national territories
falls to the Governments of the corresponding States.

In implementing decisions to authorize exemptions
to arms embargoes, the Security Council sanctions
committees have, based on these proposed blueprints,
endowed themselves with the de facto authority to
determine at their discretion the needs of countries
under embargo with respect to certain types of
weapons, and States and groups of experts would be
encouraged to provide such information at the request
of the corresponding sanctions committees. We
consider this to be an attempt not only to have access
to sensitive information about the defence capacities of
States subject to sanctions, but also to pave the way to
the unsound practice of double standards in the future.

