Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Let
me thank the Lithuanian presidency for organizing
this public debate. The briefings made this morning
demonstrate how the protection ofjournalists in periods
of armed conflict is an important issue that deserves to
be on the agenda of the Security Council.

Luxembourg fully endorses the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

Since the last public debate on this subject (see S/PV.7003), almost two years ago, we have witnessed
increasingly horrendous actions. We all remember
the brutal images of the decapitations of James Foley,
Steven Sotloff and Kenji Goto. Those journalists had
no other ambition but to inform the public about the
realities of war. They are among the 88 journalists
who, since January 2014, have paid with their lives for
exercising their profession, most of them in conflict
situations in Iraq, Somalia, Libya and Syria. And 2015
began in the most tragic manner with respect to the
freedom of the press when two armed men burst into the
premises of Charlie Heba'o and, in cold blood, executed
eight reporters as well as four other individuals. The
Security Council most strongly condemned all those
attacks, while highlighting the need to prosecute their
perpetrators.

Most often, however, these attacks go unnoticed
because most victims are local journalists, whose fates
are intertwined with those of hundreds of other killed
civilians. Hundreds of other journalists are forgotten
because they languish in prisons where they are
frequently tortured.

The vast majority these crimes go unpunished.
While 749 journalists have been assassinated since
1992, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists,
in almost 90 per cent of cases, impunity has been total.
These numbers are unacceptable. Resolution 1738
(2006) and resolution 2222 (2015), which the Council
has just adopted, rightfully highlight the fact that under
international humanitarian law, journalists in times of
armed conflict must be treated as civilians and must
be respected and protected as such. They reiterate the
responsibility of States to prosecute anyone who has
violated international humanitarian law. The struggle
against impunity must, in fact, lie at the very heart of
our efforts to protect journalists in periods of armed
conflict. Each unpunished crime is encouragement to
all those who want to silence the truth. And it is well
known that truth is the first victim of war.

In that context, we welcome General Assembly
resolution 68/163, adopted on 18 December 2013,
which proclaimes 2 November as the International
Day to End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists,
and calles upon Member States to undertake specific
measures to fight the culture of impunity. Luxembourg
co-sponsored the resolution because we are convinced
that the fight against impunity is a critical one in terms
of preserving freedom of expression. We also welcome
the consideration of the implementation of the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity at the third meeting organized by
UNESCO, on 3 November 2014, in collaboration with
the Council of the Europe, and the debates convened by
the Human Rights Council.

It is clear that cooperation among all stakeholders
is necessary if we truly want to change things on the
ground and guarantee freedom of expression. We
encourage enhanced cooperation among Governments,
international and regional organizations, the various
United Nations entities at Headquarters and in the
field, civil society and representatives of the media in
order to enhance the protection of journalists in times
of conflict.

By way of this public debate and the resolution
adopted today, the Council has clearly shown that
it is willing to take action to ensure respect for and
the protection of journalists in periods of armed
conflict - journalists who, through their work, and
sometimes at the risk of their lives, help to uphold the
values and freedoms on which the United Nations bases
its actions. It has, moreover, acknowledged the specific
risks faced by womenjournalists. We hope that, on this
basis and on the basis of the forthcoming reports of the
Secretary-General, the Security Council will ensure
the necessary follow-up with respect to this important
issue.

