Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, I should like to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January and
to wish you every success in your endeavours. I am
deeply indebted to you and to your colleagues on the
Council for giving our Committee the opportunity to
address the Council in today's deliberations, which
again raise the alarm regarding increased Israeli
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.

Our Committee reiterates its concern at the Israeli
Government's headlong pursuit of this illegal policy,
which deliberately undermines the Promethean vision
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side
in peace and security within secure and internationally
recognized borders. The settlements, which have been
sheltered for too long behind a culture of impunity, are
violating the laws of occupation, the resolutions of the
Security Council and the road map. In practice, they
preclude the two-State solution and pose a threat to
international peace and security.

To date, the Council has failed to fully assume its
responsibility and to take the necessary decisions -
unlike most of its members and those of the regional
groups, which last month strongly condemned the
Jewish settlement activity. The Committee shares their
feelings of exasperation and urges the Security Council
to take strong measures to safeguard the two-State
solution before it is too late, in order to limit, if not to
avert, the unforeseeable consequences of a terrible
tragedy that has nonetheless been predicted.

The Council must realize that its credibility is at
stake, since, when the legal avenues for a resolution of
such an untenable situation are barred, peace and
security are everywhere imperilled. Under the present
circumstances, the signatories to the Fourth Geneva
Convention must take a firm stance and convene the

conference of the high-contracting parties, as should
have been done long ago. That means that the only
possible lasting solution is one that would result from
the full application of international law, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

In that spirit, it should be noted, neither with
displeasure nor with wide-eyed optimism, that there
has been some movement towards peace, although
tentative as yet, based on the recent preliminary
meetings between the Israeli and Palestinian
negotiators in Amman, under Jordanian auspices. We
cherish the hope that they will pave the way for
credible peace negotiations focusing on the two-State
solution and based on the 1967 borders.

It is therefore important that the Quartet and its
regional partners remain firmly committed by inviting
the parties, including first and foremost Israel, to meet
the existing commitments. We solemnly call on the
stakeholders to make a salutary return to the
negotiating table on the basis of clear criteria
guaranteed by the Quartet. In that regard, we have not
forgotten that such a resumption of negotiations should
be supported by confidence-building measures on the
ground, including an end to acts of violence, the lifting
of the blockade on Gaza, the removal of the
checkpoints and the release of Palestinian prisoners.

As the 26 January deadline set by the Quartet
approaches, we note that the Palestinian party has
submitted detailed border and security proposals. We
hope that Israel will do the same in order to
demonstrate an equal commitment to a resolution of
the conflict.

The Committee remains concerned by the current
impasse in the Security Council with regard to
Palestine's application for membership in the United
Nations. We call on the Council and the General
Assembly to fulfil their responsibilities in that regard,
and reiterate the appeal for countries that have not yet
recognized the State of Palestine to do so. The
Committee also takes this opportunity to welcome the
recent progress in the Palestinian reconciliation process
centred on the Palestine Liberation Organization
platform.

In conclusion, we urge the Council to take
decisive action to bring an end to the settlement
activity and commence their dismantlement, while the
two-State solution is still possible. For its part, the
Committee will continue to contribute constructively to
the achievement of that goal, which requires only that
the commitments made be translated into clear and
unequivocal action.

