We join Council members in thanking the Dominican Republic for arranging this timely open debate via video-teleconference with a focus on accelerating the youth, peace and security agenda. We also thank Secretary-General Guterres, Ms. Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, and Mr. Gatkuoth for their insightful briefings, and we look forward to the upcoming briefing by Ms. Al-Sakkaf. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines regards the participation and leadership of youth as a key pillar of the whole-of-society approach that is necessary for achieving lasting peace, security and sustainable development worldwide. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is encouraged by the continued evolution of the youth, peace and security infrastructure in the Caribbean and Latin America. We take note of initiatives to promote peace among Haitian youth through the use of sports in neighbourhoods gravely affected by violence, and of the many contributions of young people to the peace process in Colombia. The youth, peace and security agenda is particularly relevant for Africa, the continent with the largest youth population. It is heartening to see that young leaders such as Mr. Gatkuoth remain committed to building a fairer, more peaceful future on the continent by tackling a range of issues from terrorism and unemployment to climate change. National and regional progress notwithstanding, sufficiently funded, focused and strategic action is required to accelerate this agenda all over the world, especially in the light of enduring legacies of anti-youth ideologies and the increased threat posed by the coronavirus disease. With that in mind, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines wishes to reiterate the following strategic interventions. We must continue to fund the Peacebuilding Commission and to support even greater policy coherence within the wider peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations system. In particular, young people from diverse groups must continue to be engaged as crafters of policies rather than simply as policy recipients. Funding must target the high levels of unemployment and the barriers to education and training that render youth vulnerable to recruitment, criminality and violence. That is even more urgent considering the almost-universal drastic increase in unemployment and overall despair occasioned by the pandemic. With the pandemic amplifying existing inequalities, we call for responses that engage and account for the intersections of the women and peace and security and the youth, peace and security agendas in order to ensure young women's leadership and participation in peacebuilding and to address the escalating levels of sexual and gender-based violence. In addition, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would welcome further reporting and focus on the youth, peace and security agenda. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is inextricably linked to youth, peace and security programming. Future generations must be offered the freedom of a safe and secure world. That necessarily entails greater efforts from the international community to mobilize the necessary resources to adapt to and mitigate the effects of climate change - the greatest threat facing young people. Young people, in their diversity, have often been misunderstood and silenced, but they have always spoken. They have always had a voice. It is our responsibility to develop the apparatus with which to meaningfully engage youth and ensure their full participation in decision- making as we collectively reimagine and craft a future marked by social justice and social transformation.
