Mr. Thoms (Germany): I would like to thank
Special Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing today
and for his dedicated work in support of the Afghan
people. I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin
for his remarks and to express our heartfelt condolences
with respect to the tragic loss of life of six NATO
soldiers earlier today in Afghanistan.

Despite many challenges, Afghanistan has come a
long way in its security, political and economic transition
processes. The Afghan National Army and the Afghan
National Police have proven to be increasingly capable
of mastering the enormous task of providing a secure
environment. That development has been guided and
supported by the framework set up in Bonn, Chicago
and Tokyo by the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community. It is indispensable that all
mutually agreed commitments be fully implemented. As
for the ongoing substantial international commitment in
Afghanistan, the message of all those conferences and
of General Assembly resolution 68/11 on Afghanistan
is clear - the international community continues its
support.

The year 2014 will be marked by decisive events,
such as the presidential elections in April and the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) combat troops at the end the year. As an
international community, we need to lay the foundations

for the post-ISAF era. Let me stress that Germany stands
ready to remain engaged in Afghanistan with regard
to supporting the Afghan security forces as well. The
most important precondition for that is the signing of
the bilateral security agreement between Afghanistan
and the United States. Without that signature,
the continued presence of the whole international
community, military as well as civilian, will be put
into question. The recommendation of the loya jirga to
sign the security agreement is an encouraging signal.
Consequently, the signature of the agreement should
not be put off for too long.

In the ongoing political transition and transformation
process, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), with the consent of the
Afghan Government, needs to remain the backbone
of international engagement and the post-2014
architecture in Afghanistan. That will require focusing
UNAMA's work on key areas in which its coordinating
and supporting role will remain indispensable.

The first is the continued implementation of
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework to
ensure coherence and sustainability in Afghanistan's
development.

Secondly, while we appreciate the progress
Afghanistan has made in preparation for the upcoming
elections, UNAMA's good offices will remain necessary
to ensure the transparency and inclusivity of political
processes in the future.

Thirdly, UNAMA also has a role to play in
supporting the Afghan Government's efforts to advance
in the Afghan-led and Afhan-owned process of peace
and reconciliation. UNAMA should also closely
accompany Afghan efforts to increase cooperation with
neighbouring and regional partners, especially within
the framework of the Istanbul Process.

Fourthly, in the light of continuing violations of
human rights, including a reported increase of cases of
violence against women, UNAMA will need to continue
its monitoring and supporting role. We call upon the
Afghan Government to prioritize respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without any
discrimination. The Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission remains the key partner for such
efforts. To carry out those challenging tasks, UNAMA
will need to be adequately financed and staffed. That
also includes UNAMA's necessary presence in the field
throughout the country.
I would like to conclude by underlining that
Germany will continue to support the Government of
Afghanistan through the transition period and beyond.
We are confident that the Afghan government will use
the remaining months of its tenure to further work on
fulfilling the preconditions ofa sustained international

engagement in Afghanistan for the benefit of the
Afghan people.

