Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
thank Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his briefing
today, Under-Secretary-General Malcorra for her
presence and Mr. Antonio for providing the perspective
of the African Union. We thank as well Mr. Prodi for
his participation today.

I would like to take a moment to salute the many
African nations that support peacekeeping operations
with resources, police and troops. These contributions
have saved lives across the continent and around the
world. We are here today to promote that vital work by
deepening the partnership between the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations. We appreciate the work
of Mr. Prodi, the AU-United Nations panel and the
Secretary-General in laying out and carefully analysing
possible next steps to advance this important
partnership.

The United States fully supports enhanced
strategic ties between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council, along with more
structured coordination between the United Nation
Secretariat and the AU Commission. We also welcome
the attention of the African Union to develop a long-
term, comprehensive, capacity-building roadmap in
cooperation with the United Nations and international
partners. We will continue to support the effort to
enhance the AU secretariat's capacity to plan, manage
and sustain peacekeeping operations. And we are
dedicated to helping to build the capacity of all African
nations to secure peace through mediation, crisis
management, post-conflict reconstruction and the
development of conflict-prevention capabilities within
civilian institutions and civil society.

The United States applauds the contributions of
African nations to peace and security. Currently more
than 70 per cent of United Nations military personnel
are deployed to missions in Africa. We note that
African nations provide approximately 43 per cent of
the forces in United Nations missions on the continent,
and we recognize the major deployment of over 5,100
AU personnel in Somalia and the critical work being
done together by the African Union/United Nations
Hybrid operation in Darfur.

As President Obama emphasized during his
meeting with major troop- and police-contributing
countries last month, the United States is doing its part
to improve peacekeeping operations across the
continent and around the globe. We are consulting
more closely and frequently than ever with leading
troop- and police-contributing countries, as well as
other peacekeeping partners. We are seeking mandates
that are matched by the capacity and resources of their
peacekeeping missions. We are intensifying efforts to
mediate conflicts and revive flagging peace processes.
We are helping the United Nations to mobilize critical
assets, including medical, engineering and
transportation units, and are devoting more attention to
peacebuilding activities so that Governments can
enable peacekeepers to responsibly exit when their
work is done.

Throughout all this, we recognize the need for
secure and stable funding for African Union
peacekeeping. The United States has been and will
remain a major bilateral contributor to African
peacekeeping operations and to training and equipping
initiatives. We support the use of a multi-donor trust
fund. We have also supported, on an exceptional basis,
the use of assessed contributions to support the African
Union Mission in Somalia. However, we must stress
that that decision was only possible in the unique
circumstances of Somalia, and the United States is
unable to make a broad commitment to support such
arrangements in future operations.

To demonstrate clearly our seriousness of
purpose, I will mention just a few of our investments in
African peacekeeping since we last discussed this topic
in March.

Through the African contingency operations and
training assistance programme, the United States has
trained over 28 battalions from 15 African countries to
prepare over 23,000 peacekeepers for deployment. We
have provided substantial equipment packages to
African troop-contributing countries, including nearly
$20 million in equipment packages for Burundian and
Ugandan battalions in AMISOM. and another
$20 million for 72 urgently needed armoured vehicles.
The United States Government has also trained,
equipped and airlifted several battalions to serve in
Darfur. We continue to support the presence of peace
and security advisers at both the African Union's
Strategic Planning and Management Unit and at
ECOWAS headquarters.

Those contributions demonstrate our commitment
to strengthen the African Union's peacekeeping
capabilities, but we recognize that there is much more
work to be done. The scale of the challenge is great,
and so we encourage other donors to provide financial
support for African peacekeeping bilaterally, through
multi-donor trust funds or through other mechanisms.

We have taken careful note of the Secretary-
General's call for donors to coordinate more closely
and to harmonize administrative reporting and
accounting requirements.

It is in the interest of all nations to improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of African peacekeeping.
We believe that through coordinated efforts between
African nations and the international community,
including the United Nations, we can achieve real
progress. The United States remains steadfast in its
commitment to strengthen peacekeepers across Africa
and around the world. We are pleased to support the
presidential statement that will be issued today.

