The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. al-Estrabadi
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: I welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at
this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/46l, which contains the text of a
letter dated 7 June 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2004/460, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Romania, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and
the United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1546 (2004).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


