Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): Ijoin the
other speakers before me in reiterating, on behalf of
the people of Senegal, our deepest condolences to the
delegation of the United States upon the passing of the
prominent statesman and great figure of our time, the
late President George Herbert Walker Bush.

Mr. President, let me convey to you the enthusiastic
regards of your friend and brother, His Excellency
Mr. Macky Sall, President of Senegal, who, for the
reasons he personally explained to you during your
recent stay in Dakar, was unable to take part in this
important debate. He also asked me to once again offer
you his warm congratulations on the Ivorian presidency
of the Security Council and on your choice of such a
relevant theme for today's debate, "Post-conflict
reconstruction and peace, security and stability".

I would also like to pay special tribute to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Antonio
Guterres, for his strong commitment and judicious
reforms and initiatives to promote peace and security
in the world. I pay the same tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, for his leadership in the effective
engagement of that organization in African situations,
whether they are theatres of conflict or theatres of post-
conflict. I also welcome the presence ofthe President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Jean-Claude Brou, and
commend the important work that ECOWAS is carrying
out in promoting peace and stability in our subregion.

I cannot think of a country that would be better
suited to lead today's debate than Cote d'Ivoire. Indeed,
that beautiful country - which was temporarily
thrown off course by a crisis that almost wiped out
its solid political and institutional foundations 4 was
able to resist and overcome. Today, it has restored its
rightful place in the community of nations in the most
wonderful way possible. Senegal is linked to Cote
d'Ivoire by close ties forged by history and determined
by our inescapable common destiny. We are proud to
have taken part in the normalization process of the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire, first, within ECOWAS, at the
outbreak of the crisis, and then, within the framework
of United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, until the
end of its mandate.

Lessons learned from post-conflict reconstruction,
particularlyinAfrica,revealthatthecountriesconcerned
are generally politically fragile, their institutions
are often weak, their economies are vulnerable, their
young people are facing unemployment and their
infrastructures often need to be rebuilt. The challenges
these countries face throughout the peacebuilding
process are colossal. Their needs in terms of assistance
are equally enormous, especially with respect to
electoral assistance, reform of the justice and security
sectors, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), the strengthening of the health and education
systems, and the recovery of economic activity and
job creation.

For the most part, these are countries where
everything needs to be rebuilt following the ravages of
war, which, beyond the lives lost and the buildings and
infrastructures destroyed, shake the very foundations
on which these States are built. As a result, post-
conflict reconstruction remains a broad issue of
great complexity. Adequately undertaking post-
reconstruction therefore requires an approach that is
comprehensive, as the Secretary-General said earlier,
as well as coordinated, and must take due account of
the many security, political, institutional, economic and
financial challenges, among others. All these factors
are, of course, inextricably linked.

Beyond national reconciliation, stabilizing the
security situation in a post-conflict country is certainly
a prerequisite for the rest of the reconstruction process.
The example of our dear neighbour, Mali, with which
we share a common destiny, clearly reveals the
negative impact that security problems can have on
post-conflict recovery efforts. Stabilizing the security
situation must therefore remain a priority in actions
undertaken in this context. That is why, in addition to
DDR activities, we must also combat the circulation of
arms and restructure the defence and security forces
into republican forces capable of ensuring order and
security in those countries.

While post-conflict reconstruction requires
significant resources over long periods of time,
funding for peacebuilding activities remains limited,
irregular and unpredictable. If peace is to be sustained,
the restoration of security must go hand in hand
with economic and social development. The lack
of sustainable and predictable funding is a major
impediment to the implementation of national post-
conflict reconstruction programmes. The process of
developing such programmes is fortunately increasingly
taking into account the principle of national ownership
and the involvement of all national stakeholders.
It is therefore necessary to emphasize the importance
of maintaining and strengthening the support provided
to countries transitioning towards peace so that
they can continue to benefit from the attention of
the international community, especially in terms of
sustainable and predictable funding. This means that
the commitments made at donor conferences, which are
often slow to materialize, must be fulfilled.

The example of the successful transition in cote
d'Ivoire reminds us that the success of that critical
phase of peacebuilding is a fundamental element in
preventing relapses into conflict and a guarantee for the
return to lasting stability. The transition to sustainable
peace is a most demanding undertaking that requires
early planning, which must take due account of the
conditions and objectives to be achieved in order
to allow any peacekeeping operation to succeed. In
this respect, it is necessary to ensure from the outset
that peacekeeping missions can create the conditions
necessary to a smooth transition, including drawdown
and withdrawal, without compromising efforts aimed
at achieving the long-term goals of peace and stability.

To that end, peacebuilding activities should be
developed from the earliest stages ofa mission, orienting
efforts towards strengthening national capacity,
governance and the rule of law, while tackling the
deep structural and socioeconomic problems that these
countries often face and promoting the maintenance
of effective political dialogue and coordination among
the various stakeholders. Above all, it is important to
work towards the creation of conditions conducive to
the transfer of functions to the countries concerned
at the time of the peace operation's withdrawal.
Admittedly, this is a very difficult endeavour, but also
a very achievable one, as evidenced by the successful
experience of your country, Mr. President, as well as
Sierra Leone and Liberia, among others.

Various speakers today have highlighted efforts
undertaken at the international, regional and subregional
levels to help conflict-affected countries find their way
back to sustainable stability. However, these efforts are
often undertaken by various actors whose interventions
are not always well coordinated or in harmony, which
limits their impact on the ground. Therein lies the
advantage of the concept of sustaining peace, the
cross-cutting dimension of which calls for the building
of synergies 4 especially among the various relevant
actors 4 to develop coherent and holistic strategies and
approaches for promoting lasting peace.

In this vein, the strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union and its
regional organizations must be strengthened in order
to maximize their full potential for sustaining peace.
This implies, inter alia, greater interaction between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the relevant
organs of the African Union in order to develop better
coordination and streamline efforts on the ground,
thereby enhancing complementarity and eliminating
duplication. This also requires joint assessments of the
nature ofthe challenges to peace and security in Africa,
which are becoming increasingly complex.

Finally, there must be ongoing dialogue in
order to best harmonize support for countries on the
peacebuilding agenda.

