Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It was only yesterday that we spoke in this Chamber, and we did not think that we would be meeting again today. But we are witnessing a dramatic escalation in Idlib. The situation is becoming more worrying - more than 30 Turkish soldiers have been killed. Germany strongly condemns the attack. We express our deepest condolences to the Turkish Government and the families of the victims. We stand in full solidarity with Turkey. We see a risk for a wider regional escalation. I can only repeat what we have said numerous times in this Chamber: we demand that Syria immediately stop its military offensive against civilians and against Turkish forces. Further, we demand that Russia end its support for the military offensive by the Syrian regime. There is no military solution to the Syrian conflict or to other conflicts on the Security Council agenda. There are no military solutions; there are political solutions. Whenever these military solutions are undertaken, it is always civilians that are the victims. We see this in Syria, in Yemen and in Libya, where, also today, we saw attacks on civilian targets in Tripoli. The impact of the ongoing air strikes of the Syrian regime and its allies on the civilians in Idlib are abhorrent. I wish to quote German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas who said yesterday in this Chamber: "{I]ndiscriminate attacks against civilians are war crimes. Those responsible must be held accountable" (S/PV.8734, p. 8). He also said, "Conducting counter- terrorism measures does not absolve anyone ... from respecting international humanitarian law" (ibid). The Syrian regime and Russia must fully abide by their obligations under international humanitarian law and should return to the 2018 ceasefire arrangements and end the hostilities. We also call on Russia to continue negotiations with Turkey to bring about a de-escalation in Idlib and facilitate the start of a political process. We have said this again and again - we need a humanitarian ceasefire and we need it now. Germany, together with France, as my French colleague just said, is ready at the highest levels to work towards that goal with Russia and Turkey. The hope for a lasting ceasefire emanating from the Astana format appears to have been in vain. As others before me have said, the Astana format does not work. We also call on the Secretary-General to continue his engagement, and we very much appreciate his presence in the Chamber today, which is proof of his commitment to this issue. We encourage him to personally continue to try to find a ceasefire without delay. A sustainable solution to the Syria conflict - I can only repeat this again and again - can be achieved only through diplomatic efforts. We need to go back to resolution 2254 (2015). We need to reach this political solution under the auspices of the United Nations. The Constitutional Committee must succeed. Instead of investing in bombs, warplanes and fighting, Russia should invest in these peace talks. Instead of making cynical remarks about failing radiators, Russia should invest in and support the humanitarian efforts and assist the people who are suffering under the horrendous attacks by Syria with Russia's backing. My Minister made it clear yesterday: "TW Je must step up our efforts to find a political solution. A regime that has been killing and torturing its own people cannot bring lasting peace and stability to Syria, and reconciliation without accountability for the terrible crimes committed will not work. Those who continue to fight in this war should finally realize that" (ibid., p. 9).
