Mr. Vedrine (France) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to pay tribute to the statement made and
outstanding work done by Mr. Brahimi, which will be
even more important and decisive in coming days.

My first comment refers to the fact that, even if
we have questions about the follow-up, the essential
thing is that we are starting to attain our goal of
depriving Al Qaeda of its support by bringing about the
collapse of the Taliban regime, which has been
atrocious from many perspectives. Thus, our primary
emotion today is one of satisfaction strongly tempered
by concern.

As we prepare to fulfil our commitment to
creating a new Afghanistan, it is very important that
those who have authority in the field - military
leaders, for the time being - show concern for the
security of the populace. They must control their troops
and not perpetuate the cycle of reprisals and
vengeance. They must behave responsibly, as they
know we all expect them to do.
Of course, we will need subsequently to
accelerate the preparations that have been made in
recent weeks. Lakhdar Brahimi has proposed the
approach we should take towards attaining our goals.
France fully supports him, his goals and the phases he
has proposed. We have been making similar political
proposals since early October and it is now time to
implement them without further delay. The faster we
move, the better. Specifically, I believe that the United
Nations should move as quickly into Kabul and other
liberated cities as security conditions allow it to.

We could respond to the acceleration of
developments on the ground by launching the political
process as early as this week. I do not underestimate
the difficulties in this respect. I am aware of them, but I
feel that every Afghan leader and every representative
of an Afghan entity - from the recognized
Government to all other forces - must understand
today that all that matters is the future of the country.
That understanding must prevail over calculations of
influence and balance.

As to humanitarian assistance and to the
rebuilding of the country, I believe that we can move
quickly from one to the other. I agree that, as proposed
by Mr. Brahimi, the Group of 21 should hold a meeting
here in New York on Friday, to be chaired by the
Secretary-General, whose tireless involvement in the
search for a settlement of the Afghan question I
commend. The meeting of the Group of 21 could
relaunch the process and send a message of our long-
term commitment to all the Afghan people.

Together, we will help Afghan men and women to
rebuild their country and to create a democratic,
representative Government based on an Afghanistan at
peace. This moment may be tragic, but it represents a
great opportunity. As Mr. Brahimi has suggested, we
must therefore speedily define the type of international
security presence that we will need there. We fully
support Lakhdar Brahimi and we must not squander the
best opportunity to come along for Afghanistan in 20
years. The entire world is prepared to help, but all
those who hold responsibility, influence or power in
Afghanistan must rise to the occasion.

