The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom. In doing so, I would like to align the United
Kingdom with the statement that the representative of
the Netherlands will make later on behalf of the
European Union.

The United Kingdom, like other colleagues, is
greatly concerned by the recent outbreaks of violence
in the Gaza Strip and the large number of deaths. The
United Kingdom recognizes Israel's right to defend
itself against terrorism, but that response must be
proportionate and within international law.

British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw made a
statement earlier today in which he called on both sides
to work to put a stop to bloodshed and violence. Israel

must act with restraint, and the Palestinian Authority
must fulfil its road map commitments on security. Both
sides must take much greater care to protect civilians
because, at present, neither is fulfilling its
responsibilities under international humanitarian law in
that regard.

Continued violence, particularly in the Gaza
Strip, throws into jeopardy not only the stability of the
region but also the opportunity for progress presented
by Israeli proposals to withdraw from the Gaza Strip.
Clearly, it is in everyone's interests to ensure that Gaza
is secure, stable and economically viable, both
immediately after withdrawal and in the longer term.

The recent Quartet meeting confirmed that the
road map remains the best opportunity for progress
towards peace. The United Kingdom joins others in
calling on both sides to take the necessary steps
towards fulfilling their obligations under the road map
and thus moving the peace process forward.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

As a measure to optimize the use of the Council's
time and in order to allow as many delegations as
possible to take the floor, I will not individually invite
speakers to take seats at the table and invite them then
to resume their seats on the side. When a speaker is
taking the floor, a conference officer will seat the next
speaker on the list at the table so that we can run
through consecutively and quickly. Thank you for your
understanding and cooperation.

Members of the Council agreed that we should
aim for five minutes per intervention. In fact, members
of the Council showed admirable restraint: an average
of four minutes per intervention. I encourage the same
brevity, if I may, for the remaining contributions.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Tunisia.

