The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

We thank this morning's briefers - Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo and Mr. Lamberto Zannier - for their
briefings. I will begin by welcoming the recent decision
of the Russian and Ukrainian Presidents to resume talks
under the Normandy format and to continue working at
the expert level, including with a view to a prisoner
exchange in the near future.

In line with the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, Peru recognizes and supports the efforts
of the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact
Group to facilitate a political solution to the situation
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. In that regard, we
believe that both countries should capitalize on those
opportunities and mechanisms to promote dialogue,
while refraining from actions that exacerbate tensions
and hinder the possibilities for dialogue between
the parties.

In that regard, we took note of the entry into force of
the law to strengthen the use of the Ukrainian language,
and we express our concern that the rights of linguistic
minorities in the country, such as those in Donbas, may
be affected. Similarly, we also express our concern
about the Russian executive order to expeditiously
grant Russian nationality to residents of those regions,
given that they are controlled by separatist groups.

Therefore, in line with the decision of the
Presidents of both countries, we call on all parties
and actors involved to work together with a view to
promoting trust and dialogue and to step up the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, starting with
the ceasefire commitment.

For Peru, the Minsk agreements remain the legal
basis for and the political solution to the situation
in eastern Ukraine, and we support the package of
measures and its full implementation endorsed by the
Council more than four years ago. In that regard, we
take this opportunity to welcome the decision by both
parties to withdraw their troops and artillery from the
Stanytsia Luhanska area, which also helps address
the serious humanitarian situation. We acknowledge
the important work and efforts of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission in carrying out that task.

In conclusion, I reiterate our commitment to the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Ukraine within internationally recognized borders,
in line with the Charter of the United Nations and the
Minsk agreements.
I now I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

