The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mwamba
Kapanga (Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a
seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep concern
about the current conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which poses a serious threat to regional
peace and security. The Security Council expresses
alarm at the plight of the civilian population
throughout the country.

The Security Council reaffirms the obligation to
respect the territorial integrity and national sovereignty
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
States in the region and the need for all States to
refrain from any interference in each other's internal
affairs. In this context, the Council calls for a peaceful
solution to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including an immediate ceasefire, the
withdrawal of all foreign forces, and the initiation of
a peaceful process of political dialogue with a View to

national reconciliation. The Council expresses
support for all the regional diplomatic initiatives
aimed at a peaceful settlement of the conflict. The
problems of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must be solved on the basis of a process of
all-inclusive national reconciliation which fully
respects the equality and harmony of all ethnic
groups and which leads to the holding of
democratic, free and fair elections as soon as
possible.

The Security Council urges all parties to
respect and protect human rights and respect
humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and the Additional Protocols of
1977, as applicable to them. It condemns reported
summary executions, torture, harassment and
detention of civilians based on their ethnic origin,
the recruitment and use of child soldiers, the killing
or wounding of combatants who have laid down
their weapons, hate propaganda, sexual violence and
other abuses by any side. In particular, the Council
calls for the protection of the civilian population. It
recalls the unacceptability of the destruction or
rendering useless of objects indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population, and in particular
of using cuts in the electricity and water supply as
a weapon against the population. The Council
reaffirms that all persons who commit or order the
commission of grave breaches of the above-
mentioned instruments are individually responsible
in respect of such breaches.

"The Security Council calls for safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian agencies to all
those in need in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It calls for unrestricted access by the ICRC
to all detainees in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It urges all parties to guarantee the safety
and security of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to consult, as a matter
of urgency, with regional leaders in coordination
with the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) about ways to bring about a
peaceful and durable solution to the conflict, and to
keep it informed about developments and his own
efforts. It reaffirms the importance of holding an
international conference on peace, security and
 

development in the Great Lakes region under the
auspices of the United Nations and the OAU.

"The Security Council will follow the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo closely. It will
remain actively seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.35 pm.

