Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks Mr. Nikolay
Mladenov for the information he has provided today.

I would like to begin my statement by expressing
our concern at the fact that a written report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) was not
circulated, although it had been requested by 10
members of the Council in a letter dated 14 May and
was acted upon in June, when the report was distributed
in good time. I thank the Secretary-General for having
acceded to our request at that time, and we reiterate
that this should be a recurring practice for all reports.
We stress the importance of having written reports
provided to delegations because it allows us to have
first-hand information relating to the complete cessation
of all Israeli settlement activities, which is critical to
safeguarding the two-State solution in accordance with
resolution 2334 (2016).

Unfortunately, the Government of Israel continues
to demonstrate its disdain for the resolutions adopted
by the Security Council. Its administrative and legal
acts continue to dangerously foment negative trends
on the ground and are used as justification by the
security forces to take part in violent action against
the Palestinian people and their property.As we were
informed today by Mr. Mladenov, under the pretext
of an absence of building permits, the Government
of Israel has demolished or confiscated 25 structures
belonging to Palestinian families in Area C and in
East Jerusalem. As a result of this arbitrary action, 47
people 4 including 23 children - have been displaced
and the livelihoods of 108 civilians seriously affected.

My delegation forcefully rejects the deadly attacks
of the Israeli armed forces on the Palestinian civilian
population, including those reported by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) in its report on the protection of
civilians. In the report, OCHA details the murder by
the Israeli army of three Palestinians, including two
children, with 666 wounded between 28 August and
10 September as a result of the use of live fire. The
report also details a total of 50 Palestinian casualties
during the attempt of 10 boats to set sail from Gaza to
break the Israeli naval blockade as part of the so-called
Great March of Return. These incidents culmminated
in the ships being impounded by the Israeli navy and,
as usual, the use oflethal weapons of war and tear gas.

We are concerned about the dreadful
unemployment among Palestinians in the occupied
territories. The unemployment rate is 27 per cent - the
highest in the world, according to a report of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, which
also warns that the impact is higher on women and
young people.

We also categorically reject the politicization of
humanitarian assistance engaged in by some Member
States as they withdraw their economic support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), justifying
their decision by claiming that the school, health
and assistance services provided by the Agency are
wanting. Bolivia offers its warmest commendation to
UNRWA for its humanitarian work in assisting the more
than 5.4 million Palestinian men and women who find
themselves refugees in the West Bank, East Jerusalem,
Gaza, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. Given this priority
need, we call on the States Members ofthe Organization
to continue making their valuable economic
contributions to the Agency in the understanding that
the current crisis has the sole effect of worsening of the
quality of life for all Palestinian refugees.

As on other occasions, Bolivia expresses its firm
commitment to all international efforts to find a
peaceful solution to the situation and, in this regard,
endorses such initiatives as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and others
that guaranteejust and lasting peace so that both peoples
are able to live within internationally recognized and
secure borders.

Bolivia is convinced that the only long-term option
for resolving this occupation is the two-State solution,
ultimately leading to a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 international
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.

