Ms. Patel (Malawi): Allow me to take this
opportunity to congratulate you most warmly, Madam,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November 2001. My
delegation is convinced that your expertise, experience
and personal commitment will successfully guide this
institution through the numerous issues of critical
global importance that regularly come before the
Council, including the one under deliberation now.

My delegation would also like to pay special
tribute to you personally, Madam President, and also to
the other members of the Security Council for making
it possible for the Council to have time for an open
special meeting on the situation in Angola. This is an
issue of utmost urgency for my Government, for the
region of the Southern African Development
Community and for all sub-Saharan Africa, especially
because of the very desperate plight of our brothers and
sisters as a result of the ravages of the senseless war in
that country. I am hopeful, therefore, that our
deliberations will be useful and that they will help
determine concrete steps to break the current impasse
in the global search for a speedy resolution of the long-
running civil war in Angola.

My delegation wishes to endorse and echo the
sentiments of grave concern and disappointment
expressed by the other delegations in this special
meeting. We share the growing disillusionment with
the apparent inadequacy so far of any measures by the
Security Council to reign in Jonas Savimbi and his
insurgent UNITA. Certainly, we are getting
overanxious at the slow movement towards a decisive
settlement of the Angolan crisis. My delegation
therefore hopes that fresh and speedy efforts will be
made and that renewed political impetus will be
injected into existing measures to compel Jonas
Savimbi to abide by all Security Council resolutions
that aim to bring durable peace to Angola. The
resuscitation of the dialogue between the Angolan
Government and the UNITA rebels remains central to
peace and development in that country.

UNITA's continued belligerence does not bode
well for ongoing internal and global efforts to
maximize the potential benefits of peace, stability and
socio-economic rehabilitation and progress for the
people of Angola, who have had more than their fair
share of suffering. It is totally unacceptable that their
plight continues to deteriorate and that their human
rights and aspirations are sacrificed at the altar of the
narrow political self-interests of a brutal gang of
mindless individuals such as Savimbi and his UNITA
accomplices. My delegation would, in that regard, like
to issue a firm and unequivocal condemnation of
UNITA's intransigence and the attendant barbarism. We
hold Savimbi wholly responsible for all the heinous
acts of terrorism against his countrymen.

Malawi reiterates its recognition of, unwavering
faith in and support for the 1994 Lusaka Protocol for
Angola. This framework remains the only legitimate
path and viable option for a peaceful settlement of the
problem in Angola, able to lead to the eventual
restoration of security and political stability in that
country.

UNITA's senseless and incessant attacks against
unarmed civilian populations, including travelling
civilians in passenger trains and buses, the recent
murder of chiefs and the cold-blooded slaughter of
diamond miners in the north-eastern areas of Angola
are a stark reminder to the international community of
the rebel group's ruthlessness and lack of patriotism.
These incidents of brutality are also proof that the
current sanctions regime against UNITA is seriously
ineffectual, as the embargo has come nowhere near
achieving the desired goal of financially starving
Savimbi's war chest.

It may not be too presumptuous, in this sense, to
suspect the probability of covert links between UNITA
and external criminal interests which could be feeding
into Mr. Savimbi's war effort. In this light, it will be
necessary to investigate every possible loophole in the
sanctions regime, with a view to strengthening them
and also widening their net to cover the demand side of
the diamonds and other resources that are propping up
UNITA.

On its part - and as pointed out by the
representative of Mauritius - during its summit
meeting in Malawi in August this year, SADC agreed
to tighten United Nations sanctions against UNITA by
adopting a wide range of measures against the
movement. I therefore call on the international
community to support SADC in implementing the
sanctions regime against UNITA.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to caution
that the implications for Angola and the entire southern
African subregion of a continued stalemate in the civil
war are ominous and ghastly, politically and
economically. While Malawi greatly appreciates the
commendable work done so far by the United Nations
Office in Angola, as well as the enormous personal
commitment of the United Nations Secretary-General
and his personal representative to Angola, there is still
a need for an urgent shift towards criminalization of
the atrocities of UNITA, within the context of the
existing international legal regime for crimes against
humanity. More importantly, it should be made
abundantly clear to Mr. Savimbi that the international
community will not forever stand idly by and watch
him terrorize and decimate the Angolans with
impunity. Our patience with him has worn thin.

