Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): 1 thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his briefing. I also welcome the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Fisheries and
Marine Resources of Somalia, Mr. Abdurahman
Ibrahim, and thank him for updating the Council on the
current developments in Somalia. It is clear that while
much has been achieved so far, many challenges still
remain. Let me also welcome Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, and thank him for his useful statement.

Uganda reaffirms its support for the Djibouti
peace process, as it represents the best opportunity for
lasting peace in Somalia.
We commend the efforts made by the Transitional
Federal Government towards advancing the political
process in the country, and we support its continued
commitment to reaching out to opposition groups in the
search for lasting peace. The signing of the 15 March
agreement between the Government and Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama'a was a significant achievement. We
encourage the Transitional Federal Government to
further build on that success towards forming an all-
inclusive government.

The building of State institutions is critical for
effective governance and for security, as well as for the
stability of Somalia. Uganda commends the efforts of
the Transitional Federal Government towards the
rebuilding of State institutions, including the security
and judicial sectors and the collection of revenue.
However, major challenges still remain within those
and other sectors. It is imperative that the international
community extend more support to the Government to
help it overcome these challenges and extend its
authority over more territory.

The security situation in Somalia remains a
serious challenge. The primary responsibility for
ensuring peace and security in Somalia rests with the
Transitional Federal Government and the Somali
people themselves. For this to happen, the country
requires well trained and well equipped armed and
police forces. Retention of these forces is critical; to
achieve that, the forces need to be remunerated in a
predictable and sustainable way. Other critical areas
that require support include health, education, energy,
fisheries and infrastructure. These need to be addressed
urgently in order to change the situation on the ground.
We call on the international community to assist the
Transitional Federal Government in that regard.

The success of the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government in unifying and reconstructing the
country will depend significantly on the availability of
adequate and predictable resources. We therefore call
upon the international community to continue
supporting the Transitional Federal Government. In
that regard, we welcome the Istanbul Conference on
Somalia, to be held from 21 to 23 May. The
Conference will offer Somalia and the international
community an opportunity to review progress and
challenges in the areas of security, political
reconciliation and the reconstruction of the country.

It is also important to continue the efforts towards
bringing the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) to its authorized troop level of 8,000, to
enable it fully to discharge its mandate. We appreciate
the support that has been extended to AMISOM
through the logistical support package, the trust fund
and bilateral arrangements. One of the challenges that
remain is to provide reimbursement for all contingent-
owned equipment. In that regard, we call for
predictable and timely provision of funds and other
resources.

Piracy remains a major challenge off the coast of
Somalia, as evidenced by recent incidents. This
situation remains, in spite of the significant efforts of
the international community to deploy substantial
naval assets off the coast of Somalia to combat piracy.
This is a reminder that, as long as there is instability on
the mainland, the problem of piracy will persist. It is
important that the Transitional Federal Government be
assisted in establishing authority over its territory, as
this will ensure a durable way of combating piracy off
the coast of Somalia.

Finally, we thank Mr. Ould Abdallah and the staff
of United Nations and humanitarian agencies for their
work in difficult conditions. It is important that
arrangements be made for the relocation to Somalia of
the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM, the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia and other
United Nations agencies based in neighbouring
countries. That will help strengthen the Government
and will also send a clear signal of further support by
the international community to the people of Somalia.

