Mr. Lauber: At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for inviting me to brief the Security
Council on behalf of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and for the excellent
cooperation between the Council and the configuration.

As per established practice, this statement has been
approved by the members of the PBC configuration,
including the country concerned, Burundi.

Today's briefing gives me an opportunity to inform
the Council about my latest Visit to Burundi, which took
place in late March, and on developments that occurred
after my visit. At the end, I will formulate some
recommendations regarding international engagement
with Burundi. I briefed the PBC Burundi configuration
about the outcome of my visit on 16 April.

From 27 to 30 March, I visited Burundi for the
sixth time in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
visit allowed me to get a first-hand impression of
the situation on the ground, to maintain contact with
the Government and other national stakeholders, to
advocate for renewed dialogue and cooperation between
the Government and its international partners and to
identify further avenues for PBC engagement with
Burundi. At the time of my visit, the security situation
in the country was generally calm.

During my visit, I was received by His Excellency
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of the Republic
of Burundi; the Minister of External Relations and
International Cooperation; the Minister of Finance,
Budget and Privatization; the members of the National
Independent Electoral Commission; the President
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission;
leaders of three political parties; the African Union
Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region;
representatives of the private sector; the United Nations
country team; the International Committee of the Red
Cross; the diplomatic community and a group of local
economists and historians.

My visit was an opportunity to learn more about
the preparations for the constitutional referendum,
which took place on 17 May. The Independent National
Electoral Commission explained how it was registering
voters both for the referendum and already for the
elections of 2020 and how the referendum would be
conducted. I underlined in those contacts that the
referendum should take place in a democratic and
open environment and without any incidents. I also
invited the Government to reflect on whether Burundi
may require international electoral assistance for the
elections of 2020.

On 29 March, I met leaders ofthree political parties:
the ruling party the Conseil national pour la defense de
la democratic-Forces pour la defense de la democratie,
the Union pour le progres national and Agathon Rwasa.
They all agreed that Burundi's political actors should
define the path towards the elections of 2020 in a joint
road map. Such a road map would include benchmarks
aimed at ensuring that the elections will be free, fair,
transparent, peaceful and fully inclusive, and engage
the participation of all political parties.

The serious economic challenges that Burundi is
facing were another key subject of my conversations.
Government officials called upon Burundi's partners
to focus more on mid- and long-term socioeconomic
development than on humanitarian assistance. The
Government informed me that it is currently drafting
a new national development plan, which might be
published before the summer.

Burundi's international partners reiterated their
readiness to support Burundi with regard to both
socioeconomic and humanitarian challenges. They
expressed their wish to be informed about the national
development plan as early as possible in order to adapt
their development strategies to national priorities.
Burundi's international partners and representatives
of the private sector referred to certain challenges for
economic engagement, including the lack of foreign
currency and difficulties in obtaining bank loans.

In my conversation with the President of the
Republic, I emphasized that the PBC remains committed
to facilitate dialogue between the Government
and its international partners. In that regard, I
suggested organizing another round of socioeconomic
consultations in Bujumbura, which could involve such
additional partners as the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), the European Union and bilateral donors.
Burundi's national development plan might serve as a
basis for that conversation. The President expressed his
interest in the initiative, including the participation of
additional partners.

During my stay, high-ranking officials from
Burundi, Tanzania and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) signed a
tripartite agreement on the return of Burundian refugees
from Tanzania. Priority for repatriation will be given
to those 19,148 refugees whose registered intention to
return has already been verified by UNHCR.

With regard to the humanitarian response plan
for 2018, the Government reiterated its View that
the plan contained exaggerated numbers and that
there had not been sufficient consultation on it with
national authorities. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs had launched the plan in
February 2018. Its total volume of $141.8 million is
currently covered at the rate of only 2.9 per cent. I told
the Government and its humanitarian partners that a
swift agreement on the humanitarian response plan will
allow for the mobilization of additional resources. I also
offered the PBC Burundi configuration as a platform to
generate broader support for the plan.

When I met the President of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, I learned about the
impressive progress made in this area in recent months.
The Commission has already collected more than
45,000 testimonies and worked in 16 ofthe 18 provinces
ofBurundi. Among the challenges that the Commission
is facing are time pressure, the security of data and the
question of accountability.

In my meeting with the President, I recommended
an extension of the mandate of the Commission by
one year, until the end of 2019, in accordance with
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burundi. I indicated that the PBC could help mobilize
international technical and financial assistance for
reconciliation efforts in Burundi. As in previous
meetings, the President insisted on the importance of
national reconciliation. He responded positively to the
suggestions that the mandate of the Commission be
extended and that international expertise be mobilized.

In the past few days, representatives of the United
Nations country team and United Nations officials in
New York informed me of the following developments
that had occurred after the conclusion of my visit.

On 20 April, President Nkurunziza appointed five
new Ministers, increasing the Cabinet from 20 to 21
members. Four Ministers were replaced, including
Foreign Minister Alain Aime' Nyamitwe, who was
succeeded by Ezechiel Nibigira. The campaign for the
constitutional referendum started on 1 May. According
to various observers, the environment of the campaign
and the referendum was relatively calm. At the same
time, I received reports that included allegations of
intimidation and repression against opponents of the
constitutional changes. On 11 May, as the Special
Envoy mentioned before me, 26 people were killed in
a violent attack in the village of Ruhagarika, in north-
west Burundi, by unidentified perpetrators, which was
an assault that was broadly condemned by national
and international actors. The international community
continued to follow developments in Burundi
attentively and in a constructive manner. In view of
the constitutional referendum, the African Union and
the European Union, in their capacity as guarantors
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement,
encouraged Burundi's Government to respect the spirit
and the letter of the Agreement.

I also received an update on the implementation of
Human Rights Council (HRC) resolution 36/2, which
had been presented to the HRC on 28 September 2017,
by African countries, including Burundi. As mentioned
by the Special Envoy, the three human rights experts
who had been mandated by the HRC resolution to
determine facts and circumstances entered Burundi in
February. However, they were unable to conduct their
work and left the country after one month. In view
of Burundi's support for the HRC resolution and its
commitment to cooperation with the three experts, the
window of opportunity for the mission remains open.
According to United Nations officials, it would be
advisable to conduct the mission as soon as possible
to allow the three experts to present their report to the
Human Rights Council at its next session in June.

Based on my conversations in Burundi and New
York, I draw the following conclusions with regard to
international engagement with Burundi.

First, the international community should continue
to follow developments in Burundi attentively and take
all aspects of the current situation into account. In
doing so, there is a need for coherence among United
Nations actors and the international community,
including regional and subregional actors, and for
finding common ground with the Government in order
to build trust and a better sense of partnership.

Secondly, the mediation efforts of the East African
Community, led by President Museveni of Uganda and
by former President Mkapa of Tanzania, continue to
deserve our full support.

Thirdly, the upcoming national development plan
may offer a basis for a renewed conversation between
the Government and its international partners. I am
therefore planning to organize another round of the
socioeconomic dialogue between Burundi and its
partners in 2018, in cooperation with the Government
of Burundi and the United Nations Resident
Coordinator. The involvement of partners such as the
IMF, the European Union and bilateral donors that had
not participated in the Bujumbura round tables last
year seems crucial to me. In my View, such a dialogue
session has the potential to foster confidence between
Burundi and its partners.

Fourthly,besidesmid-andlong-termsocioeconomic
cooperation, the international community should
not neglect the immediate humanitarian needs in
Burundi. The configuration should continue to
encourage cooperation between the Government and its
humanitarian partners, with a View to addressing the
most urgent needs of the population, in particular in the
areas of basic social and health services, food security
and protection.

Fifthly, the significant gains achieved through the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement must not
be undermined. One of the advantages of a road map
to 2020 among political actors would be that it could
yield a broadly shared understanding of how the gains
of Arusha can be preserved, especially in view of the
elections of 2020.

Sixthly, the international community should
continue to support national reconciliation efforts and
follow the ongoing reconciliation process in Burundi
attentively.

