Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I find myself
deeply relieved to be speaking after the leader of our
mission to East Timor and Indonesia. I would like,
though, to take a moment of our time to put on public
record my appreciation as a member of the mission for
the way in which Ambassador Andjaba led the team. It
was not only useful; it was great fun. You are welcome,
Ambassador Andjaba, to lead a third mission to East
Timor and Indonesia if you have the time and stamina.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
yet another extremely useful, extremely comprehensive
and extremely interesting briefing. As Mr. Vieira de
Mello has said, we are now at a pivotal time for the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and for East Timor, and it is very
appropriate that the Security Council should spend
some public time today discussing the issue.

I will not attempt a comprehensive round-up.
Others have done that before me and much better than
me. However, I do want to highlight a number of points
of interest to the United Kingdom, and I want to come
at it from a slightly different direction from other
statements in this debate so far and to approach the
complex of issues, in a sense, the other way around.

One of the abiding impressions that I came away
with from the mission's visit was how much East
Timor and Indonesia, in a sense, depend on each other.
It is vitally important that the relationship between the
two become full-blooded, comprehensive, fruitful and
productive. Many of the mechanisms already exist to
facilitate that exchange. I hope that over the next few
weeks and months both sides will put renewed impetus
into their cooperation.

It is very good news that a date for the meeting of
the Joint Border Commission has been set for - if I
have it right - 30 November. We look forward to
further meetings of the Commission in December -
perhaps at the level of plenipotentiary, since I
understand that this week's meeting will be at what I
may call the director level.

It is very important that that framework should be
used to the full. It is very important that it and other
avenues for cooperation are used to reach a speedy
resolution of some of the issues outlined in the
mission's report. I would particularly mention in this
regard, as Ambassador Soderberg has done, pensions,
which will be of fundamental importance to stabilizing
the future East Timorese economy, and the question of
the Oecussi enclave and the need for a fully negotiated
transit arrangement to provide access between East
Timor and Oecussi in perpetuity.

I would like now to turn to West Timor and the
refugee situation there. The mission's observations are
well set out in its report, and I do not want to repeat
them here. But I do want to say two things. First, it is
clear that the militias, in whatever form, remain a
problem. I very much welcome the determination of
Coordinating Minister Yudhoyono to come to grips
with the problem of intimidation in the refugee camps,
and we look forward to his further information to the
Council about the steps that the Government of
Indonesia is taking in this regard. It is a vitally
important element in what is really a very complex
jigsaw.

My second point is to underline the importance of
the return of international relief agencies to West
Timor. This can be done only when the security
situation stabilizes to the point where it makes a return
sustainable, and a decision on whether that point has
been reached can only be for the United Nations to
take. For this reason my delegation attaches
considerable priority to a visit by United Nations
security experts to West Timor. As others have said,
this is a perfectly normal part of the procedure for
taking decisions on the presence of United Nations
agencies in areas where security has been bad. We hope
that that visit can happen soon.

Once the United Nations agencies have been able
to return - assuming the outcome of the United
Nations security team's discussions is positive - it
will be very important to maintain a high state of
vigilance on all sides to ensure that appropriate action
can be taken if the situation deteriorates and that proper
links and cooperation are maintained between the
United Nations agencies and the Indonesian authorities,
and others with an interest in this matter.

It is particularly important to get the international
agencies back because, while ad hoc returns such as the
MILSAS group - ex-TNI reservists from East
Timor - to which Mr. Vieira de Mello has referred are
extremely welcome, there is going to be no substitute
for a proper and properly internationally observed
registration process for the refugees. That is the best
possible guarantee that we can all have that they are
able to take decisions about their own future without
threat or coercion and in safety. It must be a high
priority objective for us all.

I would now like to turn to East Timor, reversing
the order as I have done. Mr. Vieira de Mello's remarks
are well-taken and very helpful. I particularly note
what he had to say about the area of justice and the
investigation of serious crimes, which was indeed a key
priority for the mission during its visit. We look
forward to receiving the details regarding the resources
that UNTAET needs and will look at them carefully.
But I want to say that given the crucial importance of
justice and reconciliation in the whole process of
refugee return in East Timor, it is most important that
the policy on justice and serious crimes reflects the
national consensus among the East Timorese. I know
that UNTAET will take steps to ensure that the two
things become congruent. It is going to take a lot
longer than independence to sort out the question of
responsibility and accountability for the events of
1999, and it is very important that that process should
go smoothly.

The key next step is clearly going to be the
donors' meeting in Brussels next week. We would see
four main issues for that meeting. Again, they are
broadly congruent with the points that Mr. Vieira de
Mello has concentrated on this morning.

The first issue pertains to continued
improvements in the pace of rehabilitation and
reconstruction. I listened carefully to what the Special
Representative said about UNTAET leaving things
behind when it moves on. I think that that is an
extremely useful and practical observation to be
making at this stage. Like other speakers, I hope that
the General Assembly will give early consideration to
the questions that the Special Representative has raised
about the use of assessed contributions. Clearly, the
cardinal principle that assessed contributions should
not be used to fund capital- and development-related
expenditure is enshrined for very good reason. But
equally there is a good case in situations like that of
UNTAET to implement the rules with good sense and
with flexibility. We hope that it will be possible to
reach a modus vivendi on these lines, which allow
some of the essential requirements to be met.

The second priority for the Brussels meeting is a
clear strategy and timetable for the political transition
in East Timor. We have been one of those who have
emphasized the importance of charting out a course to
independence at various stages in various Council
discussions. It should not be too fast, it should not be
too slow, but it should be workable and it should carry
with it the clear ownership of the Timorese people. We
hope that the discussions in Brussels will provide
clarity on this point.

The third priority will be Timorization. Here, I
think the process is going well, but I hope that it will
be possible to take further steps to address some of the
problems that have occurred so far, particularly in the
area of recruiting senior government servants.

Finally, there is the consolidated budget, which in
turn will reflect East Timor's long-term sustainability
and on which I listened carefully to what the Special
Representative had to say about the sources of
resources for the Timorese economy in the longer term.
Some ballpark decisions on what is supportable and
what is sustainable will have to be taken soon in order,
not least, to chart out the need for development and
international assistance over the next few years. Here, I
want to endorse Ambassador Andjaba's point very
strongly. It is clear that there will be a need for a
substantial United Nations presence in East Timor after
independence. It is equally clear that we should begin
to start thinking about that now and I hope that it will
be possible for the Secretariat and the Secretary-
General to let us have at least some preliminary
indications of the way this thinking is going at the time
of the UNTAET mandate renewal next year.

I have spoken for long enough. Suffice it to say
that I hope the Council will soon be able to take some
action to formally enshrine the conclusions of the
mission's report. The United Kingdom will make its
own contribution to that process and I hope we shall be
able to bring something to fruition very soon.

