Mr. Listre (Argentina)(spoke in Spanish): Allow me
first of all to say how pleased I am that the Secretary-
General has joined us here in our discussion. I would also
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr.
Prendergast, for his very thorough and useful report. I
also wish to express thanks for the initiative of the
President's Government, which has placed particular
emphasis on the question of the effectiveness of
sanctions.
Within this context, today we will adopt the terms of
reference to guide the working group on sanctions

 

contained in the President's note on general issues relating
to sanctions. Argentina fully supports that process, which it
views not only as valuable but also as very necessary.

From the standpoint of theory, we understand
sanctions to be an important element of preventive action
that makes it possible without the use of force to express
the international community's rejection of a given position
or action. Such measures, in keeping with Article 39 of the
Charter, are intended to modify the behaviour of a State.

Until recently, this option was more theory than
practice, for it had been used on only a few occasions. But
in more recent years, the Security Council has resorted to
sanctions not only with greater frequency but in respect of
a wider range of scenarios. This relatively meagre
experience has led in some cases to unexpected results or
events.

On 15 March we suggested that the valuable "lessons
learned" exercise should be applied in the area of sanctions
as it has been in the sphere of peacekeeping operations. We
believe that the Council now has the experience necessary
to assess systematically the lessons learned and to see how
those lessons - which will emerge with greater clarity
when the working group has concluded its deliberations -
can help us in the future. We therefore support the broad
terms of reference that will guide the working group. We
believe that its conclusions and recommendations must have
a meaningful impact on the future role and effectiveness of
sanctions.

As we shall be participating in the working group on
sanctions, where this issue will be analyzed in depth, I shall
limit my statement to a few elements that are of concern to
us. Priority attention should be given to the design of
sanctions in such a way as to avoid their use being viewed
as a half measure - which would jeopardize their
effectiveness and have a considerable impact on the
credibility of the Organization. Similarly, greater care in the
design of sanctions is crucial if we wish to maximize
support from the international community, which is
essential for the effectiveness of any measures.

The area of sanctions design includes a vast number
of elements, but the first question would seem to be
whether the use of sanctions is on the face of it the proper
tool in a given case. In that connection there should be a
logical connection between the tool and the objective. To
that end, pre-assessment is essential to help determine
whether the expectations and goals are objective and
reasonable. Throughout a sanctions regime, continued
periodic assessments will be necessary to determine
whether or not the conditions continue to exist for
attaining the objective or whether it is necessary to
redesign the sanctions.

In our View, the various measures enumerated in
Article 41 of the Charter are intended to modify the
behaviour of a State and are not of a punitive nature. We
must therefore avoid the perception that the measures
themselves or their unintended effects are of that nature.
In such cases we must consider the possibility of
alternative measures.

Against that background, we support the definition
of objective criteria for the lifting of sanctions in the
same resolution that establishes the sanctions. This is of
particular importance because it is directly related to the
long-term perception of the legitimacy of the sanctions.

A level of effectiveness will be ensured by the
complete implementation of the measures in a sanctions
regime. Even though the implementation of any resolution
lies with Member States, every effort must therefore be
made to encourage such implementation.

Here, the Secretariat and the sanctions committees have
a significant role to play.

The question of implementation is related also to the
formulation of measures. While the text of each resolution
is the result of a unique political process, it is necessary
to try to unify the terminology of these resolutions with
a view to promoting implementation, including the use of
clear and unequivocal terms that require no interpretation.
Here, the working group should bear in mind the views
expressed today by Mr. Prendergast.

We know that a lack of effective monitoring
machinery can cause a sanctions regime to be ineffective.
We need only recall the sanctions against UNITA,
something we shall be considering at tomorrow' s meeting.

Along with monitoring, we believe that greater
dissemination of information could contribute to
effectiveness; greater awareness of the purpose of the
sanctions and the measures can, inter alia, promote their
effective implementation. This is particularly true for
targeted sanctions. We also feel that targeted sanctions are
a tool that should be used to avoid a major impact on the
civilian population and to minimize unintended effects.

 
But we know that for targeted sanctions to be truly
effective there must be a greater commitment from the
international community and more intensive monitoring or
verification. Without those basic ingredients, effectiveness
will be seriously compromised.

The planning, implementation and monitoring of
sanctions regimes requires the availability of sufficient
human and economic resources. To that end, sanctions
specialists should be included in the Secretariat. If sanctions
are to be a tool of which the Organization can make use in
the future, they must be adapted and fitted to its needs. The
cost is relatively low when compared with the other
options.

We believe that there will be greater observance of
sanctions if the measures adopted are endorsed by the
international community; if the measures can be
implemented; if compliance is ensured through a monitoring
mechanism; if there is an attempt to diminish unintended
impact, including through an appropriate mechanism for
humanitarian exceptions; and if the active cooperation of
the countries of the region is secured.

On the other hand, sanctions will be violated or
ineffective if the measures are viewed as excessive, unjust
or punitive, or if non-compliance does not entail
consequences.

I wish in conclusion to express my delegation's entire
commitment to the coming work of the working group; we
hope that its conclusions and recommendations will meet
the expectations expressed at this meeting.

