Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Let me
first of all congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
Minister on the assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. We are confident
that the experience and wisdom of the brotherly country
of Egypt, garnered over centuries and inspired by the
great Egyptian civilization rooted in history, will guide
your leadership and presidency of the Council.

The choice of the theme "Countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism" shows that the Egyptian
delegation has identified an important factor in the
exacerbation of terrorism. It is through the use of
rhetoric that incites violence that terrorism has spread
like wildfire. The access of terrorist groups to the
most sophisticated means of communication - the
Internet, social networks, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram
and so forth - has facilitated their success on many
occasions. Consequently, several countries have fallen
victim to terrorism, including Egypt this morning, as
well as Tunisia and Iraq. Every day more countries are
added to the list of countries victims of terrorism.
The Kingdom of Morocco, which has also been
the target of terrorist attacks in the past, expresses
its solidarity with the three brotherly Arab countries.
Morocco offers its condolences to the families of the
victims. It reiterates its condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and emphasizes that nothing can justify
any terrorist act. Terrorism can not be associated with
any religion, civilization, nationality or ethnic group.

The past two years have been disastrous for the
international community, which has been hit several
times by the terrorist groups Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front,
Al-Qaida and Boko Haram and their affiliates. This list
is likely to grow if the international community does
not take appropriate measures to counter and, above all,
erradicate the discourse and ideologies of terrorism.

The well-oiled financial machine, together with a
sophisticated communication strategy, have enabled
Da'esh by exploiting the Internet and social networks to
recruit foreign terrorist fighters from all over the world.
It has websites preaching its destructive ideology to
which many young people and civil servants from
different nationalities and social strata are unwittingly
converted. This has brought the number of foreign
terrorist fighters to more than 30,000, coming from
more than 90 countries.

It is unfortunate and unthinkable that a family
would wake up one morning to discover that their child,
who had been well educated in good schools and lacked
nothing, left to join the ranks of terrorists in Iraq or
Syria or in other hot spots. However, without a counter
narrative and with only a single hateful and incendiary
discourse, young people have become easy prey to the
forces of evil. The absence of measures to stem the
misuse of information technology and the Internet
allow terrorist groups to continue their dirty work.

Terrorist groups have no respect for life or humanity,
much less for ethics and morality. They broadcast their
atrocities on the Internet and social networks. They
also exploit the public's right to information. Their
terrorist acts are reported in the media, serving as an
instrument to impress and take the lead in international
affairs. The images of the barbarity of terrorists are
broadcast in the media and newspapers. These latter, in
the name of freedom of the press and against all ethical
deontology, wrongly propagate these photos, thereby
disseminating terrorist propaganda without realizing it.
Accordingly, the trap of dividing societies and sewing
confusion between a religion like Islam and terrorist
groups that seek to identify with Islam is spreading and
fueling Islamophobia, xenophobia and racism.

Worse yet, the media, television audience and
newspaper readers are caught in this trap as they
appropriate the discourse of xenophobia and racism,
supporting extremist political thought. Without citing
examples, journalists have become the spearheads of
hate speech and xenophobia. The radical discourse in
houses of worship, and incitement to violent extremism
and the commission of terrorist acts are other means
adopted by terrorist groups to achieve their destructive
goals.

While resolutions 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2199
(2015), 2249 (2015) and 2253 (2015) helped to respond
to some aspects of terrorism, especially foreign
terrorist fighters and the draining of financial resources
of terrorist groups, other measures are needed. In
this regard, allow me to advance some ideas that
my delegation considers to rein in this factor giving
terrorist groups access to a large global population of
all ages and categories.

While the right to freedom of expression, access
to information and use of information technologies,
including the Internet and social networks, must be
guaranteed for all, in law and in constitutions, it
should not be exploited for the purpose of terrorism.
It is therefore important to adopt new laws that, in full
respect for human rights and the right to freedom of
expression, prohibit the misuse of Internet.

We must also develop a counter-narrative that
exposes the rhetoric of terrorist groups that exploit
Islam to purely criminal purposes that our religion
and the teachings of Islam have always condemned.
Television channels dedicated to the dissemination of
moderate speech should be authorized. The private
sector, Internet service providers and the social media
benefits must operate in compliance with the law and
allow their customers to use the Internet solely for
peaceful purposes and not to infringe the safety of
citizens.

Imams must preach the true Islam of tolerance and
coexistence with moderate views accepted by the youth
of the twenty-first century. That is why the Kingdom
of Morocco has restructured and reformed religious
realm, in particular through, first, the establishment
of a scientific authority responsible for interpreting
the texts of the Koran and the Hadith, which explains
the acts of the Prophet; secondly, the training of young
male and female preachers in the precepts of Islam
based on the values of dialogue, tolerance, moderation,
coexistence and respect for others, as advocated by
Islam; and thirdly, the creation of a programme for
the deradicalization, rehabilitation and integration of
foreign terrorist fighters. The Moroccan experience in
training preachers has been shared with several friendly
countries in Africa, the Arab world and Europe through
bilateral agreements. Fourthly, interfaith discussions
must be intensified. Morocco organized in Fez a forum
on the role of religious leaders in preventing incitement
to hatred in 2015, and a conference in Marrakech on the
protection of religious minorities in Muslim societies,
sanctioned by the Marrakech Declaration, to guarantee
the security of minorities.

