Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): I wish to join the others
who preceded me in expressing our felicitations and
congratulating you, Mr. President, on holding this
debate on the tenth report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL).

Our delegation is happy to note that the Abuja
Ceasefire Agreement between the Government of
Sierra Leone and the members of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) is still holding, despite initial
hitches and problems. It will be recalled that at the
meeting held in Abuja on 2 May 2001 to review the
Ceasefire Agreement, it was observed that there were
ceasefire violations by the Civil Defence Force (CDF).
At that meeting, it was also agreed that the CDF and
the RUF should disarm simultaneously, and that all
fighting groups should release all abductees, in
particular child combatants. The meeting further urged
the two parties to create an atmosphere conducive to
the safe return of refugees and internally displaced
persons.

Considering that barely a year ago, particularly
after the abduction of 500 United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone soldiers, many thought the situation in
Sierra Leone was hopeless. Today we are happy to see
that tangible progress is being made in Sierra Leone.
The deployment of UNAMSIL soldiers to Lunsar,
Makeni and Magburaka, as well as the extension of
patrols to Koidu, which is a major diamond-producing
centre, and to areas like Kailahun, Buedu and Kabala,
is also a welcome development. Surely this is as a
result of the improvement in the leadership and
professionalism of UNAMSIL. In this regard, we wish
to commend the tireless efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Sierra
Leone, Ambassador Oluyemi Adeniji, and the able
leadership of UNAMSIL. We believe that the arrival of
the Third Battalion from Bangladesh, the Ukrainian
aviation unit and the advance party of the Pakistani
contingent will further strengthen the ability of
UNAMSIL to effectively deploy all over the country.

Indeed, it is gratifying to observe the progress
being made in the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme.
We are happy to note the increasing number of
combatants, both in the RUF and the CDF, being
disarmed at the various DDR centres in Port Loko, Bo,
Kenema, Daru, et cetera. The total number of ex-
combatants who have been disarmed since 18 May
2001 stands at 5,669, of which 1,808 are from the RUF
and 3,861 from the CDF. The number of weapons
collected is 2,991, along with more than 150,000
rounds of assorted ammunition. It is also noteworthy
that weapons handed in by the RUF in the Kambia
district were of serviceable quality and included
several heavy weapons.

However, our delegation wishes to observe that
accommodations at the various disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration centres have proved
to be inadequate, resulting in overcrowding and water
shortages. Also, we wish to observe that there is still a
critical gap in the reintegration programme, including
the absence of a bridge between demobilization and
reintegration. Without effective and adequate
reintegration opportunities, the ex-combatants could
resort to banditry or return to the bush. This is why we
urge that in the short term, ex-combatants be provided
with adequate food, materials, cash and vocational
training to enable them to return to civil life. In the
long term, employment and other forms of income
generation will depend on the revival of the economy.
One step in the right direction is donors conference
organized by the World Bank, held in Paris from 11 to
12 June 2001, to generate financial support for the
DDR programme in Sierra Leone, through the World
Bank-managed multi-donor trust fund. We call on
donor countries to seize the opportunity presented by
the ceasefire in Sierra Leone to successfully implement
the DDR programme. We also wish to draw attention to
the urgent need for humanitarian assistance in the
refugee camps.

The restoration of the authority of the
Government of Sierra Leone to all areas of the country
and the restoration of basic public services and
infrastructure is another critical element in the peace
process. We are happy to note that UNAMSIL is
assisting the Government of Sierra Leone in this
regard. We are also glad to note that UNAMSIL is
helping to train new Sierra Leone police recruits and
providing advice on investigation methods and the
deployment of police officers throughout the country.
We look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the review of the role of United
Nations police advisers in the current environment in
Sierra Leone. We also support the need to bring the
civilian police component of UNAMSIL to its
authorized strength of 60 civilian police advisers as
soon as possible.

The issue of elections in Sierra Leone, scheduled
for December this year, is critical to the whole peace
process. We commend the Government of Sierra Leone
for its commitment to the democratic process in spite
of the difficulties confronting it. We urge the RUF to
form a political party and to participate in the
forthcoming election. Furthermore, we call on the
United Nations to provide support to ensure a free and
fair election. We further urge the Government of Sierra
Leone to help to smooth this process.

In spite of the recent progress, the situation of
internally displaced persons and returnees in Sierra
Leone continues to be a major cause for concern. We
hope that UNAMSIL will continue to carry out regular
monitoring of human rights abuses in all the areas in
which it is deployed. We welcome the release of over
1,000 abducted children, 870 of them released by the
RUF. We encourage this development, and we hope
that all other children will be released soon.

Furthermore, we urge that action be expedited on
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the
Special Court. Of the estimated $57 million earmarked
for the Special Court, only $34 million in pledges has
been received. In this regard, we appeal to donors to
make additional contributions so that the Special Court
can be established.

Finally, our delegation would like to commend
the Secretariat, in particular the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and his team, for the progress
made so far in Sierra Leone. Also, we would like to
commend the improved level of consultations between
the Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries. As
a result of these consultations, the troop contributors
and the Secretariat have been able to understand each
other better.

In conclusion, the positive developments in Sierra
Leone over the past few months are an indication of
what can be achieved when we are all committed to the
peace process. We therefore call on the RUF, as well as
the Government of Sierra Leone, to continue to work
resolutely and in good faith towards achieving peace.
We also call on the leaders of the Mano River Union
countries to start without delay a political dialogue that
will have as its principal objective the restoration of
security and stability in the subregion. Developments
in Sierra Leone signal momentum in the right direction.
This window of opportunity must be encouraged and
supported.

