Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Since
1999 the Security Council has been addressing the
question of the participation of children in armed
conflict, because it understands that this painful reality
of our times represents a grave threat to the future of
new generations that will inevitably have consequences
for international peace and security in the world of
tomorrow.

Once again, Jamaica, through its Permanent-
Representative, now President of the Council, has
proposed as the subject of today's open debate a topic
that is both a moral imperative and intellectually
stimulating. We are extremely grateful.

Likewise, I would like to express my gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his detailed report, issued on
19 July, which will undoubtedly contribute many
aspects and arguments to this debate. It brings us face-
to-face with the real situation of children in armed
conflict and includes recommendations, many
addressed to the Security Council.

The presence of the Deputy Secretary-General is
particularly meaningful. She has expressed the concern
of the Secretary-General and her own concern about
this very important issue.

I would also like to express my thanks for the
presentations by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol Bellamy.

Security Council resolution 1261 (1999) is a
major milestone since in that resolution the Council
took the matter in hand, with the aim of taking
measures to end the scourge of the use of child
soldiers, as well as to alleviate the agonizing plight of
children who are victims of armed conflict. Those
children are often forcibly taken from their homes,
separated from their parents, deprived of the necessities
of life, left without education, exploited and sexually
abused.

Moreover, in resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296
(2000), on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the Council made special provisions for children who
are the victims of armed conflict. These normative
provisions are clear proof of the Council's concern
about, and commitment to, safeguarding the rights of
children in conflict situations and once and for all
putting an end to their use as soldiers.

However, despite the efforts of the international
community, we continue to receive reports that the
victimization of children continues, through forced
recruitment, economic exploitation and sexual abuse.
Girls are in a particularly vulnerable situation, for they
must often act as heads of families separated by war
and face rape, unwanted pregnancy, abduction and
enslavement. This is compounded by the fact that in
addition to their tremendous suffering in the immediate
term many of them experience a social stigma that
impedes their reintegration into families and societies
in the post-conflict phase.

What response can the international community
in general, and the Security Council in particular, give
to these boys and girls? What solutions do we have to
offer them?

First of all, as the Council has noted repeatedly
and most recently in its presidential statement of 30
November 1999, we need to build a culture of
prevention, which essentially means creating
conditions that prevent the emergence of conflicts.
Building a culture of prevention is without question the
major challenge facing the Organization in the future,
as it entails eradicating extreme poverty, creating
conditions for the development of all countries and
ending social exclusion and intolerance of diversity.

A poor or ignorant boy or girl living in a poor
society lacking any development prospects has an
exponentially greater likelihood of being recruited as a
soldier than boys or girls living under decent
conditions for living and growing.

The second type of solution that the international
community can offer is education. UNICEF has
frequently stressed that children who attend school are
much better protected against forced recruitment and
have more ways to defend themselves in conflict
situations. As the Secretary-General correctly points

out in his report, schooling - even emergency
schooling in the case of refugees and internally
displaced persons - protects children against abuse

and gives them a psychological shield against the stress
of war. It also provides them with a supportive
emotional framework that is essential for children who
have been abused or separated from their parents.

Regrettably, the very existence of the conflict
militates against schooling. The World Education
Forum, held in Dakar in April of this year, noted that in
the last 10 years the existence of armed conflict has
been the main obstacle to achieving the objective of
providing basic education to all children - boys and
girls.

For this reason, it is important to take into
account the recommendation made by the Secretary-
General in his report concerning the need for United
Nations agencies and other humanitarian and non-
governmental organizations working in the area of
helping children in conflict situations to provide for
basic educational services.

Formal schooling must be supplemented with
specific educational campaigns targeting specific
problems, such as awareness-raising campaigns to
prevent landmine accidents and educational campaigns
to prevent sexual abuse.

Lastly, the third approach to a solution is justice.
In this regard, the Rome Statute creating the
International Criminal Court is a milestone, as it
defines as war crimes rape or sexual attacks against
children; the conscription of children under 15; and
intentional attacks on civilian populations,
humanitarian vehicles or personnel, hospitals or
schools.

Furthermore, the Statute defines the forcible
transfer of the children of a threatened national, ethnic,
racial or religious group to its assailants as genocide,
and sexual slavery as a crime against humanity. For
this reason, we express the hope that all States will sign
and ratify the Rome Statute and that it will soon enter
into force.

It is also encouraging to see that the General
Assembly adopted on 25 May last the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
Argentina signed that Optional Protocol on 8 June and
urges all States to sign and ratify it as early as possible.

Children - boys and girls - are the most
vulnerable segment of the civilian population, not
simply because of their inherent weakness but also
because any harm caused them will have inevitable
consequences for their development and their future
social roles.

The Security Council, within its purview, should
continue to address the situation of boys and girls
caught up in armed conflict and to foster awareness
among the leaders of the international community in
this regard.

