Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, allow me first of all to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency, and to commend the
Permanent Representative of Botswana on the high calibre
of the presidency under him and his colleagues last month.

I should like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for taking the initiative of holding this public debate on
Afghanistan, thus enabling us to hear the opinions of the
interested States, which we will take into account when the
Council considers the Secretary-General's report.

Since the last time the Council took up the question of
Afghanistan, the situation there has deteriorated without let-
up. The Secretary-General has informed us that the Afghan
capital was heavily bombarded in March: several offensives
and counter-offensives have been launched around the city,
and we know that military preparations are under way in
several other parts of the country.

In such circumstances, it is unfortunately impossible
to avoid restating the obvious, which is that no military
solution is possible in Afghanistan. The only effect of these
military attacks is to increase the suffering of the civilian
population just that much more. All we can do, therefore,
is once again demand - as the Council did in its
presidential statement of 15 February 1996
(S/PRST/1996/6) - that the hostilities be ended.

However, I would like to lay stress on an immediate
requirement, which is a humanitarian obligation: the
obligation to allow free access to Kabul for humanitarian
assistance, for emergency foodstuffs. In this connection,
allow me to pay a tribute to the humanitarian
organizations - several of which, of course, are French in
origin - that are serving in Afghanistan, and which
continue, despite the pressure and the difficulties, to carry
out their mission of providing aid and succour.

What is to be done? In 1994, the General Assembly
charged a Special Envoy, Mr. Mestiri, with promoting
dialogue between all the factions in Afghanistan, and
many of us here know Mr. Mestiri well and value him
highly. Mr. Mestiri has gone to Afghanistan on many
occasions; he has established contacts with all the Afghan
parties. He has done what he could to convince those he
has talked to to accept the idea of a dialogue to include
all the parties. He is continuing that task right now, and
has also - and this is a good thing - set up shop in
Afghanistan proper.

The Security Council has in the past on several
occasions come to the aid of the Special Envoy in his
efforts to restore peace to Afghanistan. Today, when the
circumstances belie the existence of any improvement, it
seems to us that it is particularly necessary for the
Council to renew that aid and support the proposals
Mr. Mestiri is making, which proposals all have to do
with the idea of restoring and nourishing a dialogue
between all the parties.

If a return to peace is to last, a government must be
established that is accepted by all the various components
of the country, and, it would appear, all those components
are in favour of this idea, which must therefore be made
a reality. Not one of the major communities in
Afghanistan, either ethnic or religious, must be left out of
the dialogue.

This, I think, is an idea that should be borne very
much in mind as the Special Envoy, with our aid, seeks
agreement on his ideas for a meeting: all the communities
must participate in this kind of dialogue, and this is the
necessary condition for maintaining the country's
independence and territorial integrity and ensuring that
Afghanistan - and I know that many members here have
sympathy and affection for that country - enjoys
stability at home, which stability is itself vital for the
stability of the whole region.

