Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to start by thanking Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ms. Heidi Grau and Mr. Halit Cevik for their outstanding briefings. I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome His Excellency Mr. Sergiy Kyslytsya here today. The Dominican Republic believes that achieving peace must be a collective responsibility. We therefore appreciate the political and diplomatic efforts made on the ground to create the conditions to restore peace and stability to the Ukrainian people. Following the signing of the Minsk agreements and the subsequent adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), we note continuing violations of the ceasefire, as indicated in the reports of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. It is concerning that these are so numerous. Worse still, the continuing high death toll is compounded by the alarming number of people affected by poverty and internal displacement. During the conflict, cracks have emerged in the system of public services for civilians, including the limitation of crossing points used daily by thousands of people, the inability to provide timely quality services to meet the needs of the inhabitants in the affected areas, including poor or non-existent mental health care, care for victims of gender violence and other, no less important matters. In that connection, we welcome the efforts and solidarity of the international community to help the most vulnerable population in this area. The Dominican Republic welcomes the meeting of the quartet in the Normandy format, held in Paris in December. We especially thank France and Germany for their efforts in this quest for peace. That important relaunching of the peace negotiations gave birth to the necessary decision to respect the ceasefire regime, to clear mines and to open new border crossings and three new areas for the withdrawal of forces and equipment within the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group at the end of March. We also welcome an additional result of the Paris meeting - the recent exchange of 200 prisoners, a positive step towards progress in the peace process. These actions show the political will of the parties to move towards a definitive solution. We urge the parties to focus on the objectives of the Minsk agreements, with the necessary determination to overcome difficulties and to reach a consensus on differences in order to fully implement the agreements. That is why we believe that it is appropriate to convene a future Normandy format meeting in order to ensure that local elections are held in the best conditions and guarantee the continuity of the negotiations within the framework of the implementation of the peace agreements. We reiterate our commitment to defending the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Ukraine, within the internationally recognized borders, while continuing to urge respect for the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes. In conclusion, on the fifth anniversary of the Minsk agreements, we continue to insist that those agreements constitute the legal basis for resolving the conflict in eastern Ukraine and the instrument for achieving the political solution that the country and the region long for. We call for the continuation of dialogue between the parties under the auspices of the current Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group. Furthermore, we express our support for the package of measures endorsed through the Council's adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), which seek the effective implementation of those peace agreements.
