Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his briefing on the situation in the Republic
of Mali and developments in the activities of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) on the ground. We also
join our colleagues in welcoming the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Republic of Mali, Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly.

Five years have elapsed since the establishment of
MINUSMA and three since the signing ofthe Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Unfortunately,

despite these events, Mali has not yet found the stability
necessary to allow its people to live in an atmosphere of
peace. The high degree of complexity and fragility of
the humanitarian and security situation in that country,
which has spread throughout the Sahel region, highlights
the consequences of interventionism and regime change
policies since, following the 2011 conflict in Libya, the
side effects of that destabilization have included the
regrettable results of chaos and terrorism.

Asymmetric threats, terrorist threats, endless
clashes between armed groups and intercommunal
violence continue to jeopardize the integrity and lives
of the civilian population - not to mention the fact that
they have slowed down the country's economic growth
and development, extended and compounded the
presence and consequences of transnational organized
crime in the subregion, and significantly diminished
the capacities of the Malian security forces, which have
suffered complex attacks while defending themselves
and protecting their population.
We are concerned that, in the northern and central
sectors of Mali, the presence of mercenaries, drug and
arms traffickers and human traffickers has turned their
criminal activities into a modus vivendi that impedes
the consolidation of the peace Agreement, and which
is also increasingly contributing to the deterioration of
the security and political situation.

We consider it crucial to continue supporting
the process of implementing the peace agreement.
In that regard, we call on the Malian Government
and the international community to join forces in
a more coherent and effective manner by building
and strengthening measures of mutual trust. In that
connection, we call once again on the countries that
have pledged financial support for MINUSMA to
honour their commitments; Mali urgently requires
the main guarantor of this process, the international
community, to vigorously promote the measures
necessary to help the Malian Government to strengthen
its presence throughout its territory, as well as to
contribute to the full reconstitution of its armed forces
in order to create adequate conditions for the protection
of the civilian population.

We also commend the important efforts of the
Government of Mali with regard to the appointment
of interim authorities, the creation of legislative and
electoral timetables, as well as the application of
benchmarks for the effective implementation of the
peace Agreement and its provisions in the framework
of the inclusive political dialogue. Prime Minister
Ma'iga's visit to the most affected regions demonstrates
the Malian Government's commitment to security.
We must also consider the significant mobilization
of resources generated from the national fund for the
support of territorial collectivities in the regions of
Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal, Taoudenni and Me'naka, which
clearly give a fundamental boost to the State presence
in those localities.

We also welcome the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and
Head of MINUSMA and thank him for his efforts.
We recognize that the evolving challenges facing the
Mission, including not only the violence of armed
groups, but also the growing threat of violent extremism,
transnational crime and asymmetric threats such as
improvised explosive devices. With respect to the latter
issue, we must commend the work of the United Nations
Mine Action Service in implementing a framework for
mitigating such threats through technical and strategic
advice, which has reduced the number of victims of
such threats.

With regard to the independent strategic review
of MINUSMA, we are concerned about information
regarding the lack of material capabilities that reduce its
mobilityandimpedetheefficientprojectionofitspresence
in the field. We also consider it important to continue
to promote the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding with the Malian Government to support
the armed forces in the operational, intelligence,
medical evacuation, explosive ordnance disposal and
management and demining activities. Those aspects
are of vital importance for both immediate and long-
term stabilization in Mali. Therefore, the demobilized
elements must be effectively integrated throughout the
peace process through peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding activities.

Finally, it is clear that the security situation in Mali
and the Sahel region still presents major challenges.
Bolivia highlights the outstanding efforts made by
the regional and subregional organizations, led by the
African Union in cooperation and coordination with the
Joint Force ofthe Group ofFive for the Sahel. We call on
and strongly encourage the international community to
continue to contribute technical support and economic
and humanitarian cooperation to all initiatives that help
the population achieve stability and definitive peace in
Mali and the region.

