Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): Permit me at the outset,
Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
May. We are assured that the Council's business is
already in wise, cautious and impartial hands. Let me also
seize this opportunity to thank Ambassador Somavia,
Permanent Representative of Chile, for the excellent
manner in which he conducted the affairs of the Council
during his presidency.

My delegation is grateful to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on the situation in Liberia.
We have read with keen interest the Secretary-General's
latest report on the situation. We find it comprehensive
and instructive.

After a period of relative peace and stability, during
which we witnessed a partial resumption of normal life in
Monrovia and in many other parts of Liberia, the peace
process in that country has once again suffered a major
setback as a result of renewed factional fighting among
the warring parties. Although this turn of events is very
unfortunate, it was not totally unexpected, as the
developments that led to it were evident. Indeed, the
Secretary-General had predicted this development in his
report of 1 April 1996, a few days before the outbreak of
the ensuing fighting.

We are witnessing a descent into chaos and
confusion in Liberia. However, this Council should dispel
any confusion regarding the cause of and the solution for
the present debacle in that country. Most of the gains,
albeit tentative, that were registered in the peace process
in Liberia - including the improved humanitarian
situation and the prospects for the voluntary return of
refugees - have suffered serious reverses as a result of
the recent outbreak of fighting in the country. The
factional leaders are to blame for the fighting, which was
a breach of the obligations which they freely entered into
under the Abuja Agreement. In this respect my delegation
agrees with the observation of the Secretary-General that
the faction leaders have clearly demonstrated their total
disregard for the welfare, peace and aspirations of the
Liberian people. It could equally be said however, that if
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) had perhaps
been provided with the requisite resources and support the
dangerous lull that occurred between the cease-fire
following the Abuja Agreement and the start-up phase of
disarmament and demobilization could have been avoided.
Clearly, the initial momentum towards peace generated by
the Abuja Agreement was lost and allowed to fizzle out.

During their meeting in Accra on 7 May 1996 the
ECOWAS Foreign Ministers approved a sweeping plan

 

aimed at helping to return Liberia to the Abuja Agreement
by outlining measures to demilitarize Monrovia and to
restore the cease-fire, as well as the fractured Liberian
Transitional Government. The Foreign Ministers also
warned the faction leaders that if they did not implement
those steps ECOMOG would reconsider its involvement in
Liberia at the August ECOWAS meeting. My country,
along with other troop contributors to ECOMOG, will
seriously consider our option at that time. We hope that the
Liberian parties will demonstrate their desire for peace,
which they have so far failed to do, miserably; otherwise,
the spectre of Somalia, which the Secretary-General
referred to, is a frightening possibility.

It is important to state that ECOMOG is part of the
solution, and not part of the problem, in Liberia. It is
therefore unfortunate to observe continuous sniping about
its activities. Sometimes veiled - and sometimes not too
veiled - criticisms are levelled in some quarters against
the conduct of its troops. While we should not condone any
misconduct on their part, the international community
should not too easily forget why ECOMOG became
necessary in the first place. May I remind the Council that
in 1990, at the time of the Gulf crisis, the carnage in
Liberia never got onto the international agenda and did not
enjoy any serious coverage in the international media
because of the more visible and ongoing "Operation Desert
Shield". This was, of course, due to the strategic interest
involved in that war. In the circumstances, when no other
country was willing to lend a hand to stop the carnage and
prevent the drift into anarchy in Liberia, the leaders of
West Africa, in a bold and imaginative step, did what they
thought best, not minding the costs to their respective
countries. They deserve praise and gratitude, rather than
criticism, from the international community. My own
country, Nigeria, has spent billions of dollars, while
hundreds of our soldiers have paid the supreme sacrifice
and thousands of others have been wounded, all for the
cause of peace in Liberia.

Furthermore, some observers have wondered why
ECOMOG did not take immediate action to quell the recent
fighting in Liberia, as it had done in the past, particularly
during a coup attempt in September 1994. We know the
reason why, and the Secretary-General clearly noted the
reason in his report. Put simply, the resources necessary to
sustain a credible and robust force capable of deterring such
fighting over a long period were not available to the
countries of the subregion.

This is not to say that ECOMOG'S structure and
organization cannot be improved upon. But there is a slant
to the notion of restructuring ECOMOG which my
delegation finds worrisome and perhaps misplaced. The
proper objective should be to put in place a credible force

 

able to carry out its difficult but essential mandate. In the
circumstances, my delegation welcomes all well- meaning
efforts to help equip and fortify ECOMOG in order to
enhance its capability to carry out its assignment. And as
the ECOWAS Foreign Ministers stressed at their 7 May
meeting, any financial contributions for ECOMOG should
be directed to the force as a whole and not to particular
contingents. We cannot play "divide and rule" and yet
pretend to seek an integral solution to the Liberian
problem.

Furthermore, those countries which pay lip service
to peace in Liberia, but from which deadly arms continue
to flow to the warring factions in that country, should
now live up to their obligations to Security Council
resolution 985 (1995) and strictly observe the arms
embargo imposed on Liberia.

In conclusion, let me say that my delegation is
encouraged by the constructive attitude and posture of
many delegations which have spoken today. The clear
message we have retained is that no one is talking of
abandoning Liberia. The commitment to the people of
Liberia - and to the subregion as a whole - is welcome
and very much appreciated. We are also confident that the
Security Council will renew the mandate of UNOMIL
along the lines of the Secretary-General's
recommendation for another three months. We in the
region, and I am speaking specifically for my
Government, are prepared to continue to play our part
until peace returns to Liberia and to our subregion.
