Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): China supports and welcomes the Council's
holding of an open debate on the question of Somalia. We
hope that this debate will enable the international
community to focus more attention on the question of
Somalia; facilitate the efforts of the parties concerned, led
by African countries, to resolve the Somali question; and
help the factions in Somalia to work more actively to find
a political settlement in the interest of national
reconciliation and peace.

We have noted with pleasure the positive changes that
have taken place in Somalia in recent months. We
appreciate the efforts made by the factions concerned in
Somalia to achieve reconciliation through political
consultations. China has always held that the settlement of
the Somali question will ultimately depend on the Somali
people themselves and that national reconciliation is the
only way out for the Somali people. As a Somali saying
goes, "Only dialogue can bring about consensus". We hope
that the various factions in Somalia will seek national
reconciliation through fraternal dialogue and establish a
broadly based coalition government.

The leaders of various factions in Somalia should
realize that the African continent is entering a new
historical period of seeking peace, stability and
development. Somalia has, by comparison, fallen behind.
Years of civil war have already seriously hurt the country;
further fighting will only aggravate its backwardness. The
Chinese Government and people feel saddened by this
situation. We believe that peace among the factions in
Somalia will benefit their country, while fighting will hurt
them all. It is now high time to beat swords into
ploughshares.

Over a period of time, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the League of Arab States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and some
African countries have made positive and useful
endeavours to promote political consultations and
negotiations among the factions in Somalia. We express
our deep admiration for the determination of these
organizations, and particularly the African countries, to
seek strength through unity and to resolve problems in
their region. China welcomes and supports these efforts
and calls on the factions in Somalia to cooperate closely
with them. At the same time, we hold that these efforts
should also receive firm and effective support and
cooperation from the international community, including
the United Nations.

The United Nations, particularly this Council, has
the responsibility, and ought to take measures, to
contribute constructively to the settlement of the Somali
question. In this connection, we are of the view that the
role of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
should be strengthened and that this Council should
consider positively the Secretary-General's
recommendations, made in his report (S/1997/135) of
17 February 1997, to designate a Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on the question of Somalia, to send a
United Nations/OAU joint fact-finding mission and to
establish a Secretary-General's trust fund.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community to give more attention to the question of
Somalia and actively to help find a proper solution. The
Chinese Government is ready to work together with other
parties to this end.

