Ms. Bellamy: Mr. President, I will be guided by your
suggestion of economy and try to avoid any repetition. Let
me just say that we are very appreciative and that we thank
you very much for your personal leadership and for that of
your Government, as well as for the invitation by the
Council to participate in this briefing today.

I very much appreciate the kind words of support and
encouragement for the work of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF). It is really the wonderful staff
of UNICEF; they are some of those civilians who are out
there, and I would like to express my appreciation on
their behalf.

The clearly increasing recognition of the rapidly
changing nature of armed conflicts in the world is today's
reality. Factors to be considered are the parties - State
or non-State; the role of the private sector, unfortunately,
in some places; the victims and victimizers - sometimes
the same; the use of modern weaponry; and the impact on
civilians, particularly children and women. So it is, then,
a challenge in which traditional responses need to be
questioned. Thus, the opportunity to appear today and to
comment, in the realization that it is part of an ongoing
process involving my colleagues with whom we work in
the field - a few weeks ago Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello
was here to comment - is all part, we hope, of a very
hopeful sign of the actions that might take place.

I think it is fair to say that today's discussions and
briefings presented, I hope, some very concrete, practical
ideas. We think that it is very important to do that,
because sometimes it seems that the discussions in this
building are quite far removed from what is actually
going on in the field. So it seems to me that it is our
collective responsibility to the people to whom we
attempt to respond to be as concrete, specific, real and
practical as we can.

We very much welcome the Council's engagement
and look forward to the next steps and to the report of the
Secretary-General. Let me just assure the Council that we
stand ready, along with the other members of the United
Nations family and our colleagues beyond the United
Nations family, to try to assist in any way we can with
information or with briefings. We are here for the Council
whenever it wishes to avail itself of the information we
have. We are here to try to assist.

