The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

I should like to offer a special welcome to the young
Venezuelans of the Venezuelan chapter of the Model
United Nations who are here with us this morning,
bearing witness to our discussion of the future of the
multilateral system and the right to international peace
and security.

I should like to begin by conveying the greetings of
the President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
His Excellency Mr. Nicolas Maduro Moros. I wish
to stress the importance to Venezuela of respect for
the international rule of law to the maintenance of
international peace and security. There is a pressing
need to highlight the existing and often lethal means for
dismantling national and international legal orders as a
way to undermine one particular fundamental principle
of the Charter of the United Nations - the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
States.

Throughout human history, war and conflict have
caused untold suffering that have hindered social
development and economic progress. The prevention of
conflicts has therefore always been a shared objective of
the international community. Ensuring and maintaining
peace as a principle and fundamental right are critical
to implementing not only the Millennium Development
Goals but also the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1),
adopted by the Organization on the occasion of its 70th
anniversary. We warmly thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his role in those initiatives.

This debate is all the more relevant for taking place
70 years after the establishment of the United Nations,
as it serves to remind us of the fundamental importance
of sovereign equality and of the fact that the purposes of
the Organization will be achieved only if States enjoy
such equality and fully fulfil the requirements of that
principle in the course of their international relations.
As the Secretary-General called for last year during the
presidency of the People's Republic of China, we aim to
further entrench that aspect. Actively and permanently
promoting the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and of international law, including
honouring and fulfilling their provisions, are the
basis for ensuring the maintenance of international
peace and security. The sovereign equality of States,
national independence, unity and territorial integrity,
non-interference in internal affairs, non-aggression,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, cooperation and the
right of peoples to self-determination and the fostering
of friendly relations and cooperation among countries,
tolerance and peaceful coexistence as good neighbours
are the essential ingredients of world peace.

The Charter of the United Nations became the first
international multilateral legal instrument to expressly
and definitively prohibit war as a tool of foreign
policy. As such, the development of international
law is one of the most important aims of the United
Nations. The Preamble sets the goal of establishing
conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law can be maintained. As members are
aware, during the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations, the General Assembly adopted a declaration
on the inadmissibility of intervention in the internal
affairs of States and on safeguarding independence
and sovereignty. For most countries without coercive
capacity or tools to impose conditions on inter-State
or regional relations, respect for international law is
the most important pillar for international peace and
security, including the obligation of all States to ensure
a more just and equitable world.

In the course of its history, the Organization has
had important achievements in the area of international
peace, security and cooperation. It has made significant
contributions to human rights, decolonization and
economic and social development. Nevertheless, the
world is in a constant state ofneeding stability and peace,
which makes it necessary to activate the mechanisms
and legal framework to address the challenges posed by
extreme violence, terrorism, intolerance and the spread
of hatred. There has been an almost three-fold increase
since 2008 in the number of ongoing civil wars - from
four to 11- which is in contrast to the long-running
trend we saw beginning in the 19905. There are eight
armed conflicts in Africa alone, while four violent
conflicts in the Middle East have led to the dismantling
of sovereign States and made it possible for terrorists
and violent armed groups to take control.

The situation in the Middle East and the Palestinian
question is a case in point in which the Security Council
has had a crucial role and has adopted countless
resolutions. Yet that situation remains unresolved after
almost 70 years and continues to have a determining
impact on peace and security in a region that, for
the past five years, has suffered the consequences of
mistaken approaches to addressing solutions in a fair
and comprehensive way wherein, first and foremost,
the establishment of the Palestinian State constitutes
the basic, decisive element for peace in the region. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela - inspired by and
following in the footsteps of our eternal Commander
Hugo Chavez Frias - resolutely supports the
Palestinian cause for an independent, sovereign State
that - and we will never tire of saying it - has the
right to an immediate cessation of the criminal acts
of aggression on the part of Israel against its people,
including children, older persons and women, as well as
the right to finally legitimately recover its territories,
with the support of the international community.

The phenomenon of terrorism, the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, protracted conflicts,
pending colonial situations and the instability and
violence in the Middle East and parts of Africa are
a result of approaches contrary to the purposes and
principles of international law and of the Charter of
the United Nations. Violating the rule of law therefore
leads to prolonged violent conflict. Humankind faces
the real threat of permanent war.

While we are here discussing the rule of
international law, intensive negotiations by a group
of countries are being held to urgently find a peaceful
resolution to the conflict in Syria, a country plagued by
terrorism and extreme violence as a way to delegitimize
the will of its people and bring about the disintegration
of its territory.
Many of the conflicts that have occurred over the
past seven decades could have been prevented if the
causes that generated them had not been repeatedly
linked to the particular interests of imperialist
domination. While developing countries have been
standard-bearers for the validity of and strict adherence
to the purposes and principles of the Charter, some of
the most developed countries have been determined
to act to the contrary, leading to unilateral acts of
aggression that negate the foundation and very essence
of the Organization and constant ambition to ensure
capitalist rule over countries' natural resources,
while adhering to colonial and neocolonial strategies
and practices,. All of that has served to worsen
socioeconomic inequality, discrimination, xenophobia,
interventionism and violations of the right to self-
determination. Paradoxically, they invade, assassinate,
pay mercenaries, occupy territory and usurp the
sovereignty and self-determination of peoples - all in
the name of democracy and human rights.

In addition to that, we should also note the
growing intrusion into the internal affairs of States
by Governments in violation of the principle of
non-interference. Attempts to ignore the right of
countries and peoples to decide their future, particularly
when it comes to defining for themselves their political,
economic and social systems, constitute an obstacle
to peaceful coexistence among nations, and thus to
international peace and security.

The world continues to suffer from a clash between
antagonistic models of economic exploitation by
hegemonic, imperial Powers that insatiably seek to
appropriate natural resources and raw materials to
satisfy the interests of a global minority. According to
the Oxfam report for 2015, 1 per cent of the world's
population has wealth equivalent to 99 per cent of
the rest of the population. The capitalist system has
therefore been transformed internally in order to
ensure its survival and hegemonic domination, even at
the cost ofjeopardizing the existence of humankind.
That essential transformation has been accompanied
by real forces that have recently transformed the
nature of conflicts and of the threats to international
peace and security. Conflicts today do not just concern
military confrontations, but also encompass economic
strangulation, psychological wars, social devastation
and financial and technological strangulation - all
of which have a negative impact on the stability of
countries, undermine sovereignty and contravene the
principle of non-interference in internal affairs.

The dismantling of the rule of law at the national
and international levels entails using powerful,
unconventional methods of war whereby the military
occupation ofvast amounts ofterritories serves to further
institutional vulnerability and the delegitimizaition of
sovereign States already heavily weakened by those
real forces I mentioned.

Latin America, a region ofpeace, is today suffering
real threats that could lead to the fragmentation of its
independent national States. The neoliberal era- which
was supplanted by models of development focused on
the internal capacities, technologies and potentials of
our countries that turned away from the colonial yokes
that sought only to plunder our wealth - is trying
to make a comeback in our region through the use of
unconventional means for the dismantling of the rule
of law at the national level and the substitution of the
institutions of governance by the forces I referred to.
Coups d'e'tats have been assuming new forms and have
been attempting to weaken institutions, provoked by
the meddling of those Powers outside international
law in line with undemocratic and violent factors that
promote hatred and intolerance.

The severity and complexity of the challenges
currently being faced require a determined approach by
the United Nations, particularly by the Security Council,
to enable Member States to agree on new multilateral
approaches that can respond within the framework of
the purposes and principles of the Charter in situations
that may arise from those new threats to the sovereignty
and political independence of countries. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela reaffirms its full respect for
those values and calls attention to the risks and threats
that undermine their application and compromise the

ability of Member States in their complete, effective
implementation, with a View to strengthening
international peace and security. We firmly maintain
the necessity of rebuilding the multilateral framework
in order to urgently safeguard the rule of law to rein in
the shadow forces that seek to violently dominate the
world with their own laws, putting aside international
governance. They constitute real risks and threats to
the world, with the substitution of their multilateral
governance for the de facto powers that have effectively
limited the independence and sovereignty of countries.

To do that, it is necessary, within the sphere of the
Security Council, to avoid the application of double
standards. We the members of the Council need to be
the strongest and main defenders of international law,
the rule of law and the purposes and principles in the
Charter of the United Nations. We must set the example.
We must reject the application of double standards in
the addressing issues that affect international peace and
security. In addition, in order to safeguard and fully
uphold the purposes and the principles of the Charter,
Member States must reject and refrain from applying
unilateral coercive measures and national legislation
with extraterritorial effects. They also should not be
bringing to the Security Council issues that rightly
belong to the jurisdiction of States, in accordance with
paragraph 7, Article 2, of the Charter.

I would like to reiterate our position, voiced
during the seventieth session of the General Assembly,
in which we highlighted the need for the United
Nations to adapt its bodies to submit to the general
sovereignty of the peoples of the world who demand
that their voices be heard and respected. As our eternal
Commander Hugo Chavez said, we need to democratize
and adapt the United Nations and its bodies to
today's challenges - challenges that flow from the
displacement of the multilateral system of the rule of
law by de facto powers.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

