Mr. De Soto: The Council will recall that on 13
February 2004, the two parties in Cyprus agreed to
resume negotiations on the basis of the Secretary-
General's plan to achieve a comprehensive settlement
of the Cyprus problem through separate and
simultaneous referendums before 1 May 2004. To that
end, the parties committed themselves in a first phase
to seek to agree on changes and to complete the plan in
all respects by 22 March 2004 within the framework of
the Secretary-General's mission of good offices so as
to produce a finalized text. The parties further agreed
that, in the absence of such agreement, the Secretary-
General would convene a meeting of the two sides,
with the participation of Greece and Turkey, in order to
lend their collaboration in a concentrated effort to
agree on a finalized text by 29 March. As a final resort,
in the event of a continuing and persistent deadlock,
the parties invited the Secretary-General to use his
discretion to finalize the text to be submitted to
referendums on the basis of his plan.

The process agreed on 13 February was based on
the conditions laid down by the Secretary-General in
his report to the Council of 1 April 2003 (8/2003/398)
to resume his good offices effort. That approach
received the support of the Council in resolution 1475
(2003). That process has now resulted in a finalized
text to go to referendum on 24 April 2004: the text
presented by the Secretary-General in Biirgenstock on
31 March 2004.

The Secretary-General will soon place before the
Council a full report on the negotiations, including a
proposal, as provided for in the plan, for a revised
United Nations operation in Cyprus. He hopes that the
Council will be able to act speedily on that proposal in
advance of the referendum date of 24 April. However,
he has asked me to brief the Council orally today,
before I return to Cyprus over the weekend.

The comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus
problem consists of the following appendices: a
proposed foundation agreement; proposed constitutions
of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot constituent
States; a proposed treaty on matters related to the new
state of affairs in Cyprus; a draft act of adaptation of
the terms of accession of the United Cyprus Republic
to the European Union; matters to be submitted to the
Security Council for decision; and measures to be
taken during April 2004.

We are making available to Council members, in
electronic format, the finalized plan, which can also be
found on the United Nations web site -
www.un.org - or directly at www.annanplan.org. We
are also making available the text of the Secretary-
General's remarks to the parties on 29 March 2004,
when he presented a revision of his plan, and on 31
March 2004, when he presented the finalized version of
his plan after further intensive consultations and
negotiations.

The plan that is now to be placed before the
people may have been finalized, in the last resort, by
the Secretary-General, but it is not an invention of the
Secretary-General. The role of the United Nations has
been to put things in writing where it was hard for the
parties to do so. What is now before the people is a
plan that embodies the key concepts and trade-offs that
emerged from a long process of negotiation. The
improvements made in it, while not agreed, reflect the
material put forward in intensive negotiations that
resumed on 19 February of this year.

Those negotiations on the island occurred at two
levels. The first was at the political level, where the
two leaders - the Greek Cypriot leader, His
Excellency Mr. Tassos Papadopoulos, and the Turkish
Cypriot leader, His Excellency Mr. Rauf Denktash -
sought to agree on changes to the plan. Regrettably,
aside from some secondary points, they were not able
to do so. However, the talks allowed all the
amendments proposed by the two sides to be aired.

The second level was negotiations by technical
representatives of the two sides, appointed by the
leaders, who met under United Nations auspices to
resolve certain technical issues and to make
recommendations to the two leaders. The output of
work at the technical level was nothing short of
extraordinary and resulted in: agreed recommendations
to the leaders on a flag and an anthem for a reunified
Cyprus; the completion of 131 federal laws,
constitutional laws and cooperation agreements, to be
in force from the moment the settlement enters into
force - they run to 9,000 pages and are part of the
proposed foundation agreement; the completion of a
list of 1,134 international treaties and instruments to be
binding on the United Cyprus Republic, which are also
part of the proposed foundation agreement; a package
of agreed recommendations to the leaders on economic
and financial aspects of implementation of the plan;
progress in the identification of federal buildings, in
finalizing a list of federal property and in preparing for
the federal public service to be in place upon the entry
into force of a settlement.

However, the progress made at the technical level
could not disguise the fact that, at the political level,
the two sides were not able to reach agreement. After
direct meetings yielded little progress, I suggested a
change in format and began shuttling between the
leaders starting on 15 March. However, that did not
yield significant progress either. I will not go into the
reasons why this was so, but I believe I should record
the fact that each side expressed great frustration at the
lack of progress on the island and believed that the
other side was largely to blame for it.

As the date for completion of the first phase
approached, the Secretary-General invited the leaders
to move to a location off the island that lent itself to the
second phase. That location was Bijrgenstock, a hotel
complex in the outskirts of Lucerne, Switzerland.

Mr. Denktash, the Turkish Cypriot leader,
announced that he would not travel to Burgenstock, but
in writing he gave Mr. Mehmet Ali Talat and
Mr. Serdar Denktash full powers to negotiate in
Biirgenstock on behalf of the Turkish Cypriot side.

The talks at Biirgenstock began on 24 March
2004. As agreed on 13 February in New York, Greece
and Turkey were present in order to lend their
collaboration in a concentrated effort to agree on a
finalized text by 29 March 2004. Greece and Turkey
were represented by their Foreign Ministers.

However, due to a difference of view between the
parties on the appropriate format, it was difficult to
arrange direct meetings either of the two parties or of
the two parties together with the guarantors. This
meant that the negotiations in Biirgenstock took on a
more informal character, with the United Nations
engaging in consultations with the parties in an effort
to broker areas of understanding.

Since the Biirgenstock process was designed to
achieve agreement, if possible, by 29 March, the
United Nations sent to the parties on 25 March a
proposed framework which, had agreement on the
substance been reached, would have enabled the parties
to sign an agreement. This was sent to the parties for
their consideration, comment and negotiation, but in no
way implied that signatures were required. As agreed
on 13 February, should agreement not be possible, the
Secretary-General will finalize the plan.

The Secretary-General arrived in Bilrgenstock on
28 March, as did the Greek Prime Minister, Mr. Kostas
Karamanlis. The Turkish Prime Minister, Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdogan, arrived on 29 March. On 29 March,
the Secretary-General presented a fully revised text for
consideration by the parties. In that revised text, the
Secretary-General sought to address the key concerns
that had been expressed by the two sides in the
negotiations, while maintaining the overall balance of
the plan.

While not precluding the possibility that the
parties might yet reach agreement, the process, from
that point onwards, moved to the third phase of the
effort envisaged in the 13 February agreement, in
which the text was to be finalized by the Secretary-
General. The Secretary-General wished to do so in the
closest collaboration with all concerned - hence the
consultations with the parties over the next 48 hours in
the run-up to the presentation of a final text on 31
March.

From the Secretary-General's written report to the
Security Council of 1 April 2003, members have a
detailed explanation of the main points of his plan. I
will not repeat them. However, I would like to
summarize the main improvements that have been
made to the plan. This list is not exhaustive.

By far the most important change that has been
made to the plan relates to the question of
reinstatement of property to people who were
dispossessed. The revised scheme is fairer, simpler and
more certain. It will increase the amount of land
reinstated to dispossessed owners and it will also
increase significantly the number of displaced and
dispossessed persons who will be reinstated to some of
their property. At the same time, it will give more
certainty to current users. Certain non-discriminatory
restrictions on the acquisition of property in the
Turkish Cypriot State would be permissible, but only
for a transitional period.

The plan was also revised in the way that it deals
with two issues that are distinct but related: the
question of residency by persons from one constituent
State in the other constituent State and the question of
the establishment of residency by Greek and Turkish
nationals in Cyprus.

These transitional limitations are not designed to
divide Cypriots. They are designed to prevent either
side from being overrun by unrestricted establishment
of residence, unrestricted immigration or unlimited
property purchases in a transitional period, and to
ensure that the identity of Cyprus and its constituent
States is maintained. There are no permanent
derogations from the European Union acquis
communautaire.

The workings of the federal Government have
also been revised in three important respects. First, the
long transitional periods foreseen in the previous plan
have been replaced by a much shorter period, with full
elections to be held at the federal and constituent State
level, along with European Parliament elections, on 13
June 2004. Secondly, the structure of the Presidential
Council has been altered, with nine members rather
than six and with provision for two persons not hailing
from the same constituent State to rotate in the offices
of President and Vice-President in three 20-month
periods over the 60-month term of the Presidential
Council. Thirdly, voting for the Senate will be on the
basis of mother tongue, rather than on the basis of
internal citizenship status, to ensure that political
equality cannot be undermined over time.

A number of important improvements have been
made regarding the economic and financial aspects of
the plan, largely based on the agreed recommendations
of experts from each side in the technical committees.

The map in the plan has not changed, but an
important new element has been introduced, which will
be of direct interest to this Council. It is envisaged that,
in the last months of each phased handover of territory,
the supervision by the United Nations of the activities
relating to the transfer of areas subject to territorial
adjustment shall be enhanced in the relevant areas.
New details of measures to assist in relocation of
persons who must move as a result of territorial
adjustment have been introduced into the plan.

Important refinements have been made regarding
security in at least three respects. First, the provisions
relating to troop withdrawal have been altered. Under
the previous plan, 6,000 Greek and Turkish troops were
permitted to remain in Cyprus on the proviso that all
would leave should Turkey accede to the European
Union. The revised plan provides for 6,000 to drop to
3,000 in 2011. It further provides for the 3,000 to drop
in 2018 or upon Turkey's European Union accession -
whichever is earlier * to the 950 Greek troops and 650
Turkish troops permitted under the 1960 Treaty of
Alliance, and for three-yearly reviews of troop levels
thereafter with a view to total withdrawal by mutual
consent.

Secondly, the role of the Monitoring Committee
envisaged under the plan has been strengthened, with
the parties undertaking to act on its recommendations.

Thirdly, the mandate of the United Nations
operation has been strengthened not only to provide for
the assumption of territorial responsibility for agreed
areas and time periods prior to transfer of territory,
without prejudice to local administration of the
population, but also to provide for the United Nations
to monitor political developments and provide advice
and good offices as required.

During April, a number of steps have to be taken.
The parties need to work together to finalize plans for
federal buildings, property and personnel. They must
each hand over to the Secretary-General lists of
persons who will be citizens of the United Cyprus
Republic upon entry into force, in accordance with the
plan, and they must provide for mechanisms to identify
the members of the transitional Government to take
office for two months after entry into force.
The guarantor Powers must confirm to the
Secretary-General and each other in writing, no later
than 7 April 2004, that they agree to the foundation
agreement's being submitted to separate simultaneous
referendums and that, upon its approval and completion
of their internal ratification procedures, they will sign,
no later than 29 April 2004, the treaty provided for in
the plan.

The Secretary-General will, in accordance with
the plan, submit to the Council a detailed proposal for a
revised United Nations operation in Cyprus, with the
hope that the Council will act prior to the referendums,
conditional upon their approval.

Finally, the European Union is organizing a
preparatory meeting on 15 April 2004 for a donor's
conference that would take place after reunification.
The United Nations urges donors to participate in that
conference and to be prepared to commit the resources
necessary to give Cypriots the confidence that the
implementation of the plan will receive strong
international support.

Should the plan be approved on 24 April by each
side, it will not enter into force until 29 April, and only
after Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom, as
guarantors, have completed all the internal procedures
necessary to sign into force on 29 April the treaty
provided for in the plan. This revised mode of entry
into force of the settlement was designed to ensure that
the guarantors were legally committed to their
obligations under it.

The European Union would also have to move
quickly to accommodate the terms of the settlement
and make way for a reunited Cyprus to accede to the
European Union two days later, on 1 May 2004. In this
respect, I wish to inform the Council that the European
Commissioner for Enlargement, who was at
Biirgenstock, has confirmed to the Secretary-General
that the European Commission is committed to
submitting the act of adaptation of the terms of
accession of the United Cyprus Republic to the
European Union - which is provided for in the
plan - for consideration by the Council of the
European Union prior to 24 April 2004, and for its
adoption after the successful outcome of the separate
simultaneous referendums before 1 May 2004.
Furthermore, the European Commission is also
committed to bringing about a final outcome, without
delay, which will result in the adaptation of primary
law and ensure legal certainty and security within the
European Union legal system for all concerned.
As is obvious, achieving a Cyprus settlement is a
complex task - legally and politically. But there are
certain points that should not be lost sight of. First, the
process has been conducted in full conformity with the
mandate provided to the Secretary-General by the
Council. The product of the work is a bi-communal, bi-
zonal, federal system - a State of Cyprus with a single
international legal personality, sovereignty and
citizenship. It is based on the principle of political
equality between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.

Secondly, the plan is based on respect for
international law and individual human rights. In this
regard, a majority of Greek Cypriots who were
displaced will be able to return to their homes and have
their properties reinstated under Greek Cypriot
administration. All others will receive either
reinstatement of their property or full and effective
compensation, or a combination of both.

Thirdly, the long-term objective of the plan is the
demilitarization of Cyprus. In this regard, all troops in
excess of those permitted by the 1960 Treaty of
Alliance will withdraw from Cyprus over time, and
thereafter the small number of troops remaining will be
subject to regular review with a view to total
withdrawal by mutual consent.

The plan is inevitably a compromise. It does not
meet all the demands of each side. But the Secretary-
General believes it is a fair and balanced plan, and he
hopes that, as they consider it, the people on each side
will agree. The United Nations will be doing its best to
make available to the public in Cyprus information
about the plan.

For the people of Cyprus, the next month will be
the most critical in 30 years. They will have the
democratic right to decide whether to reunite their
country on the basis that has been suggested. We as the
United Nations are proud to have been able to work
with their leaders to give them this opportunity. We
hope that they appreciate what a unique opportunity
this is, and that they will seize the chance for a just and
lasting peace in Cyprus.

Before closing, I should like to commend the
leaders of Greece and Turkey for their efforts and their
strong support. I also wish to reiterate the Secretary-
General's appreciation for the strong support that he
has received throughout the good offices efforts that he
has undertaken in recent years.

