Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by expressing my thanks to Mr. Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, for his briefing this
morning. I wish also to welcome the presence of
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, and to thank Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for his statement.

In Somalia we are witnessing one of the world's
most tragic humanitarian crises and one of the most
challenging political situations for the international
community. There have been no easy solutions for the

crisis in Somalia. The situation requires a holistic
approach which, it is now clear, must take account of
the complexity of the problem and make use of a
variety of tools to overcome this unique crisis.

This also requires the cooperation of all segments
of Somalia society who are committed to the Djibouti
process and the firm support of the international
community. Together, we must seek to broaden the
base of the Djibouti agreement, involving the largest
possible number of stakeholders who are now outside
the process, as President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
has been doing.

Those are difficult factors in settling the Somali
crisis; they will certainly demand the commitment of
national and international actors for many years to
come. The task of establishing broad-based legitimate
political institutions is urgent; it is a sine qua non for
moving forward on the path to overcoming the crisis in
Somalia, which will be possible only on the basis of a
long-term strategy embracing the humanitarian,
political, security and development facets of the
Somali crisis.

Here, we welcome as a step in the right direction
the election of Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed as
President of Somalia and the subsequent appointment
of Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke as Prime
Minister. We are confident that they will both be able
to enjoy sufficient legitimacy to foster an inclusive
political process, which can contribute to reconciliation
and lay the foundations for national reconstruction.

The precarious security situation in Somalia is a
matter of concern for my delegation, in particular when
we consider the increase in attacks on personnel of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We
hope that progress in implementing resolution 1863
(2009) and carrying out measures to strengthen
AMISOM. will lessen the Mission's vulnerability and
enhance its effectiveness in the field. In that
connection, we support the Secretary-General's appeal
to the international community, with a donors
conference in View, to support current activities aimed
at the establishment of a joint security force in
Somalia.

My delegation condemns attacks against the
civilian population and regrets the increased number of
civilian deaths, many of whom have died when caught
in the crossfire in attacks directed against AMISOM. It
is urgent that all endeavours to ensure free access of
humanitarian assistance and to improve the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel - who are helping
more than 3 million people in Somalia, who are
dependent on this aid * continue. We remind all
parties to the conflict that they are obliged to abide by
the provisions of international law, in particular
international humanitarian law. Fighting impunity is a
high priority because of continued human rights
violations, the blocking of humanitarian assistance,
attacks on international staff distributing aid and
ongoing attacks against the civilian population. It must
be part of the strategy to put an end to the crisis in
Somalia.

My delegation recognizes the will of African
countries to strengthen AMISOM. We support the
Mission's work; it is a vital element in bringing
stability to Somalia and creating a space in which
dialogue and reconciliation efforts can continue.

Finally, I express our satisfaction at the progress
in cooperative efforts to combat piracy off the Somali
coast, especially because of the importance of those
efforts in ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We hope that the international community's
commitment to address the crisis brought about by the
proliferation of piracy will heighten the attention the
international community must devote to addressing the
root causes of the crisis in Somalia and to fostering
efforts to achieve peace.

