Mr. Malloch Brown: Mr. President, thank you
for the invitation to address the Council today. If I may,
I will divide my brief remarks into two: first, a
description of what the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) is doing in partnership with the
other agencies represented here today in the
humanitarian area, and then a word about our thoughts
on reconstruction planning, an area of activity that we
can perhaps now move into more fully after the happy
passage this morning of the Security Council resolution
1483 (2003).

First, with respect to the humanitarian area, we
are working very closely with all the agencies here, as
well as with non-governmental organizations. Let me
salute, as the Deputy Secretary-General did, our friends
and colleagues in the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their heroic effort throughout the
conflict. I also salute my colleagues in the World Food
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and the World Health Organization (WHO)
for their extraordinary activities in recent weeks.

We, too, have UNDP teams deployed in Baghdad,
Basra and the three northern governorates. We are now
deploying staff to Mosul and Kirkuk. Therefore, at the
moment we are running a rather decentralized
operation. In fact, we have the most difficulty in our
Baghdad operation, where looting and heavy damage to
our offices have required us to invest deeply and
quickly in restoring our operational capacities there.

In Iraq, unlike in the rest of the world, the UNDP
happens to be deeply involved in the electricity sector,
having carried out, under the oil for food programme,
responsibilities in building the electricity grid in
northern Iraq. That has allowed us to move that
capacity quickly to other parts of the country to attempt
to restore critical emergency electricity supplies, in
particular to allow water plants, sewage treatment
plants, hospitals and other medical facilities to resume
operations. We work closely with UNICEF and WHO
in this. We have dispatched assessment missions to key
locations to try to see what we can do to help restore
generation and distribution facilities in the north, south
and centre of the country. We very much want to thank
the United Kingdom for the financial support that
makes this emergency electricity work possible.

We are also involved in dredging the port of
Umm Qasr, where, through the support of the
Government of Japan, we have put in place an
emergency dredging project to support the World Food
Programme's capacity to deliver food shipments. The
actual dredging works will start on 26 May and allow
over a four week period the dredging of that part of the
port that is receiving food aid and other humanitarian
assistance. That will allow vessels of up to 50,000 tons
to offload, which is currently not possible.

Let me also say that activities in each of these
areas have been accelerated by access to contracts
under the oil for food programme, which has given us
both extra support in the dredging area and key
components for electricity and other sectors.

We have also started work on emergency
employment generation, imitating a very successful
project we have had in Afghanistan for quick
employment generation after conflict. A component of
that programme is just getting under way in Baghdad,
again with the support of the Government of Japan.
That support was announced just yesterday. We also
have activities in mine action and other areas. I would
like to thank again those Governments that have come
forward to support those activities.

Let me now, if I may, just say a word about
reconstruction and recovery planning. As so many of
you in the Council informally urged me, I sought to
make sure through the United Nations Development
Group (UNDG) that we as a system would be ready
when the mandate came to move beyond humanitarian
assistance to reconstruction and recovery planning. We
have been deeply engaged with the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund on planning needs
assessment activities, bringing both those two
organizations up to speed in terms of providing them
with detailed economic, financial and project data to
shortcut their own planning and preparation processes.
We have been discussing with them, as well as through
the UNDG and all of our fellow agencies, how we
could quickly mount needs assessment activities for
reconstruction in the field once that became possible.

As well, with the Government of Norway, we are
preparing for a major assessment of current living
standards, a nationwide data collection activity and
household survey to identify more clearly the
reconstruction needs of Iraqis throughout the country.

I just want to assure the Council that the
humanitarian operation, as you will hear from others, is
well and truly under way and that, as we have always
made clear, it was in no way contingent on a resolution
such as the one passed this morning. But now that this
morning's resolution is in place, I, through the UNDG
and under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-
General, plan to move quickly to put in place the
planning and needs assessment process for
reconstruction.

