Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for his information on
the inter-Sudanese settlement and the activities of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). We welcome Mr. Onanga-Anyanga in his
new role as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Horn of Africa and thank him for his briefing.

We believe that the joint efforts of both parties are
vital to the successful promotion of an inter-Sudanese
settlement. The bilateral agreements concluded in
September 2012 in Addis Ababa, along with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, represent a good
basis for the cooperation between Khartoum and Juba.
We should not omit to point out that relations between
the Sudanese parties have warmed significantly since
September 2018. Khartoum's effective participation
in the Intergovernmental Authority on Development's
mediation efforts for the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan has helped the people of South Sudan
overcome the deadlock in the peace settlement. We join
the Secretary-General's call to build on this positive
momentum in the interests of achieving a settlement in
Abyei as well. We hope that the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel will continue to be an
important mechanism in assisting the normalization of
relations between the two countries.

We are pleased that the situation in Abyei remains
stable. We believe UNISFA's efforts to maintain
constructive relations with local communities are
important. The measures undertaken by the United
Nations to prevent intercommunal conflict and
establish intercommunal cooperation on issues of law
and order and economic activity in the area of the Amiet
common market deserve all possible support, as it will
be impossible to restore trust and achieve reconciliation
between the two communities without it. We deplore
the fact that few of the provisions of the agreement
of 20 June 2011 are being implemented. The power
vacuum in the region continues, and the demilitarized
status of Abyei itself and of the buffer zone at the border
between the Sudan and South Sudan is being violated.
We would also like to see more regular contact between
the parties.

We have carefully studied the data provided by
the Secretariat on the parties' implementation of the
benchmarks established in resolution 2438 (2018) for
launching the full functioning of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. We note that
Khartoum and Juba have been working on meeting
them throughout the reporting period and have made
significant progress. However, we are quite certain
that the success of these efforts will depend not only
on the political will of the parties, which they have
demonstrated, but also on the concrete circumstances
and dynamics of the situation on the ground. In our
View, the Mechanism is an essential element in the
system for preventing incidents between the parties, and
withdrawing UNISFA's support to it could have a very
negative effect on the prospects for achieving a final
settlement of the situation around Abyei. We therefore
supported the Council's adoption of resolution 2465
(2019), which extended UNISFA'S mandate to assist the
Mechanism through 15 October.

We are all familiar with the factors that are
preventing Khartoum and Juba from expediting the
process ofreaching a settlement on Abyei's final status.
In that context, maintaining UNISFA's continued
presence in the region continues to be crucial, and
in that regard, the Russian Federation supports the
Secretary-General's proposal to extend UNISFA's
mandate for another six months. However, we believe
that consideration of the Secretariat's proposals with
regard to the mission's civilian component should take
into account the views of Khartoum and Juba, as the
fundamental principles of peacekeeping prescribe.

