Mr. Marker: Please accept my congratulations,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this very important meeting. I am
sure that under your able guidance, the outcome of our
deliberations will be both productive and significant.
Permit me also to commend the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan and his colleagues for the
initiative that has brought us together here to debate
and discuss an issue that is as important as it is timely.

At the outset I wish to state that the views
expressed by me during these proceedings are personal
and entirely my own. The fact that I have the honour to
be a Special Adviser to the Secretary-General makes
this a necessary caveat.

In recent years, especially following the end of
cold war, there has been an increasing tendency to
resort to enforcement measures under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations. This has, on the one
hand, led to criticism of the Security Council and, on
the other, raised concerns about the utility of methods
regarding the pacific settlement of disputes. The
complementarity of Chapters VI and VII is
unfortunately often obscured in this process.

The Charter emphasizes the pacific settlement of
disputes. The concept is rooted in the avoidance of the
use of force and the settling of disputes among States
without causing excessive disruption. The underlying
principle is to foster cooperation and understanding
among States.

It is axiomatic that pacific settlement affords
better opportunities for the resolution of disputes in a
manner which is harmonious and less costly in all
aspects, builds confidence, allows greater respect for
the sovereignty of Member States and strengthens the
position of weaker nations. The solutions thus achieved
are also long term and durable. Enforcement measures,
on the other hand, often involve heavy costs in
economic, social and political terms, and above all in
respect of human life and welfare.

Chapter VII is, of course, the ultimate instrument
for the implementation of United Nations resolutions
and constitutes in a sense the Organization's iron fist.
But its latent efficacy can be considerably enhanced
through a timely and judicious application of the velvet
glove of Chapter VI. One of our tasks should be to
ascertain the best and smoothest method for the glove
to fit over the fist. In a lecture to the students of the
United States National War College in 1946, the
legendary Ambassador George Kennan said, "You have
no idea how much it contributes to the general
politeness and pleasantness of diplomacy when you
have a quiet little armed force in the background."

In my view, the most important working
document that we have before us is the
Secretary-General's report entitled "An Agenda for
Peace". It states that "Between the tasks of seeking to
prevent conflict and keeping the peace lies the
responsibility to try to bring hostile parties to
agreement by peaceful means." (5/24111, para. 34)

Chapter VI, Article 33 of the Charter sets forth a
comprehensive list of such means for the pacific
settlement of disputes: "negotiation, enquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement,
resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other
peaceful means of their own choice." Article 33 adds
that "The Security Council shall, when it deems
necessary, call upon parties to settle their dispute by
such means."

Chapter VI also enables the Security Council to,
in Article 34, "investigate any dispute"; in Article 36,
"recommend appropriate procedures or methods of
adjustment" and refer a dispute to the International
Court of Justice; in Article 37, "recommend terms of
settlement"; and, in Article 38, "make
recommendations to the parties with a view to a pacific
settlement of the dispute".

The Chapter VI provisions have since been
amplified in a series of declarations and resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly, namely, the 1982
Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International Disputes (resolution 37/10); the 1988
Declaration on the Prevention and Removal of
Disputes and Situations Which May Threaten
International Peace and Security and on the Role of the
United Nations in this Field (resolution 43/51); and the
1989 resolution on enhancing international peace,
security and international cooperation in all its aspects
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
(resolution 44/21).

A review of the history of the Security Council
reveals both successes and failures in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. East Timor is a recent success
story. But there are other cases where success has not
yet been achieved, such as the Middle East, Jammu and
Kashmir, and Western Sahara. In the first two,
however, there is reason for some cautious optimism as
a result of the recent signals emanating from those
troubled regions, and we commend the statesmanship
of all concerned. This includes the contribution of your
personal efforts, Mr. President, in the directions taken
so far, and our hopes that they continue. Perhaps at the
appropriate time a way can be found to further this
process through the application of the provisions of
Chapter VI.

The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, could do much to promote the
pacific settlement of disputes. First, it could ask the
parties concerned to negotiate and report agreements
for dispute settlement. Secondly, it could authorize the
Secretary-General to use his good offices and other
possibilities for mediation and conciliation to resolve
disputes, directly or through a special representative,
and report to the Council. Needless to say, the manifest
diplomatic capability of Secretary-General Kofi Annan
constitutes a formidable asset in this respect. Thirdly, it
could appoint a commission of inquiry, conciliation or
determination, which could, after consultations and
negotiations with the parties, submit its
recommendations. Fourthly, it could refer a dispute to
the International Court of Justice for an advisory
opinion, if not a legal decision or adjudication.

The Security Council could also utilize its
mandatory enforcement authority under Chapter VII of
the Charter to persuade parties to disputes to engage in
the processes for the peaceful settlement of disputes
envisaged under Chapter VI. Moreover, through a
decision adopted under Chapter VII, the Council could
refer a dispute to the International Court of Justice,
whose determination would thereafter be binding on
the parties, irrespective of whether or not they had
accepted the jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice.

It is essential that the international community
give consideration to the option of a more frequent use
of the devices for peaceful settlement of disputes. This
would require not only that these methods be
strengthened, but also a greater commitment on the part
of the international community, as well as the political
will to do so.

The challenge is to reinvigorate the role of the
United Nations, especially of the Secretary-General
and his good offices and of the Security Council, in
strengthening the mechanisms for the pacific
settlement of disputes. It is a challenge which assumes
added significance in the current international milieu,
with the discordant voices of the sceptics on the rise.
But I remain firmly convinced that, notwithstanding an
uncomfortable increase in the climate of unilateralism
in international affairs, the Security Council, together
with the Secretary-General, can play a crucial role in
the peaceful settlement of disputes. Our deliberations
today will, I am sure, take us a long way in this
important process.

