Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We applaud the
manner of your current leadership of the Council. We
also commend Mauritius for theirs in January.

The backdrop of events in the Middle East
against which we meet is a tale of an unfolding
tragedy. Two peoples, connected to each other across
the widest possible socio-historical spectrum, are
involved in a seemingly intractable gory conflict as the
world looks helplessly on. The Council was created to
address issues that threaten regional and global
security. Few other problems today qualify more for its
attention. In meeting today under your stewardship,
Sir, the Council is discharging a moral and ethical
obligation.

The situation is rendered sadder still, because
more than ever before there is a broad agreement on
the vision that is the ultimate solution. It includes the
creation of a separate independent State called
Palestine. The end is thus in View. The question is how
to proceed towards it.

S/PV.4478

 

Violence and terror are not the instruments that
will advance the achievements of this vision. Neither
will gross and systematic violations of the Geneva
Conventions. These methods must be abjured. That
would be the categorical imperative for the parties to
stay on the course to peace.

To remain in this path, it has to be cleared of
impediments. Of these, occupation remains central.
Once this root cause of conflict is eliminated, the
journey to peace will be immeasurably facilitated. This
must be simultaneously accompanied by a reduction in
violence and a buttressing of a sense of security of the
protagonists. Progress on the linked issues must be
achieved in tandem.

The practice of building settlements has been
shown to be clearly most unproductive. It must cease
forthwith. Excessive and disproportionate use of
military force must be ended. Actions along these lines
are bound to induce positive response. As the
Secretary-General has identified, the Tenet
understandings and the Mitchell proposals provide a
possible way out, as do the other international
agreements between the parties concerned. These, of
course, must be based on Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), with a view to establishing a
State of Palestine, with Jerusalem as its capital.

We are vastly encouraged by the new thinking
that now appears to be emanating from the Saudi
leadership. High praise is due to Crown Prince
Abdullah for setting in motion a set of fresh ideas.
These deserved to be fleshed out and taken note of. We
are heartened that this is indeed being done.

There will be a need to identify an appropriate
forum to deliberate on these initiatives. In December,
in the General Assembly, my delegation suggested the
holding of continuous talks between the Palestinian
and Israeli leaders involving the Presidents of all
United Nations organs - the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
- and the Secretary-General, till such time as a result
is achieved. This will embrace the totality of the
United Nations system, enabling it to address the issue
in a comprehensive manner. This is perhaps the only
way forward.

This will involve a united and serious effort for
tranquillity in the region whence have emerged the
three great faiths of Islam, Christianity and Judaism.
All three are linked in enjoining peace upon their
adherents. Their followers owe them the duty to
respond to their message of harmony. One massive
endeavour may indeed result in the realization of the
aspiration that the Muslim, the Jew and the Christian
could begin to live side by side in bliss in Palestine and
Israel - the land that had in the past given birth to
hope for humanity. Bangladesh believes that goal is
achievable if only the requisite political courage is
forthcoming.

