Let me first congratulate the German presidency on placing this important debate on the critical link between peacekeeping and human rights front and centre on the Security Council's agenda. Peacekeeping is likely the most visible face of the United Nations, presenting every single mission deployed with a set of particular responsibilities related to promoting and protecting human rights. Peacekeeping operations are a useful instrument at the service of the international community to prevent human rights violations in conflict and post-conflict situations and to provide humanitarian support to local populations. By preventing armed conflict and civil strife from reigniting and by keeping belligerent parties apart, peacekeeping operations play a critical role in saving lives, deterring gross human rights abuses and keeping violators and criminals in check. As peacekeeping has evolved over the decades, the United Nations has become increasingly aware of the importance of including humanitarian, development and human rights concerns in the mandates of its peacekeeping operations. In doing so, peacekeeping operations are a means of addressing the root causes of a conflict, avoiding disputes from resuming and facilitating the transition from conflict situations to post-conflict peacebuilding. Peacekeeping missions that have in-built protection of civilians mandates are especially focused on advancing a people-centred approach integral to human rights and help prevent serious human rights violations and abuses. Peacekeepers can also play an instrumental role in supporting States to fulfil their protection responsibilities, thus contributing to advancing the human rights of local populations. There is yet another side to that multifaceted relationship between peacekeeping and human rights: peacekeepers must not only prevent human rights abuses from taking place but must also refrain from committing human rights violations themselves. Blue Helmets must abide by the highest standard of conduct, which includes respect for human rights, and should be held accountable if they fail to do so. In that regard, Brazil encourages the United Nations to develop evaluation mechanisms in a transparent manner to ensure that peacekeeping leadership and police and military units fully comply with human rights, both in their predeployment training and during in-mission activities. Troops serving under the United Nations flag must be assigned clear tasks and standards on human rights and be cognizant of the full range of their responsibilities in executing their duties, whether they are patrolling conflict zones or engaging directly with local communities. In doing so, they should strictly follow conduct and discipline protocols that respect the human rights of the local population. Adequately preventing and responding to sexual exploitation and abuse is also a core strategy for promoting and respecting human rights in the context of peacekeeping. In this respect, I would like to highlight that Brazil is a staunch supporter of the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy against sexual exploitation and abuse. We have also developed extensive predeployment training and deployment protocols on this matter, which is a priority for the Brazilian military. These elements intertwining peacekeeping and human rights are an integral part of the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which provides a useful conceptual and operational framework for dealing with this complex and multifaceted relationship. In our view, Action for Peacekeeping should be strengthened and emboldened with active engagement by Member States, as the most recent substantive session of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations showed to be possible. When it comes to advancing human rights, the use of force must never be used except as a last resort. Overusing force under the pretext of protecting human rights can compromise the credibility and legitimacy of peacekeeping missions and damage the fundamental principles of peacekeeping. In fact, peacekeeping operations should above all make full use of peaceful measures, such as strengthening cooperation within civil-military coordination cells and human rights components in order to establish links with the local population, gather information and understand and respond to the community's main threats and concerns. Brazil is proud of the track records of its peacekeepers in both protecting and respecting human rights on the ground. Rigorous human rights screening, selection and preparation help ensure that Brazilian peacekeepers meet the highest standards in human rights. My country is committed to is predeployment training, another key element of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Adequate predeployment training ensures that military troops and police officers are better equipped to protect local populations, ensure their own safety and security and implement conduct and discipline protocols on the ground. The Brazilian Peace Operations Joint Training Centre/Sergio Vieira de Mello Centre and the Navy's Peacekeeping Centre have provided training not only for Brazilian Blue Helmets but also to peacekeepers coming from a range of international partners, including Argentina, Colombia, Ecuador, Germany, Mexico and Switzerland. We must encourage the essential role of women peacekeepers, which includes, but is not limited to, building trust with local communities. By liaising with local actors, female uniformed personnel can assess how human rights can be enhanced and better implemented on the ground. The role gender advisers play in peacekeeping operations must be highlighted as an important contribution to creating a culture of respect for human rights in host countries and within missions themselves. Brazil is particularly proud that two of its female peacekeepers - Commander Marcia Braga and Commander Carla Aratjo - distinguished themselves, receiving the United Nations Military Gender Advocate Award, respectively, in 2018 and 2019, for the work they each carried out in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. Their work exemplifies some of the best practices Brazil supports in promoting human rights in peacekeeping operations. In conclusion, protecting and respecting human rights in the realm of peacekeeping operations are two sides of the same coin, to which Brazil remains actively committed.
