Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): I would like to begin,
Sir, by echoing the expressions of congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. We feel reassured that the
Council will benefit from your well-known diplomatic
skills and experience as we today consider a matter of
fundamental importance to us. We similarly extend
sentiments of appreciation to your predecessor,
Ambassador Wisnumurti of Indonesia, for his able
conduct of the business of the Council last month. Our
commendation also goes to Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his concise and clear report on
the situation in Angola, and to his Special Representative,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and the men and women of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) for their unwavering commitment to the
search for peace in Angola.

Today's debate takes us back to 2 October 1996,
when the Heads of State and Government of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security, deeply concerned about

 

the stalemate in the Angola peace process, met in Luanda
with the intention of giving fresh impetus to the process. In
addition to agreeing to convey the region's position on the
Angolan situation, the Heads of State recommitted
themselves to redouble their efforts to contribute towards
the realization of peace and stability in Angola. The SADC
countries will not falter in their resolve to bring the
Angolan peace process to the front burner in their regional
and international engagements.

The Secretary-General's report notes several welcome
developments, among which are the decrease in the number
of ceasefire violations, the acceleration of the pace of
incorporation of UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed
Forces (FAA), the resumption of demobilization, and the
dismantling of illegal checkpoints, which has significantly
contributed to the free movement of people and goods all
over Angola.

We are naturally encouraged by these positive
developments and urge all the parties to spare no effort in
fulfilling all the tasks enumerated in Security Council
resolution 1075 (1996).

Despite the substantial progress made in carrying out
the major tasks outlined in the Council resolution to which
I have just referred, we regret that some sporadic incidents
have continued to slow the peace process. In this regard,
we appeal to all parties to refrain from any acts that may
continue to affect the peace process negatively.

All that we in southern Africa are asking for now is
for peace in Angola to be given a chance. In view of the
positive developments already noted, we wholeheartedly
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that the
present mandate of UNAVEM. Ill be extended until 28
February 1997, and that after that date the residual force
should be drawn down over a period of six months.

Of course, this is only a beginning of a post-conflict
peace-building process which will bring Angola back to
stability. An even more challenging task will be to carry
out the programme of economic reconstruction. We expect
that the United Nations will not abandon Angola and will
play a key role in ensuring the economic reconstruction of
that country and the generation of peace and economic
prosperity.

By extending the mandate of UNAVEM. III to 28
February 1997 this afternoon, the Council has demonstrated
that while it is prepared to continue to support the peace
process, it expects the parties to demonstrate their
commitment to implement the Lusaka Protocol and
Security Council resolutions fully and without delay.

