Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the Secretary-General's report,
and we congratulate him on his comprehensive, objective
and balanced analysis of the causes of conflict in Africa.

We agree that we must tackle the root causes, and not
just the symptoms, of conflict. The United Nations is
uniquely qualified to coordinate a comprehensive approach
to the long-term, structural causes of conflict.

The Secretary-General's analysis of the realities of
preventive action, peace-building and peacekeeping in
Africa and his operational recommendations are also spot
on. We endorse them, and so should the Security Council.

Africa has been the scene over the last few years of
some of the United Nations greatest successes, but also of
its greatest failures. We need to learn from both. We must
admit our mistakes and do so frankly. We should have
moved more quickly to secure peace in Sierra Leone before
its people were subject to the brutalities of last year's
military coup. We could, and should, have done more to
halt the fighting in the Congo (Brazzaville).

The experience of intervention in Somalia was a
bitter one, but that of non-intervention in Rwanda - as
my Swedish colleague has eloquently reminded us this
morning - was perhaps worse. Fear of the financial costs
of intervention cannot be allowed to become our guiding
principle. We all know the realities of intra-State conflict.
Intervention can be difficult and dangerous, but it can
often be unavoidable if we are to prevent humanitarian
catastrophes and the insidious spread of instability. We
cannot shy away from the demanding military
requirements of humanitarian interventions. The United
Nations has shown in Eastern Slavonia that, given the
right mandates and resources, it can tackle the toughest
operations. And if it does not have the resources, perhaps
we should be giving greater thought to ways of providing
them.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the long-
term enhancement of African peacekeeping capacity is a
key priority. It is also one which stands out as a
partnership between developed and developing countries,
between Africa and the international community. We were
delighted to work with Zimbabwe and the States of
southern Africa in the Blue Hungwe exercise last year
and to participate in the Guidimakha exercise in Senegal
this year. We stand ready to help in other similar African
initiatives.

Many African nations have a proud history in United
Nations peacekeeping. We should build on that. The
multilateral efforts now launched under United Nations
auspices, in close consultation with the Organization of
African Unity, should do much to strengthen African
peacekeeping capacity and help implement the
recommendations in this report. Such capacity
enhancement will, we hope, deliver its own rewards in the
long term. But, in the short term, we must, as the
Secretary-General insists, demonstrate the political will to
deal with the conflicts with which we are confronted in
Africa. There can be no question of a retreat by the
Security Council from Africa. Its responsibilities are clear.
Regional and subregional organizations have a key role,
but they cannot substitute for the United Nations. What
we need is active partnership with Africa.

Britain is trying to play its part, both inside and
outside the Council. We welcome the extent of
cooperation in putting Sierra Leone back on its feet. We
have offered $2 million for the Trust Fund; we urge
others to contribute swiftly too, if peace is to be
sustained.

 
We agree that mandates for peacekeeping operations
must include clear recommendations for the transition to
post-conflict peace-building. This is an area where better
coordination is urgently required within the United Nations
system. We look forward to the development of United
Nations-wide country strategies for post-conflict peace-
building, involving the Bretton Woods institutions as well
as the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

We agree with the Secretary-General that sanctions
can be effective in encouraging States to bring their
behaviour back into line with accepted international norms.
We agree that, wherever possible, "smart" sanctions should
be used, targeted to hit political leaders and decision
makers, and that economic sanctions should contain
humanitarian exemptions to minimize their impact on
ordinary people. We support the Secretary-General's call
for Member States to adopt legislation making the violation
of any Security Council arms embargo a criminal offence.
I can confirm that the United Kingdom always pursues such
violations with the full rigour of the law.

We endorse the Secretary-General's call for all
African countries to provide returns to the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms. We agree that
supplementary regional registers would be a useful further
development. In this context, we, too, commend the
Government of Mali's initiative for a moratorium by States
in the Sahara-Sahel subregion on the import, export and
manufacture of light weapons. Our Department for
International Development has pledged $300,000 to a
United Nations Development Programme project in support
of the moratorium once the latter has been agreed.

We fully agree with the report on the need for
restraint by arms-exporting countries. We have proposed
and are trying to secure European Union-wide agreement
on similar standards through our proposal for a European
Union (EU) Code of Conduct on arms exports.

The proliferation of light weapons in Africa is as
much the result of illicit trafficking as of legal transfers.
The report recognizes this. We have taken forward work
during the United Kingdom Presidency of the EU under the
EU Programme for Combating Illicit Trafficking. A British-
funded seminar in South Africa next month will seek to
identify practical ways of tackling the problem at the
subregional level.

The Secretary-General is right to highlight the plight
of refugees, where we welcome his ideas on a mechanism
to assist with the maintenance of the neutrality and
security of refugee camps. We also agree on the need to
take a hard look at humanitarian assistance. We support
wholeheartedly his determination to ensure that
humanitarian action is fully consistent with broader
United Nations peace and development activities, and
properly coordinated. We hope that the special challenges
he lists in this field will be tackled urgently by the
Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs. He can
count on our support.

Our general welcome for this report extends to the
chapter on building a durable peace and promoting
economic growth. We hope the General Assembly will
also have the opportunity to discuss these issues, but we
would like to endorse here and now the Secretary-
General's assessment of the importance of respect for
human rights - which include the rights to education,
health-care and a livelihood, as well as civil and political
rights - and the rule of law and the need to create a
positive environment for investment and economic
growth. We welcome the Secretary-General' s frankness in
underlining the damage done by corruption. We endorse
his call for a timetable for legislation to implement the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development's Convention on Combating Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials in International Business
Transactions. An African convention could be an
important part of this.

We also warmly welcome the fact that the Secretary-
General has linked the issues of tackling poverty and
protecting the environment. The two are inextricably
linked. Some of the root causes of conflict lie in
environmental issues. Rwanda, for example, has the
highest population density in Africa. Eliminating poverty
is essential to caring for the planet. In order to achieve
this goal, Africa needs and deserves our continued and
increased moral and financial support. The British
Government is fully committed to the United Nations-
approved international development targets, including
reducing by half the proportion of people living in
extreme poverty by 2015 and ensuring universal primary
education in all countries by 2015; progress towards
gender equality and the empowerment of women; and
improvements in health-care and mortality rates. Britain
has pledged to increase by 50 per cent its commitments
to primary health-care, basic education and the provision
of safe drinking water in Africa between 1997 and 2000
as part of our effort to ensure that these targets become
a reality for Africa.

 

And Britain strongly supports the call to reduce
Africa's debt burden. The United Kingdom has already
converted into grant all its official development assistance
debt held by the poorest countries, and supports the rapid
and flexible implementation of the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Debt Initiative, as expressed in the British
Chancellor's Mauritius Mandate statement last September.
Together with other creditor Governments and the
international financial institutions, we will continue to work
with the Governments of the poorest countries to reduce the
burden of debt.

The Secretary-General seeks the support of the group
of major industrialized countries. I can assure him today
that the developing world in general, and Africa in
particular, will be high on the agenda of the G-8 Summit
when it meets in Birmingham from 15 to 17 May.

The scope and complexity of conflict in Africa can
seem daunting. But the Secretary-General offers us hope
and many practical suggestions for improving our individual
and collective performance. The British Government is keen
to respond. We want to make our own contribution to that
collective political will, which the Secretary-General rightly
identifies as key to the successful implementation of this
list of good intentions. We will be listening particularly
closely to our African partners, within and outside the
Council. Their leadership, determination and political skills
are Vital to achieving the results we all want to see.

Meanwhile, the best tribute we can pay to the
Secretary-General's report is to act upon it and to act
quickly. Africa cannot wait.

