Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Iwould like to congratulate
the presidency of the Security Council for taking the
initiative of convening today's briefing. Allow me
also to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. John
Prendergast for their very informative briefings.

One might say that corruption is an internal
problem of a country, but it is not. The fact is that
corruption undermines governmental institutions and
weakens judiciary systems and countries' economies. It
also undermines armies' ability to stand up to terrorist
groups, especially in countries in which soldiers are
not well paid or fully equipped. In an environment of
low morale, corruption can thrive. It provides terrorists
with access to financing and weapons and undermines
the rule of law, good governance and human rights.
Widespread and systematic corruption is one of the root
causes of many conflicts that may constitute a threat to
international peace and security.

Corruption is also one of the major structural
obstacles to successful post-conflict reconstruction in
its negative impact on the three foundational pillars of
the United Nations system, namely, peace and security,
human rights, and sustainable development. It all leads
to one conclusion: corruption is not confined to national
borders. The Security Council cannot turn a blind eye
to corruption and terrorism that have joined forces in
conflict-affected countries. However, we have to bear
in mind that it is both a factor and a consequence of
the present security challenges we face. I would like to
share with the Council a few ideas that, in our opinion,
could contribute to addressing the problem.

First, we should veer towards a policy of financial
pressure aimed at reforms. Donors should send a clear
message that they are willing to stop funding or reject
projects if the Government in question fails to include
safeguards to prevent corruption. The scope of Security
Council sanctions should be expanded when deemed
necessary. By targeting multiple actors at the same
time, there is a chance of having greater impact.

Secondly, with regard to good governance and
transparency, Poland considers the fight against
corruption as a cornerstone of modern democratic
societies. Member States and international institutions
should support long-term democratic and transparency
processes and governance reform. Capacity-building
programmes in all sectors need to be re-evaluated so
that they no longer bolster existing corrupt institutions.
We all know that, without political will, no reform
can bring about the desired effects. Globally, we
call for the universal adoption of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption and close cooperation
among institutions dealing with corruption, such
as the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, the Council of Europe and the European
Union. We also see civil society as an essential partner
in this area.

For many years, Poland has advocated at the Human
Rights Council for the adoption of a draft resolution
on the role of good governance in the promotion and
protection of human rights focused, inter alia, on the
fight against corruption. Poland has also been successful
in developing cooperation with interested countries
that have implemented at the local and regional levels
measures contributing to reducing corruption in the
governmental sector. We also provide training in which
we share anti-money-laundering practices and counter-
terrorist financing measures.

Lastly, we call for enacting anti-money laundering
measures when needed. Bodies like the Financial Action
Task Force have developed international standards to
combat money laundering, and countries should use that
toolbox of measures and implement them at the national
level. If such measures were implemented effectively
by countries, their implementation could create an
environment in which corruption, terrorist financing
and money laundering would fail to go unnoticed.

In conclusion, Poland is fully committed to
reducing corruption. It is disruptive to people's lives and
countries, and not a single one is immune to corruption.
As reducing levels of corruption is one of the Goals of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, it makes
it an even more challenging and ambitious objective,
and we should all strive towards achieving it.

