The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of Haiti,
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lelong (Haiti)
took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Civilian
Police Mission in Haiti, document S/ 1998/ 144.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1141
(1997) of 28 November 1997 and welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) of 20
February 1998 (S/ 1998/ 144).

"The Security Council commends the
achievements of the Secretary-General's Representative
in Haiti, the United Nations staff, and the MIPONUH
civilian police officers in Haiti. It notes with
appreciation the important contributions made by the

United Nations Development Programme and the
International Civilian Mission in Haiti (MICIVIH).
"The Security Council welcomes the progress
made by the Haitian people towards the
establishment of a durable democratic and
constitutional system. It also welcomes the sustained
improvement in security and stability in Haiti. The
Security Council agrees with the Secretary-General
in his assessment of the Haitian National Police
(HNP) as expressed in his recent report
(S/1998/144). It also welcomes the significant
progress made by the HNP as mentioned in the
report of the Secretary-General and expresses
confidence that MIPONUH's activities will continue
to build on the achievements of previous United
Nations missions in Haiti and to further the
professional development of the HNP. The Security
Council expresses the hope that HNP achievements
will be matched by progress in other areas, including
the development of a functioning judicial system,
and in this regard, recognizes the importance of
judicial reform.

"The Security Council reaffirms that further
assistance to the Haitian National Police, should it
be needed, should be provided with the full support
of the international community through United
Nations specialized agencies and programmes, and
through international and regional organizations and
by interested Member States.

"The Security Council reaffirms also that the
people and Government of Haiti bear the ultimate
responsibility for national reconciliation, the
maintenance of a secure and stable environment, the
administration of justice, and the reconstruction of
their country. It emphasizes the importance of Haiti's
continuing to settle its contentious issues peacefully
and democratically. It expresses the View that a
prompt solution of these issues in Haiti will facilitate
economic development and the provision of
international assistance. It fully supports the
Secretary-General's appeal to Haitian authorities and
political leaders to resolve Haiti's political impasse
so the country can move forward and welcomes the
current efforts undertaken to this end.

"The Security Council stresses that it is of the
utmost importance that the next parliamentary and
local elections in Haiti be conducted in a free, fair
and transparent manner in order to allow the

 

broadest possible voter participation, consistent with
Haitian law. It notes that a substantial effort will be
required to ensure the success of these vitally
important elections. The Security Council looks
forward to the steps taken by the Government of Haiti
in this regard and urges the international community
to be ready to provide electoral assistance as may be
requested.

"The Security Council recognizes that economic
rehabilitation and reconstruction constitute the major
tasks facing the Haitian Government and people and
stresses that a sustained commitment by the
international community and the international financial
institutions, as well as the relevant United Nations
bodies, to assist and support the economic, social and
institutional development in Haiti is indispensable for
long-term sustainable development in the country. It
commends the efforts of those organizations and
countries currently involved in meeting these needs
and encourages them to coordinate their activities.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
this matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/8.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

