Judge Pocar: First, I would like to express my
thanks to the members of the Security Council for their
support for the work of the Tribunal and for their
appreciation for the measures taken by the Tribunal
during the reporting period to comply with the
requirements of the completion strategy, while
respecting the principles of fair trial. I wish also to
thank Council members for the comments made on the
activity of the Tribunals during the reporting period
and to date.

I take note of the concern expressed by members
regarding the deadlines of the completion strategy. I
wish to assure the Security Council that the dates of the
completion strategy are constantly before us and that
we are constantly mindful of them in our work.

I want to assure the Security Council that the
Tribunal will do everything it can to conclude its work
by the deadline, bearing in mind the caseload. I wish to
stress that so far the Trial Chambers have concluded
the trials - I am speaking only about the trials - of
66 accused, which is a huge number, bearing in mind,
of course, the principles of fair trial that we have to
respect.

It is true that the plans that I have made provide
for a situation in which trials will have to run into
2009. That does not at all mean that 2009 will be fully
devoted to trials. The assessment that I have made
reflects the situation as it is seen now. But I stressed in
my statement earlier that the Tribunal is not content
with the dates as they stand, but is constantly looking
for new ways to speed up the work and conclude the
activity. I cited the example of the seventh
simultaneous trial which we are going to have at the
beginning of next year. We will continue to find other
ways and means to speed up our procedures and our
work.

On one particular note: the question of the
accused Mr. Seselj was commented upon. In that
respect, I would like to assure the Council that all
measures will be taken to speed up the trial, which,
unfortunately, had to be delayed because the accused
was on a hunger strike. But the Tribunal will certainly
resume the trial as soon as possible - when the
accused's health condition is such as may allow him to
stand trial as a self-represented accused, as decided by
the Appeals Chamber of the Tribunal.

I will not comment further on the question of the
partnership with domestic jurisdictions. I take note of
the guidance of the members of the Council, which
goes in the direction that the Tribunal had already
taken. I also take note of the comments made about the
residual mechanisms and the procedure encouraging
the Tribunal organs to intensify their work. We are
working on that matter, and certainly we are in touch
with the Office of Legal Affairs in that respect.

Again, I wish to reiterate my thanks for the
support and the thoughtful comments made by the
members of the Security Council and to express once
again the commitment of the Tribunal to the
completion strategy.

