Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Minister Ayrault for being here with us to provide over
today's debate. His presence is an affirmation of the
importance that France attaches to protecting civilians,
as evidenced in recent years by President Hollande's
decision to send French forces to Mali and to the Central
African Republic in the hour of their greatest need.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his sustained efforts in pushing
Member States and United Nations officials to protect
the vulnerable. We are grateful to the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Peter Maurer, for his briefing today and for the
valiant efforts of the ICRC staff every single day to
provide vital assistance to people in dire circumstances.

Let me last welcome President Touadera, whose
inauguration I had the honour of attending and whose
commitment to making a clean break from the past is a
much-needed change in the Central African Republic,
a country that knows too well the human consequences
when civilians are attacked and when those who can
help them stand by. I was most moved at President
Touadera's inauguration by his decision to have on
stage with him the 19 opponents who had run against
him in the election. That was a very moving gesture
of reconciliation and one I am not sure many of our
countries would be able to muster in our politics.

Today's meeting comes a critically important time,
as recent news has cast light both on the serious risks
peacekeepers continue to take with so little fanfare to
fulfil their mandates in some of the most dangerous
parts of the world and, unfortunately, on the horrific
consequences when peacekeepers violate the trust
placed in them to protect innocent people in those
same vulnerable circumstances. On 29 May, five
Togolese peacekeepers serving in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali were killed and one was wounded when their
convoy was ambushed by terrorists in Mali's Mopti
region. Two days later, a Chinese peacekeeper was
killed and others injured when the camp where they
were stationed in Gao was attacked. And, as we all saw
just yesterday, terrorists reportedly killed and wounded
many Ethiopian troops in a massive coordinated attack
on an African Union Mission in Somalia base in the
town of Halgan, Somalia.

I would like to express sincere condolences on
behalf of the American people and the United States
Government to the people of Togo, China and Ethiopia,
and in particular to the families of the victims for their
immeasurable loss. I would also like to convey our
collective gratitude for their honourable service.

At the same time, we have seen other reports in
recent days on the alleged extrajudicial execution of
civilians in the Central African Republic by soldiers
serving in the African Union-led peacekeeping
mission in March 2014. The discoveries underscore
the need for the Republic of the Congo, from where
the peacekeepers alleged to have been involved in this
incident have hailed, to ensure that the investigations
and judicial proceedings under way are thorough and
impartial, and to ensure that if any soldiers are found
responsible they are held accountable. Again, we must
treat these crimes as if they were crimes committed
against our own people and act with equal Vigilance
and urgency. In this context, I would like to focus my
remarks today on three ways the Security Council can
help address chronic shortcomings when it comes to
civilian protection in peacekeeping.

The first, reporting, should be easy. We strongly
support the Secretary-General's demand in the
report he released last month that "[a]ny failure by
peacekeepers to act or follow orders will be brought
to the attention of the Security Council" (S/2016/447, para. 58). However, we all know that such failures
are rarely reported to the Council in a timely manner.
More often, reports take many months to emerge if they
emerge at all. To give just one example, a report by the
United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services in
2014 found that, in 507 attacks against civilians from
2010 to 2013, peacekeepers virtually never used force
to protect those coming under attack, likely resulting
in the deaths of thousands of civilians. And yet those
same investigators could not find a single case - not
one - in which the failure of a peacekeeping unit to
execute the order of a force commander was conveyed
to the Security Council, or even included in the
mission's situation reports that are regularly sent to
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. This is
not a functional system, nor is it a system acting in
accordance with the will expressed by the Secretary-
General or in appropriate response to the necessity for
the Security Council to know what is happening in
the field in missions that we have mandated and that
we must take responsibility to try to strengthen. This
situation must change, and we collectively have to be
the ones to make it change.

Reporting is critical both for accountability and
for bringing to the surface problems that have to be
solved to make the collective enterprise more effective.
Without reporting, impunity persists and bad practices
become more common. Civilians are the ones who get
hurt. When, on the other hand, a problem is reported to
the Council, that is not a panacea, but we at least have
a shot at using the bilateral and multilateral tools in our
toolkit to address it.

Regular reporting can also help the Council right-
size missions, taking into account the performance of
peacekeepers on the ground, while allowing Council
members' international capacity to offer targeted
training and equipment to address the challenges the
troop-contributing countries face. When appropriate,
it also allows the Secretary-General to repatriate
contingents that prove unwilling to protect civilians
or that fail to investigate allegations of abuse or hold
perpetrators accountable.

To cite just one example, of why reporting matters,
take the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in the Sudan, where
the Government of the Sudan continues to block vital
equipment and supplies from reaching peacekeepers.
As of Tuesday, 7 June, peacekeepers at Port Sudan only
had 20 days worth of food remaining. Meanwhile, in
southern Darfur, an entire battalion has been prevented
from receiving personal weapons. Without such basic
supplies, peacekeepers cannot even be expected to
protect themselves, never mind to protect civilians who
count on them. Yet word of the Sudanese Government's
latest obstruction took longer than it should have to
reach the Security Council. Now that these reports have
reached us, the Council must do much more to demand
that the Government of the Sudan comply with its
obligations under the Status of Forces Agreement with
the United Nations and that the Government respect
UNAMID's freedom of movement.

The Council's inability to address this issue over
the course of the past year is a shameful failure and a
breach of our responsibility to the troops that we deploy
who risk so much to advance peace in profoundly
hostile environments. Some participants today were
at the meeting of the troop- and police-contributing
countries yesterday in which we heard first hand about
what those troops are going through not being able to
access food and basic supplies (see S/PV.7709). It is an
embarrassment to the Council that we cannot make a
collective demand on the Government to let that food
reach those peacekeepers.

The second way the Council can improve protection
of civilians is through improving the way it plans and
adapts missions to conditions on the ground. Fulfilling
our responsibility to protect civilians demands
anticipating and preempting threats that analysis
suggests are likely to emerge. This has to have not only
at the planning stage for missions but also at regular
intervals for as long as the mission is deployed, in order
to respond kinetic and evolving circumstances in real
time. This is basic common sense and yet as we all
know it is far too rare.

Thirdly, and finally we must get better at matching
the will and capacity of troop-contributing countries
with mandates. Let us be honest: this was hard to do in
the past, due to the scant supply oftroops and police. But
the nearly 50,000 additional troops and police pledged
at last September's peacekeeping summit and in the
days that followed were a game-changer, allowing us
and the United Nations system to help ensure a better
fit between what missions demand and what troops
and police from a given country are willing and able to
do. Troop- and police-contributing countries that have
qualms about the mandates or that doubt their capacity
to do what is asked of them should no longer deploy to
missions simply because nobody else will. And neither
the United Nations nor the Council should feel forced
to leave in place Blue Helmets who are unwilling or
unable to do what is asked of them.

Here I agree with the Minister that the Kigali
Principles can be extremely helpful in aligning the
will and capacity of contributors with the demands of
respective missions. The Principles are designed to
provide a concrete blueprint for shaping the practice
of peacekeepers in volatile situations, particularly with
respect to the theme of this meeting: the protection
of civilians.

To give just one example, the Principles call for
troop-contributing countries to empower the military
commander of a peacekeeping contingent to make
decisions on whether to use force to protect civilians,
because experience has taught us that if a commander
has to wait hours for guidance it may mean not being
able to react in time to repel a fast-approaching attack
on a nearby village. If properly implemented, the
Principles can make peacekeeping missions more
effective, improve security and save lives.

At present, 29 countries, including the United
States, Senegal - as we heard - Uruguay and France,
have announced support for the Kigali Principles,
accounting for more than 40,000 troops and police
currently serving in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That is over one third of the uniformed
personnel on the ground right now. We encourage all
troop-contributing countries to make these Principles
their own, as we believe they are indispensable to
effective peacekeeping in the twenty-first century.

Given the real-life implications of the Principles
and what they suggest about a country's willingness
to protect civilians under threat, we urge the United
Nations to attach considerable weight to a country's
commitment to implementing the Kigali Principles
when it is selecting units for peacekeeping operations,
particularly those operations deployed to volatile
environments with civilian protection mandates.

In February of this year, armed men attacked a
United Nations protection-of-civilians site in Malakal,
South Sudan, where nearly 50,000 civilians were
seeking protection and shelter from the country's civil
conflict. At least 19 people were killed and more than
100 were wounded. Thousands more people who had
been living in the camp fled and chose not to return,
deciding that they felt safer outside the gates than under
United Nations protection. The day after the attack,
one resident told a reporter: "I saw the United Nations
soldiers run away. What happens next time? I do not
know. I saw many people die." Soon after the attack,
the United Nations took the initiative to set up a board
of inquiry, which will brief the Council on its findings
in a few weeks, findings that will be useful not only
for ensuring that there is accountability - if, indeed,
peacekeepers fail to protect civilians - but also to learn
what the Council can do to prevent the next Malakal.

While the horrors of that attack will leave an
indelible mark on the victims and their families, actions
like these could ensure that the more than 170,000 people
who continue to live in camps under the protection of
peacekeepers in South Sudan are more secure. Reporting
that is regular, rigorous and transparent, planning
that anticipates threats and is constantly adapting to
evolving conditions on the ground, and deployments
that ensure that the peacekeepers who serve in the most
dangerous situations have the capacity and the will to
protect civilians - these are steps that, ifimplemented,
will not only make peacekeeping more effective, but
will save countless lives.
