We congratulate the Dominican Republic on its leadership of the Security Council in these turbulent days. We also commend China for its stewardship of the Council in March. We thank United Nations Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov for his briefing and for his efforts at this critical time, as well as those of Humanitarian Coordinator Jamie McGoldrick and his team in Palestine, including those made in support of our collective efforts to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. On behalf of the Government and the people of Palestine, I wish to convey our deepest condolences to all bereaved families and countries on the tragic loss of life caused by this virus and reaffirm our solidarity with all the afflicted, wishing the restoration of health and stability to each of them. We acknowledge the leadership of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed in responding to the pandemic. We commend their efforts to mobilize the United Nations system, with the World Health Organization taking the lead in addressing the health impact of the pandemic, together with all relevant United Nations agencies that are helping to alleviate the pandemic's vast economic, social, humanitarian and security impacts, including on women, children and youth, refugees and displaced persons. This includes the valiant efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) undertaken to support Palestinian refugees, alongside those of the other United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations assisting the Palestinian people, helping to protect them from the ravages of the pandemic as they work to alleviate the needs and hardships caused by Israel's illegal occupation and the historic injustice Palestinians have been forced to endure for so long. We appeal for urgent international support to UNRWA to ensure continuity of its essential work. We also underscore today the Secretary-General's wise call for a global ceasefire, which President Mahmoud Abbas has endorsed on behalf of the State of Palestine. This call must include an appeal to Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its war against the Palestinian people, stop its denial of their right to self- determination, halt its colonization and de facto annexation of Palestinian land, end its immoral blockade on the Gaza Strip and release the thousands of Palestinians that it has imprisoned, including children, who are at great risk of contagion in crowded, unsanitary prisons. Israel must be unequivocally called upon to respect its legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention; accountability for violations is imperative. Only in this way can human lives be saved and the potential for peace and justice realized. We recognize that many people are now suffering and that fears about our individual and collective futures are at an all-time high. However, the Palestinian situation in this pandemic is unique and painfully acute. Our coping capacities have been depleted by 53 years of an illegal occupation and the constant dispossession, deprivation and oppression of our people. This crisis will only exacerbate an already volatile situation. The state of emergency declared on 5 March remains in place, therefore, with a view to stopping the spread of the virus, which would be disastrous, especially in Gaza, where the health system is near collapse and where an outbreak would gravely endanger lives, especially in the refugee camps. Despite limited resources and the severe restrictions imposed by the occupation, our Government Ministries 35/99 36/99 and relevant national institutions are exerting every effort to protect our population and respond to the vast humanitarian and socioeconomic repercussions of this crisis. They are doing so with the support of United Nations agencies and the generous assistance of countries the world over, for which we are grateful. Regrettably, however, even the extreme challenges posed by this pandemic on all people have not convinced the occupying Power to stop committing its crimes. Instead, Israel carries on with its illegal policies and practices - business as usual. Whatever technical coordination has been achieved between the two sides in recent weeks to combat COVID-19 has been undercut by incessant violations. This is not a politicization of the matter, as the Israeli representative alleges; these are the hard facts. The most flagrant of these violations has been Israel's annexation push. Officials and extremists openly vow to annex parts or all of the West Bank. They brag about plans to commit this crime and to do so in full coordination with the current United States Administration. Shockingly, annexation became the centrepiece of the recent negotiations to form the new Israeli Government. Indeed, while world leaders have been calling for negotiations to resolve all final status issues to end the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and achieve a just and lasting peace, we are certain they were not referring to negotiations between Netanyahu and Gantz to determine what Palestinian land they would steal and illegally annex. Yet, as revealed by the cynical agreement reached in the past few days, the Israeli Government is forging ahead, in breach of the Charter of the United Nations and all other relevant provisions of international law, in blatant contempt of the Security Council and undeterred by the international community, believing that only the support of its main patron State matters. This situation should leave no doubt as to the extent to which Israel's sense of its own impunity has been emboldened by the United States plan unveiled on 28 January and its dismissal of the internationally endorsed terms of reference and other parameters for a just solution based on international law, including United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the framework of two States peacefully coexisting within the pre-1967 borders. We reiterate that the United States plan will not bring peace. This plan - and Israel's decision to proceed with annexation - will destroy the two-State solution and entrench Israel's military control over the Palestinian people and their land. As stressed in Special Coordinator Mladenov's 30 March briefing, "Unilateral steps are detrimental to peace... Israeli officials have repeatedly stated their intention to annex Israeli settlements and other parts of the occupied West Bank. If implemented, such steps would not only constitute a serious violation of international law, but they would also effectively end the prospect of the two-State solution and close the door to negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians" (S/2020/263, annex I, p. 6). The result, we all know, will be a one-State reality of apartheid, guaranteeing more conflict and harming generations more of Palestinians and Israelis as well as the entire region. Such an outcome must be averted at all costs. The international community must repudiate all annexation measures and demand a halt to them. It must not fall prey to the pretexts crafted by Israeli official, including today's excuse - the pandemic - to divert attention from these crimes. We must not be fooled by the naming of the new Government as a "national emergency Government". Congratulatory words that ignore the fact that annexation is central to this Government's programme effectively bless such crimes. Accordingly, we appreciate the many strong statements issued by Arab, European, African, Asian and Latin American States and organizations, by Special Envoys of concerned States and by the United Nations that oppose Israeli annexation plans and demand a halt to them. But experience over the years has proven that statements alone will not compel Israel's respect for the law, nor avert its looming destruction of the two-State solution, as annexation is unfolding on the ground as we speak. We urge the international community to take immediate action to enforce concrete and practical measures that hold Israel accountable for its perverse impunity. There must be consequences. There must be deterrence. Only such action - by the Security Council, by the General Assembly, by the Quartet, by international judicial bodies, by Parliaments and Governments and by civil society - can ensure the accountability needed to halt violations and salvage the prospects for a just peace and security based on the global consensus. Without a cessation of these violations, no efforts to create a credible political horizon towards the attainment of a just, lasting and comprehensive solution will ever succeed. The real concerns and worries raised worldwide by this horrible pandemic cannot be used as an excuse to ignore human rights violations and look the other way, as Israel would wish everyone to do. On the contrary, this pandemic has only further highlighted the absurdity, immorality and illegality of such crimes and the urgency of bringing them to an end, right now. When people everywhere are being instructed to shelter at home, how can Israel justify destroying homes? When people everywhere are desperately seeking medical care, how can Israel justify the destruction of clinics, the denial of humanitarian assistance and the medical neglect of prisoners? When the Secretary-General, joined by Pope Francis and leaders around the world, appeals for a global ceasefire, how can Israel justify its entrenchment of occupation and pursuit of annexation? Now is the time to cease those violations and reverse the negative trends on the ground, not escalate them in such a flagrant, provocative way. Now is the time to heed the global calls to respect international law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention and relevant United Nations resolutions. Now is the time to become more humane and giving, not more brutal and insatiable by imposing apartheid and never-ending conflict. Now is the time to see the other as equal and as deserving of freedom, safety, security and prosperity as yourselves. Now is the time to recognize our common humanity and shared future and to revive hope and trust. Now is the time to recognize that no injustice will last forever. Israel has a choice. It may feel emboldened to blindly and arrogantly move ahead with annexation. But, should it choose to go down that illegal, destructive path, then it should not be surprised at the chain of events that will ensue. Many countries have already warned that annexation will not go unchallenged and that there will be consequences. Those who are principled and respect international law and the authority of the Security Council and General Assembly as the pillars of the rules-based international order will not stand idly by while the law and human rights of an entire people are so flagrantly breached and while the foundations for a just peace are destroyed, setting dangerous global precedents. Moreover, the Palestinian people will never forgo their inalienable human rights, including to self- determination and independence and to exist as a free and equal people, living in dignity, security and prosperity in their homeland. Even if the two-State solution is ruined, it will not end their quest for freedom and justice. The Palestinian people and leadership remain resilient. 37/99 38/99 We must join together to uphold international law and insist on its respect without exception. It is time for an international peace conference to finally resolve the Palestine question and end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is time to bring the illegal occupation to an end. It is time for justice and for the Palestinian people to know freedom and dignity in their independent, sovereign State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and to live side by side in peace and security with all of their neighbours, joining together to meet all the challenges before us and create a better, brighter future for all of our peoples.
