Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking our four briefers, who have genuinely enriched
our discussions here today, as well as by extending the
United Kingdom's deepest sympathies to the families
of the victims targeted in attacks by Al-Shabaab. We
condemn those attacks in the strongest possible terms
and we pay tribute to the role of the Somali National
Army, the Somali Police Force and the troops from the
African Union Mission in Somalia in their efforts to
promote peace, security and stability in Somalia.

I want to give a particularly warm welcome to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Swan
and pay tribute to him and his team for the work that
they have been doing over the past few months. The
United Nations has played, and will play, a vital role in
enabling the achievement of lasting peace and security
for Somalia, and we encourage full engagement and
cooperation with the United Nations. The sanctions
regime is of course a key part of security sector reform.
We encourage Somalia to engage in dialogue with
the Panel of Experts, who have been mandated by the
Security Council.

I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General PramiIa Patten for her very
important briefing today and for the excellent work
that she has been doing with the Somali Government to
address conflict-related sexual violence.

The Government's commitment to developing a new
national action plan to end sexual violence in conflict
demonstrates willingness to tackle that pervasive issue.
However, we share concerns about the lack of progress,
in particular in passing the sexual offences bill, which
Special Representative Patten mentioned. I hope that
she will be able to come back to the Council in due
course to update us on progress on the many issues that
she flagged this morning.

I would also like to thank Ms. Arale for her
extremely brave and very powerful briefing today
about the work she is doing on the ground and the work
that her organization and other human rights defenders
do to strengthen human rights in Somalia. We all
heard loud and clear her message about the need for
the Security Council to integrate the issues of human
rights and tackling sexual violence into our work on
Somalia. I thank her for being so clear. Her presence at
our meeting today is a further reminder to the Council
of the importance of women playing a central role in
conflict prevention, mediation and State-building. I
thank her very much.

As we heard from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the next 18 months will be crucial
for Somalia. I would like to briefly touch on three issues.
First, with regard to the elections in Jubaland, we,
together with other partners around the table, have been
encouraging all stakeholders to reach an agreement on
a single electoral process that is credible, inclusive, fair
and peaceful. We are very concerned about the fact that
an agreement on such a process has not been achieved
and that the existing approaches are reaching a point
beyond which the likelihood of instability and division
within Jubaland has been significantly increased.

We therefore call on all actors in Jubaland to
refrain from Violence. We encourage a reinvigoration
of dialogue among States of the region, aimed at
maintaining stability in Jubaland, Somalia and the
wider region and call on all stakeholders to pursue any
possible changes that would result in a process that
enjoys wider support in Jubaland. The United Kingdom
stands ready to provide its full support to such
discussions through the efforts of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Swan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia and in partnership with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.

The second area I would like to touch on is the
national elections in 2020 or 2021. The swift passage
of an electoral law that ensures a fair process and
allows the representation of all Somalis is vital. If it
is not passed by November this year, it could seriously
impact the delivery of elections on time. As it stands,
the United Kingdom is particularly concerned about
the insufficient provisions on the rapid representation
of minority groups and women. It is an issue that
Ms. Arale also touched on in her briefing just now. We
stand ready, as the United Kingdom, to provide support
for the elections and urge others to do the same.

The third area of focus is security. It is vital that
the Federal Government of Somalia and the member
states work together to implement the national
security architecture agreed at the 2017 London
Somalia Conference and deliver the transition plan
towards Somali-led security, as the Council called
for in resolution 2472 (2019). We agree with the
Special Representative and Ambassador Madeira that
force generation of able, accountable, acceptable and
affordable Somali security forces is absolutely vital
to that end. I would also agree with the message from
Special Representative Patten that we also need to
ensure that the Somali security forces are able to tackle
the issue of sexual violence against women and girls,
which is so prevalent in Somalia, as we heard today.

On that note, we welcome the ongoing Somali-led
joint security operations in the Lower Shabelle region as
an as an example of good coordination between Somali
and international forces, but much more remains to be
done to stabilize and hold the territory in the long term
and carry out similar work elsewhere in Somalia.

In conclusion, we agree with Special Representative
Swan that engagement between the Federal Government
of Somalia and the federal member states is at the heart
of all our efforts in Somalia. We therefore urge both
the Federal Government and the member states to come
together to settle the remaining questions about federal
power and resource-sharing through a process of
constitutional review to enable the continued trajectory
of Somalia to inclusive and peaceful one-person
one-vote elections in 2020 or 2021. It is important that
the Somalia Partnership Forum in October demonstrates
that the Federal Government's relationship with the
federal member states is a genuine partnership and that
it delivers an agreed set of shared priorities to the end
of 2020. External pressures continue to pose risks to
political stability. The international community, States
of the region and the Council must use their influence
constructively, invest in the federal system and
institutions and increase our coordination to support
Somalia in its efforts.

