The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

I would like to thank all the briefers for their
comprehensive briefings and the work that they have
done thus far, despite difficult circumstances. The
briefings reported both positive developments, some
of which the Security Council ought to have heard and
expected several months ago, and news on the persistent
gloomy humanitarian situation.

We would like to underscore three points. Before
that, I would like to pay tribute to the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) for his work, as well as his visit.

First, regarding the implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement, Indonesia takes note of the
redeployment of troops by the Houthis from the three
ports, as well as the report from the Special Envoy
on the meeting in Amman to discuss the revenue
from those ports. That exercise should continue with
the demining operations in the ports and the removal
of heavy weaponry, under the monitoring of the
United Nations Mission to Support the Al-Hudaydah
agreement, with a View to ensuring a valid, verifiable,
genuine and faithful implementation of the agreement.

It is hoped that this long-delayed step could soon
be followed by the other steps that are necessary to
remove any military manifestations from the city, as
stipulated in the Stockholm Agreement. In addition to
that, and as set out in the Al-Hudaydah agreement, we
also expect that the revenues from the three ports will
be settled and channelled to the Central Bank of Yemen
through its branch in Al-Hudaydah. We need to revive
the economy in support of humanitarian efforts. It is
our expectation that the humanitarian corridors will
be established.

Secondly, Indonesia supports the continuation of
consultations between the Government of Yemen and
the Houthis to pursue the bigger goal of a political
settlement and resolve the conflict. We support the work
of the Special Envoy, as well as Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard. Constant engagement among the parties, in
our opinion, is an investment in the peaceful resolution
of the long-standing conflict in Yemen. We also share
Mr. Griffiths' View on the involvement ofwomen in the
peace process and on a comprehensive solution.
The Stockholm Agreement calls for all parties to
be fully committed to continuing the consultations
unconditionally; that is an important point. Indonesia
would like to once again reiterate its call for the parties
to release or exchange all detainees. There should also
be some progress related to the city of Taiz, as the
situation there is not improving. Indonesia also calls on
all sides to exercise restraint from provocative actions,
such as drone attacks, that could further escalate
tensions and derail the fragile efforts that are currently
being undertaken by the United Nations. Military
action is not the solution.

Thirdly, Indonesia remains concerned about the
constantly bleak humanitarian picture in Yemen. Not
only is starvation lingering, but the people are also
facing a cholera outbreak, as Ms. Fore described. I
believe that the picture that she painted in the Council
is a very bleak one; the Council must do something in
that regard. There are many cholera cases, as Mr. Fore
reported: 153 children have died since January, and,
just in one week, there were 13 associated deaths, from
29 April to 5 May. It is a dire warning to us all that
the humanitarian situation in Yemen is reaching its
lowest point. That should be addressed immediately.
We should all heed the call of the Executive Director
of UNICEF to be united to help the children of Yemen.

Indonesia supports the work of UNICEF, the
World Health Organization and other actors to cure
and stop the cholera outbreak. All parties in Yemen
should cooperate to facilitate their efforts. We also
support the work of the World Food Programme in
delivering assistance.

We have also noted the point Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock made that humanitarian support has
started to reach people in need, but the situation remains
dire. We should continue to preserve the momentum
gained and ensure more robust humanitarian delivery
on the ground. Moreover, we heard Under-Secretary-
General stress the need for funding, which is
very important.

Once again, Indonesia would like to reiterate the
importance of unity within the Security Council to take
measures to ease the suffering of the Yemeni people
and support any action that could advance the peace
process. We must never forget that ourjob is to save the
people of Yemen.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

