Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I too
would like to thank Mr. Egeland very much for his
latest report on the humanitarian situation in Africa
with a focus on Darfur and the J uba peace talks. We are
touched by the commitment and passion which have
consistently characterized his work as Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs. He has
inspired many to action, but, as he showed, many
challenges remain and, in some cases, some situations
have deteriorated.

The current situation in Darfur is reminiscent of
what it was in 2004 and 2005, and it is getting worse.
The Government's military actions and the activities of
the militias have continued unabated. In some cases,
they have continued with impunity. It is instructive to
recall that in the course of 2005 the Security Council
adopted two important resolutions to facilitate the
peace process in Abuja and the humanitarian work in
Darfur. The Council has an obligation to revisit those
resolutions and try to create a new consensus to
advance the peace process, to protect civilians and to
assist and protect humanitarian action in Darfur.

The Darfur peace process was far from perfect
and the Agreement is certainly not the best one. Its
implementation prospects are receding. However, it is
the only framework for a multilateral and multiparty
solution. The Security Council, in partnership with the
other stakeholders, especially the African Union,
should try to rescue the Agreement. Short of this, it
will give the Government of the Sudan an excuse for
unilateral military action in place of recourse to a
political process. The Council should be mindful of the
need to work very closely with the African Union in
order to see how the Peace Agreement can be rescued.

The African Union peace mission in Darfur is
still operating essentially on the terms of the

N'Djamena cessation of hostilities agreement and has
not been enabled to engage in the implementation of
the Abuja peace process. The mandate of the African
mission in Darfur has been extended several times, but
its operational mandate has not been substantially
revised or enhanced. The renewed discussions among
the African Union, the United Nations, the Sudan and
other stakeholders in Addis Ababa should be an
opportunity to build much-needed confidence to make
a breakthrough in addressing the situation of the
implementation of the Abuja peace process, or the
Darfur peace process.

The security of the camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in Darfur and the refugee camps in
Chad need to receive special attention. As the
fragmentation of warring parties continues, there is a
great risk of these parties seeking bases in the refugees
camps and IDP camps. This could further exacerbate
the tense situation existing between the Sudan and
Chad, and between the Sudan and the Central African
Republic. It is important therefore that as we consider
the overall security of the camps, we should also
consider this regional dimension.

Under Mr. Egeland's leadership, world opinion
has been sensitized to the situation in Darfur, as we see
advertisements in major world newspapers and rallies
around the world to support the cause of Darfurians.
Mr. Egeland has mobilized resources for the largest
humanitarian operation in the world today. He has
encouraged coordinated action by United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations with the
Central Emergency Relief Fund. The report on system-
wide coherence in humanitarian action should further
enhance coordination within the United Nations
humanitarian community. The Security Council should
provide the needed political support for these
initiatives which Mr. Egeland started.

Turning to the Juba peace talks, we congratulate
Mr. Egeland on his success in meeting with Joseph
Kony and Vincent Otti. It is normally not very easy to
meet with these kinds of people. It takes a lot of
planning and courage. We hope that Mr. Egeland will
continue to engage in dialogue with them, especially
on the outstanding humanitarian issues, in particular
the question of women and children abductees.

We have come a long way. This opportunity
should not slip away from us again. These talks are
qualitatively different from previous ones. Having the
Government of Southern Sudan as a facilitator makes a
big difference. The involvement of the United Nations
and the international community assures that these
talks receive attention and the necessary support. There
has to be peace and justice. The two should not be
mutually exclusive. Impunity should not be allowed,
but the issues have to be handled tactfully, without
compromising the strategic objectives of peace and
justice.

The international community should work closely
with the Government of Uganda and all other
stakeholders to address the humanitarian situation in
northern Uganda, and also to contain the situation from
becoming what it used to be in terms of a regional
challenge.

