Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Ms. Schraner Burgener, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Myanmar, for her briefing. We
commend her efforts. China will continue to support
her in working constructively with Myanmar and
Bangladesh to achieve progress in the settlement of the
issue of Rakhine state.

Thanks to the joint efforts of the countries
concerned, countries of the region and the United
Nations, we have seen progress recently in the settlement
of the Rakhine issue. Myanmar and Bangladesh were
visited this year by Special Envoy Schraner Burgener
and held in-depth consultations on the issue. The two
countries have actively verified voluntary returnees
and have made arrangements for the fourth joint
working group meeting. The Government of Myanmar
has committed to gradually shutting down the Rakhine
internally displaced persons camp and issuing legal
identity documents to those repatriated.
As prompted by Special Envoy Schraner Burgener,
Myanmar has undertaken to simplify the application
process for legal documents. The Myanmar Government
has continued to implementing the tripartite
memorandum of understanding, signed with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme, and
approved the quick-impact development projects the
two agencies are to carry out in Rakhine state.

Turning to the alleged human rights violations,
the independent commission of inquiry on Rakhine
state held a sixth meeting at the end of January. The
commission decided to officially collect information
from the public regarding human rights violations.
The Bangladeshi Refugee Relief and Repatriation
Commission, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Cox's Bazar
local Government have registered a total of more than
60,000 people currently seeking refuge and waiting
to be repatriated, and they are communicating with
Myanmar on their repatriation.

The issue of Rakhine state is a legacy issue. Its
resolution lies in tackling both its symptoms and
its root causes. The top priority is to enable an early
return of those currently stranded in Bangladesh, which
is the only realistic and viable way to alleviate the
Rakhine state crisis. To that end, China has proposed
an approach with three phases, namely, the cessation
of violations, repatriation and development. We have
twice facilitated informal tripartite meetings between
China, Myanmar and Bangladesh, during which three
important points of consensus emerged on the issue
of repatriation, pushing the two countries to address
the matter through dialogue and negotiation. That
has been widely acknowledged and supported by the
international community, including countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Ambassador Sun Guoxiang, Special Envoy for
Asian Affairs of the Chinese Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, has visited Myanmar and will visit Bangladesh
in early March. He will have in-depth exchanges with
the two countries on the issue of Rakhine state with
a view to fostering mutual trust between the two
countries so that concrete measures can be taken as
soon as possible.

China is very concerned about the humanitarian
situation of the people in Rakhine state and has actively
provided humanitarian assistance to both countries.
A total of 1,100 housing units have been delivered
to Myanmar in order to improve local conditions for
settling returnees. In addition, China has provided
Bangladesh with ¥20 million in food aid. We will
continue to do our part to contribute to the settlement
of the issue of Rakhine state. The issue of Rakhine
state is essentially one that concerns Myanmar and
Bangladesh; as such, it is up to those two countries to
work out a solution.

Countries ofthe region, the Association ofSoutheast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the United Nations can
provide positive and constructive assistance. Late last
year, the AEAN Secretary-General, Mr. Lim Jock Hoi,
conducted an inspection tour of northern Rakhine.
The ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance on Disaster Management recently sent a
needs-assessment team to Myanmar to support the
repatriation work by the Government. China commends
ASEAN for its important role and active efforts in
search ofa solution to the issue of Rakhine state.

The international community should encourage
Myanmar and Bangladesh to strengthen dialogue and
achieve early repatriation of the first batch of displaced
persons so that all those currently seeking refuge can
return to their homes as soon as possible. Issues of
interest to the international community in the process of
repatriation, such as freedom of movement, citizenship
and accountability, need to be addressed gradually
and properly. Insisting on setting preconditions for
repatriation will only render such solutions out of reach.

Development is the fundamental way to resolve the
issue of Rakhine state, which has abundant resources
yet its development lags behind. The international
community should increase support for investment
in Rakhine state to help local communities eliminate
poverty and promote development to achieve stability.
China supports the United Nations playing a greater
role in that regard.

Council members should remain united and
avoid applying undue pressure, therefore playing a
constructive role in promoting a bilateral settlement of
the issue by Myanmar and Bangladesh. The Office ofthe
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Development Programme should step
up their coordination with the Myanmar Government
and steadily implement the tripartite agreement.

The international community should continue
to be patient and create an environment conducive to
the implementation by the two countries of bilateral
repatriation agreements and advance the settlement
of practical issues with a view to achieving long-term
peace, stability and development in Rakhine state.
