The President: I thank the representative of the
United Arab Emirates for his kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker is His Excellency Mr. Keba Birane
Cisse, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

Mr. Cisse (Chairman, Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People)
(interpretation from French): I congratulate you warmly,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
I am certain that your great experience and diplomatic
skill will contribute to the success of the Council's
deliberations.

 

I should also like to take this opportunity to warmly
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Emilio
Cardenas, Permanent Representative of Argentina, for his
exemplary guidance of the Council's work during the month
of January.

I am also grateful to the members of the Council for
allowing me, as Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
to participate in the important debate on the question of the
establishment of Israeli settlements in the territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and the
dangerous consequences they could have for the Palestinian
people and the Middle East peace process.

The issue before us is as complex from the political,
diplomatic standpoint as it is painful and emotional from
the human. I am speaking of Israel's continued construction
and progressive expansion of settlements on Palestinian
land. For many years the Committee I represent has tried,
as have other United Nations bodies, to make the
international community aware of the illegality of those
actions.

Israel, the occupying Power, continues to implement
the unlawful policy of establishing settlements in occupied
Palestinian territory and authorizing more and more Israeli
settlers to move into them, in the most direct and serious
contravention of article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War of 12 August 1949, and also in Violation of
many Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
446 (1979), 452 (1979) and 465 (1980).

Not only that, even more Palestinian land is being
confiscated, existing settlements are constantly expanding
and ever more buildings are being put up while yet more
settlements are being established, particularly in and around
the occupied city of East Jerusalem. Since September 1994,
several announcements by high-level Israeli officials have
indicated a toughening of Israel's position on this key issue,
and Israeli policies and other goings-on have caused serious
friction.

Even as recently as 19 February 1995 the Israeli
Government, in a vote that showed how divided it is,
approved the expansion of three Jewish settlements in the
West Bank, near Jerusalem. This decision cannot but have
an adverse impact on the peace talks with the Palestinians.

The plan in question, under which 500 homes would
be built in Maaleh Adumin, 800 in Givat Zeev and at least

 

500 in the religious settlement of Bitar, was met with
immediate criticism from the Palestinians, who hope to
gain self-rule in the occupied West Bank through the
negotiations now under way.

It should be noted that the Israeli decision comes at
a time when the implementation of the second stage of
the 13 September 1993 Declaration of Principles has been
delayed for seven months, including the redeployment of
the Israeli forces away from populated areas in the West
Bank and the election of the Palestinian Council. Clearly,
this decision further undermines the current peace process
and exacerbates the already fragile, tense and dangerous
atmosphere in the occupied territory.

It is well known that the Israeli settlements are
contrary to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which
is applicable to all the territory occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem. The Council has repeatedly
reaffirmed this fact in several resolutions. Moreover,
settlements are a very serious obstacle to peace, and the
continuing settlement activity violates the letter and the
spirit of the agreements reached between the Government
of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, as
well as threatening the integrity of the peace process at
this critical stage.

These developments have also triggered widespread
demonstrations by Palestinians and Israeli peace activists,
highlighting the importance of the settlement issue for the
future exercise of Palestinian rights and the peace process
itself.

On behalf of the Committee, I should like to recall
that the Security Council, in its resolution 465 of 1 March
1980 and other resolutions, determined that all measures
taken by Israel to change the physical character,
demographic composition, institutional structure or status
of the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied
since 1967, including Jerusalem, have no legal validity,
are in violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and,
furthermore, constitute a serious obstruction to the
attainment of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East.

The Committee considers that the increasing
expansion and consolidation of settlements create facts on
the ground inconsistent with Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) - which the current peace
process seeks to implement - and seriously compromise
the agreements between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization. Noting the similar concerns

 

expressed by the Council of the Arab League in its
resolution of 5 January 1995 and by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine in his letters to the Secretary-General
of 9 and 31 January 1995, the Committee wishes to join
them in appealing to the Security Council, to the sponsors
of the peace process and to all others concerned to exert
their influence on the Israeli Government to end its
settlement policy, as an indispensable step towards the
attainment of the just and lasting peace we are all working
for.

The Committee believes that only rapid and consistent
progress in the peace process, leading to a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East, will prevent the
current situation from deteriorating even further. The
Committee calls on all concerned to do everything possible
to surmount the current obstacles and to advance towards
full implementation of the agreements that have been
reached thus far.

The convening of today's meeting of the Security
Council indicates that the continuing deterioration of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories has become
a matter of major concern to the members of the Council
and to the international community as a whole. The
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People therefore hopes that this debate will
culminate in a clear demonstration of the Council's
determination to find ways and means to reinvigorate the
peace process. The international community must assist the
parties to proceed rapidly along the road towards a
negotiated peace, on which they have embarked together -
the only road that can ensure a lasting peace in the region.

The President: I thank the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People for his kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of Malaysia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.


