The President: I thank the representative of
Pakistan for his kind words addressed to me and to the
Greek delegation.

There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.

I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Security Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
peace and security and that any acts of terrorism
are criminal and unjustifiable regardless of their

motivations, whenever and by whomsoever
committed. The Security Council reiterates its
condemnation of the Al-Qaida network and other
terrorist groups for ongoing and multiple criminal
terrorist acts aimed at causing death and
destruction of property and undermining stability.
The Security Council also reaffirms that
proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, as well as their means of delivery,
constitutes a threat to international peace and
security and recalls its grave concern about the
risk posed by non-State actors that attempt to
develop, acquire, manufacture, possess, transport,
transfer or use nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery.

"The Security Council reiterates its call on
all Member States to become parties to all 12
international conventions against terrorism and in
this context draws attention to the treaty event
being held in New York in September, and
encourages Member States to take that
opportunity also to sign the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism. The Security Council calls on
Member States to cooperate on an expedited basis
to resolve all outstanding issues with a View to
adopting the draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism.

"The Security Council urges all States to
cooperate to bring to justice, in accordance with
the principle of extradite or prosecute, the
perpetrators, organizers and sponsors of acts of
terrorism. Recent events, as condemned by the
Security Council in resolution 1611 (2005) and
S/PRST/2005/29, stress the urgency and necessity
of redoubling efforts to combat terrorism.

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefings by the Chairmen of the Al
Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the Counter-
Terrorism Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on
the work of the three Committees. The Security
Council reaffirms the importance and the urgency
it attaches to the implementation of the
provisions of the resolutions relevant to the three
Committees as well as the fulfilment of the
mandates of the three Committees. The Security

Council therefore strongly encourages Member
States as well as the respective Committees to
redouble their efforts to seek ways to further
strengthen the implementation of resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), in
accordance with the provisions of these and other
relevant resolutions.

"The Security Council reaffirms its call for
enhanced cooperation among the three
Committees, as well as their respective groups of
experts, in monitoring States' implementation of
the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, with due respect for their different
mandates, including through enhanced
information sharing, coordinated response to late
submission of States' reports to the three
Committees, and other issues of relevance to all
the three Committees. The Security Council also
invites the three Committees to continue
cooperation with the working group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004).

"The Security Council urges Member States
to redouble their efforts to implement the
the

provisions of the resolutions relevant to the three
Committees. While reaffirming that the
responsibility for implementing the provisions of
these resolutions rests with the States, the
Security Council encourages States to seek the
necessary assistance to ensure that the necessary
capacity to implement the resolutions is
available.

"The Security Council reiterates that
relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations can play a crucial role in supporting
the goals of these resolutions, raising awareness
of their importance, and helping their members
implement them. The Security Council
encourages such organizations, as or when
proposed by the relevant Committee, where
appropriate, to provide the necessary technical
assistance. Moreover, the Security Council
encourages its Counter-Terrorism Committee, Al-
Qaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee, and, when
appropriate, its 1540 Committee, as well as
relevant organizations, to enhance cooperation
with a view to identifying, promoting, and
developing, as appropriate, best practices to
provide clarity and guidance to States on
implementation of the provisions of the relevant
resolutions.

"The Security Council encourages Member
States in a position to do so to make technical
assistance available on a priority basis.

"The Security Council invites the three
Committees to continue reporting on their
activities at regular intervals and, where
appropriate, in a coordinated manner."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.
