Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We once again express
appreciation to the Kazakh presidency for having
convened this important debate on building regional
partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model
to link security and development.

Coming as it does on the heels of the recent
Security Council mission to Afghanistan, this debate
also affords us an opportunity to reflect on our visit.
We are pleased to see you again, Mr. Minister, presiding
over this meeting, which demonstrates the importance
that the Kazakh presidency attaches to the situation in
Afghanistan and Central Asia and to the nexus between
security and development.

We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing on the overall situation in the region.

The situation in Afghanistan was discussed last
month during the quarterly debate on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), but what
is different this time around is that this discussion is
taking place after our very recent visit to Afghanistan,
which we found very useful and productive.

We were indeed able to express solidarity with
the people and the Government of Afghanistan and
better appreciate the many complex peace and security
challenges that the country continues to face, as well as
the real potential it has for renewal and for contributing
not only to regional security but also to development.
Ensuring peace and stability, fighting terrorism
and violent extremism, promoting dialogue and
reconciliation, fostering good governance and the role
of law, conducting parliamentary and district elections,
and promoting inclusive growth and development are
some of the most topical issues that we discussed with
the Afghan leadership as well as a number of other
important stakeholders.

It was very clear to us that Afghanistan continues
to require comprehensive, sustained and coordinated
support from the international community in all these
areas. The fact that the country needs and deserves
such support was lost on none of the Council members
in the mission.

The discussions we have had on the situation in
Afghanistan here in the Council cannot be said to have
paid adequate attention to the regional dimension.
What is different today is that we are considering the
situation, perhaps for the first time, from the regional
perspective. Indeed, the situation in Afghanistan
cannot be seen in isolation from the peace, security and
development of the Central Asian region.

There is no doubt that a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan is vital for regional peace, security and
stability in Central Asia, but that is not all. Afghanistan
is also vital, as are the rest of the countries of
Central Asia, to mutually advantageous development
cooperation in this very important region.

In that context, we welcome today's adoption
of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/2) that
very much underscores that point, and we commend
Kazakhstan for its facilitating role as penholder.
Ethiopia attaches great importance to a regional
approach to addressing threats to peace and security
and promoting development cooperation to enhance the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in line with Chapter
VIII ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations. In that regard,
we recognize the important role that the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia continues to play in helping countries of the region
to address their shared challenges to peace, stability
and development. We note the declaration adopted at
the meeting of Central Asian foreign ministers held
on 11 December 2016 in Ashgabat on the occasion of
the tenth anniversary of the Regional Centre, at which
the countries of the region agreed to enhance regional
cooperation with the support of the Centre. Of course,
we will have another opportunity to discuss that and
other developments with regard to the Regional Centre
next week.

We believe that it is critically important to
maximize the efficiency and efficacy of the work of
the United Nations in Afghanistan and Central Asia,
including through enhanced coordination across the
United Nations system. We hope that the Centre will
enhance its cooperation and coordination with relevant
United Nations bodies such as the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and other regional
organizations, in order to strengthen the capacity of the
countries of the region to overcome their challenges
and foster greater cooperation among themselves for
the sake of shared peace, stability and development.

