Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we welcome the presence here today of His
Excellency. Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso. We would
also like to express our thanks to all the briefers for
their valuable remarks. It is pleasing to listen to the
diverse group of speakers today representing different
organizations and experiences, which gives us a better
understanding of the situation in the Sahel region and
helps us understand the different roles of actors in the
region, as well as the needs of the Sahel region at large.

As has been made clear to the Security Council from
the briefings today, there are issues that we can support
to achieve stability and security, promote development
and tackle the root causes of instability. I would like to
address three main aspects of our discussion today: the
efforts of the Joint Force, the security situation and the
measures to be taken.

On the activities of the Joint Force, we welcome
the resumption of its operations in January, particularly
after the difficult situation that followed the attack
on its headquarters last year. We also welcome its
efforts to reach 75 per cent of operational capacity.
We encourage the Joint Force to maintain that positive
approach in order to confront the terrorist threats that
are expanding in an unprecedented manner throughout
the region. We also welcome the recent measures taken
by the Joint Force to deploy a police component and
operationalize the human rights compliance framework
and investigate violations. Those issues are important
for restoring trust among the people, which will in turn
support the efforts of the Joint Force

We understand the difficulties faced by the Joint
Force, particularly with regard to the lack of sustained
funding to guarantee its continued operation. We
welcome the proposal of the Secretary-General to
establish a dedicated United Nations support office for
the Joint Force. We must consider that proposal or other
ways to identify how the Council can support the Joint
Force, guarantee stability in the region and prevent the
further spread of terrorism throughout the region.

With regard to the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali to the Sahel Joint Force, we applaud the positive
response of the Mission to all support requests from the
Joint Force, in accordance with the technical agreement
pursuant to resolution 2391 (2017). The resolution
restricts support to Malian territories alone, which
increases the pressure on the Joint Force.

On the security situation, we are deeply concerned
about the increase of attacks in the region. There has
been a rapid spread of violence in the Sahel region,
from Burkina Faso to the coastal States of Benin,
Togo, Ghana and Cote d'Ivoire. That highlights the
importance of regional cooperation to address the
threats in the region. The international community
must support such cooperation in order to prevent the
further expansion of terrorist activities.

In Mali, we have recently witnessed successful
military operations by the military forces against
terrorist groups, but they have not, unfortunately,
improved the security situation. There have been
increased incidents of violence during the recent
period, the most important of which was the Ogossagou
village massacre, which took place during the Security
Council visit in March. In Burkina Faso, we heard
closely from the Government during our visit about
threats faced by the country. We understood that the
threats in the region are similar and interconnected, and
that addressing them in a coordinated and cooperative
manner is therefore crucial. In this regard, I would like
to join previous colleagues in expressing condolences
to the friendly French Republic on the recent loss of
two of its soldiers in Burkina Faso.

Lastly, in order to address the current situation
in the Sahel region there are several issues that
must be tackled, including the military and the
development aspects. On the political process in
Mali, the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali is important to the entire
region, as noted by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2019/371) on the Joint Force. He notes that progress
in the security sector in Mali would positively affect the
operations of the Joint Force.

On the root causes of instability, we emphasize the
need to achieve development throughout the region.
The lack of economic opportunities, fragile governance
and the impact of climate change, if not addressed, are
but a few of the factors for instability and conflict.

We are pleased about the preliminary efforts of
the G-5 States with respect to the Priority Investment
Programme, and the efforts of the United Nations
through the implementation of its Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel. Progress must be achieved in tandem
with the military aspect of the G-5 Sahel in order to
guarantee the achievement of comprehensive progress.

