Mr. Schulz (Germany): First, I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing, as well as Ms. Amina Khoulani and Dr. Hala
for sharing their moving stories with us. The losses
and heavy blows of fate they and your families have
suffered stand for thousands of other Syrian families
who have lost loved ones in Syrian prisons or are still
left in the dark about their fate or whereabouts.

We welcome that Special Envoy Pedersen has made
concrete action on the issue of detainees, abductees and
missing persons one of his five priorities. We support
his efforts and his engagement with the Syrian parties
and all the relevant States. We hope that his efforts will
soon result in meaningful and tangible progress on this
issue. We agree with his assessment that progress on
this issue would be an important confidence-building
measure. Resolution 2254 (2015) is very clear. It calls
on the parties to immediately release any arbitrarily
detained persons, particularly women and children.

But today's meeting on detainees and missing
persons in Syria reminds us that, eight years after
the beginning of the conflict and five years after the
publication of the Caesar photos, the situation in Syrian
prisons is still unbearable. For example, according to
the Syrian Network for Human Rights, at least 140,000
individuals are still detained or have disappeared at the
hands of the main parties to the conflict in Syria. It is
important to note that it is reported that Syrian regime
forces account for around 90 per cent of those cases.
More than 14,000 have allegedly died due to torture.
And this gruesome practice is still ongoing. According
to estimates by the Syrian Network for Human Rights,
around 1,700 persons were arbitrarily arrested and
more than 140 persons died from torture in the Syrian
regime's prisons this year alone. The Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic has called this systematic pattern of
mass arrests and enforced disappearance by the Syrian
regime a widespread and systematic attack against the
civilian population.

The Syrian regime continues to arbitrarily detain
thousands of innocent Syrians merely because they
dare to make use of their freedom of expression. It has
tortured thousands of innocent Syrians to death merely
because they dared to ask for political reforms and
freedom in Syria. We are talking about ordinary people
and engaged citizens. Calling them terrorists in order to
create a pretext for their arrest and torture is scandalous
and extremely cynical.

The crimes committed against detainees in the
Syrian regime's prisons are broadly documented. The
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
has rightfully named such crimes war crimes.
Arbitrary arrests, torture, sexual violence, enforced
disappearances and executions in Syrian prisons must
stop immediately. While we welcome the four prisoner
exchanges facilitated by the Astana working group on
detentions and abductions in the Syrian conflict, given
the high estimates of detained and missing Syrians,
those reciprocal low-level exchanges are clearly
insufficient. Considering that the majority are being
detained by the Syrian regime, the regime's insistence
on reciprocal exchanges is unacceptable.

The Syrian regime must immediately release all
political prisoners and arbitrarily held detainees. It
must agree to a timetable for identifying and releasing
all detained individuals. It is crucial that the Syrian
regime publish a comprehensive list of the names of
all detainees and inform the families of the tens of
thousands of missing persons about the fate of their
loved ones.

As we heard this morning during the briefing,
the regime simultaneously issued thousands of death
notifications for detained and missing persons - listing
heart failure or stroke as the cause of death. Often,
groups of people detained in the same facility share
death dates, making summary executions seem likely.
That must be further investigated.

The Syrian regime should also provide families
with notifications of the burial sites of all detainees,
abductees and missing persons who have deceased. Not
even allowing families to grieve and to know about
their loved one's fate only adds to the abominable
crimes committed by the regime in its prisons.
The crimes and atrocities committed on all sides
during the Syrian conflict, including horrific accounts
of murder, torture and sexual violence in Syrian
prisons, must be investigated and the perpetrators
brought to justice.

National reconciliation and lasting peace in
Syria will not be possible without accountability. The
International Impartial and Independent Mechanism
has become a central repository of information and
evidence of the crimes committed in Syria. It therefore
has a crucial role to play in the prosecution of crimes
committed during the Syrian conflict. We will continue
to support the work of the International Impartial
and Independent Mechanism and of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and to pursue accountability in order to
achieve justice for the victims and eventually enable
national reconciliation and sustainable peace.

