Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Special Representative
Kubis for presenting the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/721) and Ambassador Tanin for his important
contribution.

I would also like to express heartfelt condolences
for the death ofthe six United States soldiers in southern
Afghanistan.

The Secretary-General's report presents a
comprehensive overview of the circumstances in which
the transition in Afghanistan is taking place, the goals
attained and the difficulties still to be confronted.
The report acknowledges the importance of the 2014
elections for strengthening the peace, reconstructing
Afghanistan and completing the political and security
transition.

Therefore, we highlight the progress in the
preparations for the elections, the existence of a
preliminary list of 10 presidential candidates, and
later identifying the corresponding process for the
independent electoral institutions. At the same time,
we believe that it is important that the elections be
carried out in an appropriate security framework that
enables the Afghan people to freely exercise their
rights. In particular, we encourage Government and
the international community to make provision for the
presence of women, police officials and security agents
so that Afghan women can exercise their right to elect
their representatives. The full participation of women
in the elections is a major challenge. However, it is
also an important demonstration of an inclusive and
transparent electoral process.

While we acknowledge the significant progress that
has been achieved over the last decade, when it comes to
gender equality in Afghanistan and the empowerment
of Afghan women, we are aware of the challenges, and
we believe it is vital for women to fully participate in
the peace and reconciliation processes as well. As on
we have said on other occasions, we believe that must
also be a strategic priority in the transition. The full
participation of women at all levels and sectors of
economic activity is vital in building solid economies
and consolidating societies that are stable and fair.

With regard to the security situation, we are still
seriously concerned about the rise in the number of
civilian victims of terrorist attacks. Among them are a
high number of women and children killed or injured.
We reiterate our urgent appeal to all parties to observe
international humanitarian law and for the perpetrators
of those acts to be brought to justice.

Under the leadership of its Government, the decisive
impetus of its people and the support international
community, Afghanistan has travelled a long road and
is preparing to begin a new phase of independence
and sovereignty in 2014. In that new phase, the United
Nations and the international community must continue
to accompany the Afghan people and Government in
capacity-building as they shoulder their responsibilities
to reduce the impact of the transition to the lowest
possible extent. We agree with the High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the importance of ensuring that
the progress achieved on human rights over the last
12 years should not be compromised in the transition
process. We highlight in particular the need to protect
and strengthen the rights of women and children.

