Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of the United Kingdom to
organize today's meeting. We support the Council's
unanimous adoption of resolution 2171 (2014). I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Ms. Pillay for their briefings.

In the history of humankind, war and conflicts
have brought untold suffering and loss to peoples
throughout the world. They have always hampered
social development and progress. Preventing conflicts
and the recurrence of disasters has always been a
common objective of the international community.
The foundation of the United Nations fully embodies
the joint commitment of Member States to prevent
the recurrence of conflict and war. At the heart of the
collective security mechanism, the Council has actively
worked to prevent conflict and has played an important
role in preventing and limiting the escalation of some
regional conflicts.

At the same time, owing to the interlinking security
threats and challenges, the nature and manifestation of
conflict are increasingly complex. We should ponder
about how to prevent the emergence and escalation of
conflicts under the new circumstances and how to stop
post-conflict countries from sliding back into conflict,
I would like to emphasize the following four points.

First, the Charter of the United Nations is the
cornerstone of conflict prevention. The Charter
stipulates that Member States bear the primary
responsibility for conflict prevention. Any action taken
by the international community, including the United
Nations, to prevent conflict should comply with the
purposes and principles of the Charter and respect the
ownership of the countries concerned, seek to support
their efforts and take the understanding and cooperation
of those countries into account. In undertaking actions
to prevent conflicts, priority should be given to peaceful
means, such as dialogue, negotiation and mediation.
Forceful measures can be only a last resort and must
meet the conditions provided for by the Charter.

Secondly, a locally adapted approach is a necessary
condition for successful conflict prevention. Countries
have different national conditions and there are complex
and diverse causes of conflict. There is no one-size-fits-
all approach for conflict prevention. Measures must
be adapted to the local conditions of the countries
concerned. Adopting conflict prevention approaches
that are not based on reality is often problematic and
ineffective. When actions such as early warning are
undertaken to prevent conflicts, reliable early-warning
information should be acquired in a timely way. The
differences among countries in terms of their history,
ethnic composition, religion and social and economic
development should be fully taken into account in order
to prevent hasty interventions that could affect efforts
to achieve the peaceful settlement of a conflict.

Thirdly, tackling the root causes is the key to
conflict prevention. Ethnic and religious tensions, a
lack of development, poverty and weak capacities can
all lead to sectarian tensions and exacerbate social
problems or even give rise to bloodshed. Conflict
prevention should address both the root causes and the
symptoms and should address the fundamental political,
economic, social, cultural and other problems. Through
an inclusive political dialogue, it should promote a
national reconciliation process and establish a peaceful
environment that is conducive to social harmony and
ethnic unity.

The United Nations and the international financial
and development institutions should vigorously
support developing countries, in particular post-
conflict countries, in achieving economic and social
development, in increasing their capacity-building and
in promoting social cohesion, peace, reconciliation
and unity in order to prevent the emergence of
discrimination and rivalry.

Fourthly, the international community should
strengthen its coordination and cooperation in order
to ensure smooth conflict prevention efforts. The
relevant United Nations bodies should fully utilize
their respective advantages and potential and act in
a coordinated and consistent way in accordance with
their mandates. They should assist Member States and
regional organizations, such the African Union, in
capacity-building and conflict prevention and support
such States in playing a leading role in developing
concepts and adopting policies in that regard. They
should also help States to assess their experience and to
explore effective conflict-prevention strategies. In an
international community, of which we are all members,
promoting democratic international relations that abide
by the principle of the rule of law is very important for
conflict prevention.

Sixty years ago, China, India and Myanmar
jointly advocated the five principles of mutual respect
for territorial integrity and sovereignty, mutual
non-aggression, non-interference in each other's
internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit and
peaceful coexistence. Over the past 60 years, the Five
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, as a transparent
and inclusive principle of international law, have fully
embodied the values of sovereignty, justice, democracy
and the rule of law. They have significantly contributed
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
safeguarding the interests and rights of developing
countries and working for a new reasonable and fair
kind of international relations.

China will continue to implement the Five
Principles of Peacful Coexistence, to work with all
parties to support the United Nations and the Security
Council in playing their due role in preventing conflict
and to make our own contribution to the achievement
of the common security and lasting peace of the world.

