Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
welcomes the adoption of this important resolution
(resolution 2418 (2018)).

The situation in South Sudan is appalling.
Thousands have been killed. More than one fifth of the
population is on the verge of famine, more than half
is food-insecure and a third have fled their homes.
Widespread human rights abuses continue to be reported.
We strongly welcome and support regional efforts led
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to revitalize the peace agreement and broker
an agreement between the parties. But it is clear that
the parties are still not prepared to compromise in the
interest of peace.

Even while peace talks were taking place, violations
of the cessation of hostilities continued. We have seen
horrific reports of violence and human rights violations
and abuse. Just today the media is reporting that the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism has recorded multiple ceasefire
Violations, allegations of gang rape, murdered children
and the use of child soldiers. That cannot be allowed
to continue.

It is clear that the solution to South Sudan's crisis is
lasting peace. I agree with my colleague from Ethiopia
about the need to address the problems of South Sudan
through an all-inclusive political process. Without
it suffering will spread and the consequences will
endure for many years to come. Genuine compromise
is essential to secure a political agreement that stands
the test of time.

The United Kingdom believes that resolution 2418
(2018) is an important step in increasing the pressure on
the parties to compromise in the interest of peace and in
the interest of the people of South Sudan. The Security
Council has today shown that it will act. Let that be a
clear message to the parties and to those who wish to
prevent peace going forward.

I acknowledge that it is unfortunate that the Council
could not agree unanimously today, but I believe that
we are united in our vision for South Sudan. I believe
we all remain supportive of IGAD and its work. Let us
therefore not cease in our resolve to find peace or give
any comfort to those who oppose it.

