Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his work in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the past nine years and for his dedicated
leadership of the Office of the High Representative.

The Office's mission reflects the very ideals that
the Security Council envisions for a modern Bosnia
and Herzegovina, a peaceful and viable democracy
that is on course for Euro-Atlantic integration and
responsible for its own destiny and future. The United
States reiterates its strong support for the mandate of
the High Representative under the Dayton Accords as
the final authority on the interpretation of the civilian
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We
consider the role of High Representative Inzko to be
essential, especially in the aftermath of the October
general elections and as the country continues to contend
with the divisive nationalistic rhetoric that threatens
to undermine gains made under the agreement. We
also commend the continued work of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea and
its role in preserving a safe and secure environment in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The United States is pleased
to support the renewal of its mandate.

We are concerned about those who seek to weaken
the constitutional order of the single State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, composed of two entities and three
constituent peoples, and we call on the members of
the Council to remain vigilant against any efforts to
undermine Bosnia and Herzegovina's State-level
institutions. We renew our collective commitment to
upholding the Dayton Peace Accords by maintaining
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.

The United States will hold accountable those who
threaten Bosnia and Herzegovina's peace, security and
stability. Accountability is essential to discouraging
spoilers to the country's political process. Let me
reiterate a position that we have repeatedly made clear
in the Chamber. Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders
must demonstrate the political will to follow through
on the commitments necessary to cementing their
country's path into the European Union and NATO.
Euro-Atlantic integration is the only path for Bosnia
and Herzegovina's future as a responsible global player.
Those steps must be taken in concert with efforts to
strengthen the rule of law, tackle corruption, increase
economic opportunity and otherwise respond to the
needs of all the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
regardless of their ethnicity or religion.

There is much to be optimistic about. We see
Bosnia and Herzegovina's future in the 23-year-old
poet who organized a nationwide poetry contest to
fight hate speech. We see the country's future in the
work of its Interreligious Council, which just celebrated
its twentieth anniversary and dedicates its time to
promoting interfaith dialogue and visiting the sites of
attacks on religious institutions, four of which it has
visited in the past year. We also see the country's future
in the ethnically diverse students from the town of
Jajce, who protested the further segregation of schools
after local authorities sought to build a school just for
Bosnian Muslim class members.

The United States looks forward to a time when
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully satisfies the objectives
and conditions for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative, also known as the 5+2 agenda, as
established by the Peace Implementation Council.

