Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation
welcomes you, Sir, and the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Netherlands and of Ukraine to the
Security Council. We express our appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and the
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan, as
well as Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, for
their comprehensive updates.

Kazakhstan expresses its concern about the
unpredictable and volatile situation in eastern Ukraine
and the frequent ceasefire violations, which have
a direct impact on the civilian population. Those
violations result in deaths and injuries, along with
many humanitarian consequences.

The humanitarian situation in Donbas has
worsened since the beginning of this month. We also
note an increase in the use of heavy weapons, to the
extent that more than 60 per cent of the people living
along the contact line are affected by regular shelling.
A considerable segment of the population does not have
access to power, water or gas supplies. The deteriorating
security situation in the wider area around the Donetsk
filtration station poses a threat to the facility, its
workers and monitors.
We also express sincere concern for the fate of
youth, women and all vulnerable groups, including
internally displaced persons and refugees, half of
whom are elderly.

In that regard. Kazakhstan reiterates strong support
for the activities of United Nations agencies and the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in the conflict area.
We call for the immediate implementation by all sides
of the framework decision on disengagement of the
Trilateral Contact Group and welcome the results of its
latest meeting, held in Minsk on 16 May. We also urge
the parties involved to provide full, safe and unhindered
access to the Special Monitoring Mission monitors in
the conflict zone, which is an essential requirement as
a confidence-building measure.

Bearing in mind that strong political will remains a
key precondition in the process of settling the Ukrainian
crisis, we believe that there is no other alternative to
resolving the crisis except through strictly peaceful
means. That should be based on observance by all
participants of their obligations, strictly complying
with resolution 2202 (2015), on the Minsk agreements.

We are also of the view that a further escalation of
tensions should be prevented to avoid complicating the
situation further. It is therefore necessary for all parties
to withdraw their heavy weapons from the contact line.
It is just as critical for United Nations agencies, regional
organizations and the international community to stand
ready to assist the population, support international
mediation efforts and facilitate the negotiation process
among all parties and their leaders, with a particular
focus on revitalizing the Normandy format. All parties
must therefore meet their obligations to provide free
access to humanitarian assistance in the conflict zone.

Of equal importance is the economic recovery of
the south-east of Ukraine. We therefore propose that
confidence-building measures be introduced in the
economic sphere so as to support greater social stability
for the region.

Last week, the Joint Investigation Team presented
its findings related to the investigation of the downing
ofMalaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 over eastern Ukraine
on 17 July 2014. We urge all the parties involved to
pursue an objective, comprehensive and impartial
investigation of the incident in accordance with the
existing norms of international law and resolution 2166
(2014).

