Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
following the publication of the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Mali (S/2014/403). That
publication occurred while Mali suffered violent
clashes in the north that rocked not only the country
but also the already fragile political process. This new
outbreak of violence, concerning which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has already
reported to the Council, was followed by a suicide
attack against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
on 11 June in Aguelhok, in which four of our soldiers
were killed and six others were wounded, demonstrating
yet again the precarious security situation in Mali. I
take this opportunity to convey once again our sincere
condolences to the families of those peacekeepers and
to the Chadian Government and people, and to wish the
wounded a speedy recovery.

(spoke in English)

Despite the efforts of the international community
and Malian authorities over the past year, the tragic
fighting in Kidal and its aftermath, as well as the
general insecurity caused by the persisting presence
of terrorist groups across northern Mali, highlight how
much remains to be done to achieve lasting stability
in that country. A successful political process has
to be the cornerstone of that stability. All aspects of
the stabilization of Mali, including the restoration
of State authority, the re-establishment of security
and the protection of civilians, remain contingent on
the successful conclusion of peace talks between the
Malian Government and northern armed groups in the
framework of the Ouagadougou Agreement. The status
quo cannot stand. Progress in the political process is
urgent, and the time for peace talks is now.

After a promising start with the signature of
the preliminary agreement one year ago today, the
Government and the armed groups have made little
progress towards real, substantive dialogue. I think it
is fair to say that the lack of progress in the political
process led to the sharp deterioration in the security
situation in Kidal, where a military confrontation
between Government forces and armed groups resulted
in heavy casualties and the disorderly retreat of the
Malian forces from Kidal and much of the north-east
of the country. I condemn the atrocities committed
in the course of these hostilities. Armed groups have
now assumed effective military and, to an extent,
administrative control over Kidal and other northern
towns, in breach of the Ouagadougou Agreement.

The armed groups must understand that the presence
of parallel or competing administration is incompatible
with the spirit and the letter of the Ouagadougou
Agreement and with the Council's goal of long-term
peace and stability in Mali. These events - along
with repeated attacks using improvised explosive
devices and indirect fire incidents against MINUSMA,
Malian forces and French Operation Serval - reflect
a serious deterioration of the security situation since
initial improvements in 2013, and have had a continued
impact on the political, human rights and humanitarian
situation.

A narrow window of opportunity has now opened.
Thanks to thejoint good offices ofPresident Ould Abdel
Aziz of Mauritania and of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Koenders, a ceasefire agreement
was signed on 23 May to end the hostilities in Kidal.
The modalities for the implementation of that agreement
were agreed in Gao on 13 June under the auspices of
the MINUSMA Force Commander and the head of
the Joint Technical Security Commission, which, as
Council members know, is the ceasefire management
body established by the Ouagadougou Agreement in
June 2013. The ceasefire recommits the parties to the
preliminary agreement and represents an important
step in the right direction.

In parallel, the armed groups meeting under
the auspices of Algeria in early June signaled
their willingness to enter into negotiation with the
Government to address the fundamental issues
at the root of the conflict through dialogue. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
MINUSMA of course stand ready to continue playing
a key role to encourage the launch of the peace talks
as soon as possible. But ultimately, it is for the Malian
parties to abide by their commitments and agree to the
launch of the peace talks. Let me say again that they
must do so at once.

Let me now turn to MINUSMA and its mandate, on
which the Council will be deliberating in the course ofthe
coming weeks. MINUSMA is now at an advanced stage
of deployment and is set to reach, by the end of this
month, 70 per cent of its envisaged civilian strength,
77 per cent of its military strength, and 83 per cent
of its police strength. All of MINUSMA's authorized
military and police capabilities have been generated,
but the problem of the utility and armed helicopters
remains. Their actual deployment continues to be
delayed, however. About 90 per cent of the Mission's
military assets are already based in the north.

My Department initiated a strategic review of
MINUSMA earlier this year, which sought to test
our original planning assumptions so as to inform
the Council's debate on the way forward. As the
Secretary-General outlines in his report of 9 June,
we are formulating several main recommendations.
They are, first, to reiterate the central importance
of the political process and reframe and strengthen
MINUSMA'S political role; secondly, develop a shared
vision for the way forward between the Mission and
the Malian authorities; thirdly, maintain the troop and
police ceilings while expanding MINUSMA's presence
and mobility in the north as part of an integrated
stabilization strategy; and fourthly, add or clarify
tasks, such as support for cantonment, local elections
and electoral reform, transitional justice and military
justice, and counter-trafficking capacity-building, as
well as enhanced support to the Malian military, subject
to the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy.

Recent events have highlighted the importance
of the central finding of the strategic review that the
extension of State authority and stabilization cannot be
uncoupled from the political process, which therefore
remains the top priority. It also requires a closer
partnership between the Government and MINUSMA
based on a shared understanding of the Mission's
mandate and the roles of each partner.

The Mission's concentration on the north will
require us to address very real and very severe security
and support constraints. A revised force laydown
of MINUSMA and deployment plan for uniformed
and civilian personnel will need to be developed.
MINUSMA will need to be innovative in how it further
decentralizes its presence, including through the use of
tools such as long-range patrols.

In order to implement its mandate, MINUSMA
must be in a position to identify, mitigate and deter
threats against Malian civilians and United Nations
personnel and assets. The Mission will have to make
maximum use of its capabilities to project its presence
beyond its bases of operation. In this regard, I take this
opportunity to signal to the Council our intention to
deploy unmanned aerial systems in order to enhance
the situational awareness of MINUSMA and its ability
to protect civilians and its own personnel. We are
gratified by the arrival in theatre of combat helicopters
that are capable of supporting long-range patrols and
deterrent action over a wide area. I would nonetheless
urge Member States that have pledged additional assets
or that are providing bilateral support to enhance the
capabilities of troop-contributing countries to deliver
on these pledges as quickly as possible.

(spoke in French)

The sustained political commitment of the Security
Council is essential to the successful stabilization of
Mali. Moreover, the bilateral partners and international
financial institutions need a consistent approach in
order to achieve progress in the areas that are essential
to stabilizing the country, such as governance and
security sector reform. That will also be indispensable
to the complete and successful implementation of the
mandate of MINUSMA. We are relying more than ever
on the support and cooperation of all partners, including
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the European Union and all the friends
of Mali, in order to achieve the objective shared by all,
above all the people of Mali, of achieving a lasting, just
and inclusive peace that will allow the country to focus
on its top priority - development.

