Mr. Prendergast: Since my last briefing to the
Council on 16 January, violence between Israelis and
Palestinians has continued unabated, resulting in
further loss of life, in injury and in destruction.
Moreover, the humanitarian crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territories is worsening.

On the political side, parliamentary elections
were held in Israel on 28 January, resulting in a
substantial increase in seats for the Likud party, which
is led by Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. Mr. Sharon has
been requested by President Katzav to form a new
Government. The new Israeli Government can be
assured of the cooperation and full support of the
international community if it takes steps that would
move the Israeli-Palestinian conflict towards the two-
State solution envisaged in Security Council resolution
1397 (2002), through which peace and security can be
achieved for both peoples.

We welcome reports about a private meeting last
week between Prime Minister Sharon and the Speaker
of the Palestinian Legislative Council, Mr. Ahmed
Qurei, known as Abu Ala. This will hopefully mark the
beginning of a renewed dialogue between the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority
towards reaching a ceasefire understanding, which
would greatly assist progress towards restoring trust
and dialogue between the parties.
Without the prospect of some forward movement
on the political front, it is difficult to envisage how the
current cycle of violence and counter-violence can be
stopped. As I have already indicated, the violence in
the region has intensified, with deaths mounting day by
day. Since my last briefing, 65 Palestinians and 7
Israelis have been killed, bringing the death toll since
the outbreak of the second intifada in September 2000
to more than 2,300 Palestinians and nearly 700 Israelis.
The Secretary-General is deeply disturbed at this
mounting death toll, and he is gravely concerned for
the future of both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, as
well as for the wider Middle East region, if death and
destruction are not replaced by peace and
reconciliation.

Developments in the past month give little cause
for optimism and no room at all for complacency. On
25 January, after a number of Qassam rockets were
fired by Palestinians on Israeli communities inside and
outside the Gaza Strip, the Israel Defence Forces (IDF)
entered Gaza City in their biggest operation in the
Gaza Strip since September 2000. That Israeli
incursion left 13 Palestinians dead and scores injured.

As has been stated in previous briefings,
Palestinian civilians often bear the brunt of Israel's
military operations. Israel has the right to defend itself,
but it must do so within the parameters of international
law. As the occupying Power, Israel has particular
responsibilities, which are clearly defined and set out
in the Fourth Geneva Convention. Regrettably, Israel's
actions are all too often at odds with those
responsibilities. We are concerned, for example, by the
continuing Israeli policy of demolition of Palestinian
homes. In the Hebron area, the IDF incursion of 30
January resulted in the demolition of 22 Palestinian
houses in and around the city. The IDF announced that
on 3, 4 and 8 February, four houses were demolished
in, respectively, Beit Furik in the Nablus area, the
Muassi refugee camp in central Gaza and Nablus city.
These demolitions are, in our view, measures of
collective punishment that are violations of
international humanitarian law and breaches of Israel's
obligations as the occupying Power.

During the same incursion in Hebron on 30
January, Israeli bulldozers also levelled 100 stalls in
the Hebron market. Earlier, on 21 January, the IDF had
demolished 62 shops and market stalls in the
Palestinian village of Nazlat Issa, in the Tulkarem area.

Since my last briefing, attacks by Palestinian
groups have claimed the lives of seven Israelis,
including one civilian. Israel continues to report
interceptions of suicide bombers attempting to enter
Israeli territory. The Secretary-General has consistently
and repeatedly condemned terrorist attacks as morally
repugnant. They are also counter-productive, because
terrorism undermines the pursuit of legitimate
Palestinian national aspirations and is an obstacle to
the resumption of a sustainable peace process.

We have welcomed the efforts of the Government
of Egypt, through meetings it has hosted in Cairo, to
encourage talks among Palestinian groups on adopting
a ceasefire. We call on all concerned parties to do
whatever they can to facilitate the continuation and
fruitful conclusion of this dialogue.

On 16 January, I told the Council that

"there has been no appreciable improvement in
the humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory since the previous briefing,
and Israel still has not fulfilled the commitments
it made to the Secretary-General's Personal
Humanitarian Envoy last August". (S/PV.4685, 
113)

Unfortunately, stringent closures and curfews
continue to cause the deterioration of economic
conditions in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and to
hamper the work of the international donor community.
Again, I take this opportunity to remind Israel, as the
occupying Power, of its obligations and responsibilities
under the Fourth Geneva Convention for the well-being
of the Palestinian population.

While the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, the capacity of the international community
to respond to growing needs among Palestinians is,
unfortunately, eroding. The Commissioner-General of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
Mr. Peter Hansen, has warned that by the end of next
month his organization will be in danger of running out
of resources for its emergency activities in the West
Bank and Gaza Strip. Today, UNRWA is feeding 1.1
million people in the occupied Palestinian territory.
This crisis has occurred because UNRWA's appeal for
$94 million to replenish its dwindling emergency fund
has gone largely unheeded.

We call on the international community to
respond generously to UNRWA's appeal so as to
prevent a diminution of its capacity to continue to
answer growing calls for assistance. Although the
primary solution to the humanitarian crisis in the West
Bank and Gaza Strip lies in the lifting of curfews and
closures so as to facilitate the resumption of economic
life in the occupied Palestinian territory, donor support
for UNRWA's appeal is essential for meeting
immediate needs.
I ought to say that there are a few tentative
positive signs of hope amidst this very bleak picture.
The Palestinian reform process continues to progress,
with the active support of the international community.
Prime Minister Blair's meeting in London last month
on the issue of Palestinian reform will be followed by a
further series of meetings. These will include: first,
meetings of Quartet envoys; secondly, a capitals-level
donor Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting on
international assistance to the Palestinian people; and,
thirdly, meetings of the Task Force on Palestinian
Reform. All of these meetings will take place in
London between 18 and 20 February. The United
Nations and other participants hope to build on the
success of the January meeting in order to inject new
impetus into the reform process, as well as into the
efforts of the donor nations to address the humanitarian
cr1s1s.

The United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General to the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, and two of his fellow Quartet
envoys, Ambassador Moratinos of the European Union
and Ambassador Vdovin of the Russian Federation,
met on 11 February with Chairman Arafat and senior
officials of the Palestinian Authority. They discussed
the upcoming London meetings, and called on
Chairman Arafat to take bold and immediate steps to
support and facilitate institutional and security reform
ahead of those meetings. Representatives of the Quartet
will be having follow-up meetings with Mr. Arafat and
other senior Palestinian officials later this week.
Mr. Roed-Larsen has also remained in close contact on
this issue with senior officials in Israel and
neighbouring countries.

Turning to other developments since the previous
briefing to the Council, I ought to say there has been an
increase in tension along the Blue Line. On 21 January,
after almost five months of relative calm, Hezbollah
targeted IDF positions in the Shab'a farms area with
mortars and missiles, obviously in clear violation of the
Blue Line. The IDF responded shortly afterwards,
leading, regrettably, to one Lebanese civilian being
killed and another wounded.

I would like to note once again that the Secretary-
General confirmed and the Security Council endorsed
in June 2000 that Israel had withdrawn its forces from
Lebanon, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 425 (1978). Both Israel and Lebanon
pledged to respect the line identified by the United
Nations for this purpose, commonly referred to as the
Blue Line. The Lebanese Government should therefore
fulfil its responsibility to maintain calm along the
entire length of the Line. We have noted the increased
deployment of the Lebanese Joint Security Forces in
the south, and we hope that this reflects a commitment
by the Lebanese authorities to ensure calm.

Israeli warplanes continue to violate the Blue
Line and Lebanese airspace on a regular basis. Various
sources, including the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, have indicated that the last week of January
witnessed a marked increase in the number of these
overflights. Israeli jets were reported to have flown at
low altitudes over populated areas. The Government of
Lebanon protested to the United Nations about these
violations of its airspace. These Israeli overflights, and
the anti-aircraft fire they draw, carry a potential for
escalation, especially in the currently tense regional
situation.

I should also mention that the Wazzani/Hasbani
water issue continues to be a source of tension and
possible escalation between Lebanon and Israel. The
Government of Lebanon has expressed its willingness
to find a negotiated solution through the good offices
of the Secretary-General. The Government of Israel,
however, has not yet expressed its wish to use the good
offices of the United Nations in order to reach an
agreement between the two sides on the use of water in
this area. Meanwhile, we call on the Government of
Lebanon to continue to respect its commitments not to
expand its water projects beyond what is already stated
in its report until the matter comes to a resolution.

Last month, I briefed the Council on the shooting
incident on 8 January in the Golan Heights, which
resulted in the death of a Syrian soldier. I would like to
commend both Israel and Syria on their handling of
that incident, which they did not allow to escalate.
However, the incident has served as a reminder of the
great sensitivity of the Golan area. Both sides must act
with the utmost caution and with full respect for the
terms of the disengagement agreement. I am sure that
they will do so. Both sides should also refrain from
actions that could jeopardize the status quo and create
further friction.

At this particularly precarious time across the
Middle East, I would like to urge all parties to exercise
maximum restraint in their words and deeds. Every
effort must be made to enhance stability and,
correspondingly, to avoid actions that could contribute
to a further destabilization of present conditions.

The situation in the Middle East remains very
serious. Despite this, the best path towards ensuring the
security of Israelis and Palestinians, and achieving a
comprehensive regional peace, remains moving
forward with the Quartet's road map. The road map's
approach of addressing the inextricably linked issues of
security, political progress and economic development
in parallel would enable progress in each area to
buttress progress in the others. We remain convinced
that the early implementation of the road map would
break the current stalemate and allow Israelis and
Palestinians actively to pursue their legitimate
aspirations at the negotiating table. Through this
process, the parties could realize the vision of two
States - Israel and an independent, viable, sovereign
and democratic Palestine - living side by side in
peace and security.

The longer implementation of this vision is
delayed, the farther apart Israel and the Palestinians
will move and the longer it will take for them to build
the trust and confidence that is a prerequisite for their
mutual security and, ultimately, for a just and
comprehensive settlement. The realization of this
vision is entirely dependent on the political will of the
parties. But it is also incumbent on the international
community and on the Quartet, individually and
collectively, consistently to encourage the parties to
embrace this vision and the road map wholeheartedly.

