Mrs. Hrda (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the
European Union and would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency for bringing up this very important topic.

We echo the widely shared regret over the
unacceptable and rising number of j ournalists who have
been harassed, threatened, attacked and killed, whether
by State or non-State actors. And we deplore the
impunity that prevails for crimes against journalists,
which engenders further violations. Working journalists
today represent part of everyone's freedom of opinion

and expression. They are the catalysts of the free flow
of information and ideas - we all use the results of
journalists' work. Far too often, those brave individuals
continue to pay the highest price for making sure that
human suffering in conflicts does not go unseen and
unheard.

Journalists have the strength to bring perpetrators
of human rights violations and abuses in remote areas of
the world into broad daylight - suddenly, in the blink
of an eye - through print, television or the Internet.
Thanks to modern communication technologies,
anyone who is brave enough can now become a citizen
journalist, documenting human rights violations and
abuses. And anyone can be targeted as such. The
systematic and comprehensive work at the global and
regional levels to raise awareness, set standards and
share best practices must be met by the same resolve
and commitment at the national level to reverse the
entrenched impunity.

The Czech Republic supports, through concrete
projects, the strengthening of democratic media and
open, independent and professional journalism. In the
course of the Universal Periodic Review we regularly
raise the issue of the free and unhindered work of
journalists, along with the rule of law, of which the
safety of journalists must be an inherent part.

We welcome the shared examples of best practices
for the prevention, investigation and prosecution of
crimes against journalists. We hope that the concerted
efforts rallying behind the United Nations Plan of
Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity will bear fruit, whether through UNESCO,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Council of Europe or other regional
organizations. We owe it to the survivors of attacks and
threats, the families of those killed and to journalists
whose work will always remain the ultimate mirror of
our democracies.

