Mr. Kronfol (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): There
is no doubt that giving Member States the opportunity
to participate in the deliberations of the Security
Council on the threats to international peace and
security as a result of terrorist activities enhances the
principle of cooperation, transparency and equality that
inspires and guides the work and activities of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Allow me, on my country's behalf, to
congratulate Ambassador Inocencio Arias on his great
skill and his valuable role in ensuring the continued
success of the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). We appreciate his detailed briefing
on the Committee's programme of work for the coming
period, in which he emphasized the importance of the
practical steps the Committee has taken to increase the
available resources and develop the capacities of all
Member States for the fight against terrorism and his
intention to submit a report on the obstacles and
difficulties encountered by Member States in
honouring their commitments under resolution 1373
(2001). In that context, I should like to stress that
Lebanon continues to strongly support the CTC in
combating terrorism and to cooperate with it in the
implementation of its mandate.

Lebanon strongly condemns and denounces all
terrorist acts, including acts of premeditated violence
such as murder, assassination, hostage-taking, the
hijacking of aircraft, bombings and all other acts
targeting civilians. I reiterate that Lebanon stands ready
to cooperate with any just and impartial international
effort to fight terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

Lebanon continues to believe that any
international effort to suppress terrorism must be based
on an understanding of terrorism's root causes and
origins in order to diagnose, contain and consequently
eradicate the disease - hence the need for a definition
of terrorist acts and for the adoption of objective
criteria for defining terrorism that are in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, international
legal norms and human rights principles. Such a
definition would undoubtedly enhance international
cooperation to fight the scourge of terrorism.

Supporting the Security Council's essential role
in maintaining international peace and security can be
strengthened only by honouring our commitment, as
Member States of the Organization, to address the
challenges and crises facing the international
community by resorting to agreed collective solutions,
in conformity with the basic principles of the Charter
and of international law. This would help avoid using
the international counter-terrorism campaign as a
pretext for trampling upon and violating the rights of
peoples and jeopardizing the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Member States. Any violation of the
Charter, any disregard for or circumvention of the
United Nations and its legitimacy, any selectivity in
implementing its resolutions, or any attempt to impose
external solutions to conflicts represents a grave
setback to the credibility of the Organization -
including its agencies and, in particular, the Security
Council - and a serious blow to the very foundations
of the international order. Therefore, Lebanon believes
that approaches based on security alone and on partial
and phased solutions can never succeed in eradicating
the scourge of terrorism, for it is difficult for human
societies to achieve security without social, political
and economic justice.

Clearly, the effectiveness and success of the CTC
depend ultimately on the degree of Member States'
compliance with their obligations under resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant Security Council
resolutions, and on support on the part of all Member
States and international organizations that play an
important role in this area. Lebanon is acting at the
regional and international levels and through its
national institutions to carry out its obligations under
the provisions of the relevant resolutions and the
protocols, agreements and conventions to which it is a
party, which take precedence over the provisions of
Lebanon's domestic laws. Lebanon's counter-terrorism
steps are included in the three reports it has submitted
to the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), contained in documents
S/2001/1201, S/2002/728 and S/2003/451; and in its
report submitted under resolution 1455 (2003),
contained in document S/AC.37/2003/(1455)/60.

Lebanon looks forward to continuing its
cooperation with you, Mr. President, and with the
international effort to help to find just and
comprehensive solutions to address the scourge of
terrorism from which the international community is
suffering.

