Mr. Corman (Turkey): I too would like to
warmly welcome His Excellency President Ismail
Omar Guelleh. We are honoured by his presence. His
statement, for which we thank him and which we
greatly appreciate, is further testament to the important
role Djibouti plays in its region in the search for peace
and stability.

Having special ties with Djibouti, Turkey
commends its constructive efforts, especially in the
context of Somalia. Indeed, the peace process in
Somalia was crafted in Djibouti, and today it still bears
the name "Djibouti peace process". Likewise, in the
context of the fight against piracy, there is the Djibouti
Code of Conduct, which we greatly welcome. Also,
Somalia's security forces are trained in Djibouti. Those
examples alone are sufficient to illustrate Djibouti's
constructive contribution to the resolution of the
Somali crisis.

Starting on Friday, 21 May, there will be an
important international conference on Somalia, which
Turkey will host in Istanbul. The Istanbul Conference
will provide us with the opportunity to take stock of
where we are and discuss practical ideas and
suggestions that we hope will strengthen Somalia's
prospects for the future. The high-level session of the
Conference, to be held on 22 May, will set the stage for
a comprehensive discussion of various aspects of the
Somali crisis. We intend at the end of the Conference
to convey a strong message of political support and
solidarity to the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia. In that context, we are encouraged by the fact
that the Foreign Minister of Djibouti will attend the
Istanbul Conference. We strongly believe that
Djibouti's participation in and contribution to the
Istanbul Conference will strengthen our efforts.

Finally, we listened very carefully to President
Guelleh's views and remarks about the border dispute
with Eritrea. We believe that Djibouti deserves the
support of the international community, particularly as
regards the implementation of resolution 1862 (2009).
Therefore, we encourage all relevant parties to comply
with the provisions of that resolution without further
delay and to facilitate a swift and peaceful settlement
of this problem on the basis of dialogue and
cooperation.

