Mr. Oshima (Japan): Thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this public meeting today on the
situation in Timor-Leste, as the mandate of the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) nears its end.
We are very pleased by the presence in this Chamber of
the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Ramos-Horta,
and thank him for his detailed briefing. We also
welcome Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special

Representative of the Secretary-General, and thank him
for his briefing.

We note with satisfaction that nation-building
efforts continue to make steady progress as Timor-
Leste moves towards greater self-reliance, with the
Government and the people working together, assisted
in their efforts by the international community. We
recognize that UNOTIL has been a valuable and trusted
partner in those endeavours and has been playing an
important role in providing advice and material
assistance, particularly in the areas of security,
governance and capacity-building. We therefore pay
tribute to Mr. Hasegawa and his team on the ground for
their dedication and leadership in that regard.

We also note with satisfaction the reference in the
Secretary-General's report to the fact that the tasks of
UNOTIL have been gradually and smoothly transferred
to the Government of Timor-Leste, with the support, in
the process, of bilateral and multilateral donors and
other players in the international community.

We believe that peacebuilding and nation-
building in Timor-Leste - as, indeed, in any other
country - will be most successful if they are pursued
with a firm belief in and with actual implementation of
the concept of ownership. In our view, that is being
actively, and generally successfully, pursued in Timor-
Leste. The complementary assistance efforts being
made by bilateral and multilateral donors, including
support from the United Nations, have helped promote
ownership by the people of Timor-Leste of the nation-
building process, and that should continue to
consolidate the gains achieved so far. We are
determined to do all that is necessary to make Timor-
Leste a proud success story of United Nations
engagement in peacebuilding.

Although Timor-Leste has made encouraging,
steady progress towards self-reliance, a certain degree
of fragility remains in society, as the recent violent
incidents in the area of Dili have clearly shown. Those
incidents have occurred just as the consolidation of
peace in Timor-Leste is about to take root and as the
transfer of tasks from UNOTIL accelerates. We must
view that as a matter of serious concern. Japan is of the
view that all the efforts over the past six years of
international assistance to and cooperation in Timor-
Leste, and the tangible gains that those efforts have
produced, must not be wasted in the final stages of
international engagement. To that end, as the mandate
of UNOTIL is about to expire, the Council needs to
take speedy action - action that can adequately and
appropriately address the requirements on the ground
in Timor-Leste at this critical juncture.

The presidential and parliamentary elections
planned for 2007 will be the first general elections
since independence, and are thus critically important
for the further consolidation of democracy in the
country. That is why we believe that appropriate
support is needed from the United Nations and the
international community, with a view to ensuring that
the elections will be free and fair and conducted in a
safe and secure environment. Japan understands and in
principle supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation to establish an integrated United
Nations office that has election assistance as its central
function. The establishment of a special political
mission that focuses on electoral assistance should
fully respect the ownership of the Government of
Timor-Leste.

In conclusion, Japan stands ready to work with
other members of the Council to forge a consensus
towards the best possible approach with a view to the
creation of a follow-on United Nations office, as
proposed by the Secretary-General, paying due
attention to the opinions of key countries that have
been deeply involved in this issue in the region and
beyond and of other regional actors.

I would also like to state that, as a major donor
country, Japan will continue to be actively involved in
bilateral development cooperation with Timor-Leste,
including for the preparation of the forthcoming
elections, in the interests of economic and social
development and greater self-reliance and resilience in
Timor-Leste. We urge all Member States to join in
those efforts.

