Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/575), which outlines the main recent
developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the progress made by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in fulfilling its
mandate. We appreciate and commend the work of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui and all MONUSCO staff.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea urges the
Government and all the political actors of the Democratic
Republic of Congo to continue to take advantage of this
historic juncture of the peaceful transfer of power and
the activation of the political structures arising from
the elections. We are confident that these actions will
help to strengthen national sovereignty and consolidate
democracy, peace, stability and socioeconomic progress
in the country.

We welcome the post-electoral gains, the
installation of national and provincial legislative and
executive institutions and the return of opposition
leaders, which reflects the opening of the political
space. We encourage the Government and all actors
involved to pursue negotiations for the establishment of
a Government and functioning institutions to meet the
challenges currently facing the country.

Since his accession to the highest office of State,
President Tshisekedi has committed to working to
consolidate peace, the rule of law, democracy and
socioeconomic development, and to address the
scourge of armed groups. In addition, after assuming
his responsibilities as Head of State, he has initiated
significant reforms in the security sector that have
strengthened good relations throughout the region,
which has resulted in his various visits to Kenya, Angola,
Uganda and Rwanda, with the aim of consolidating
stability in the country, creating the necessary
conditions for its development and maintaining an
atmosphere of peace and post-electoral harmony.

However, we remain concerned about the
destabilizing activities of armed groups and the ongoing
intercommunal conflicts, which has resulted in more
than 13 million people still in need of humanitarian
assistance and protection, 4 million internally displaced
persons and 540,000 refugees from neighbouring
countries who remain exposed to malnutrition, cholera,
measles and Ebola. We are extremely worried by the
deteriorating Ebola situation in the country and we
call on the international community to prioritize this
public health emergency of international concern. In
that connection, it must provide sufficient funds for
updating the three-year humanitarian response plan
that ended in mid-January.

We condemn the frequent attacks on humanitarian
personnel, their means of transport and their
equipment. Such attacks are considered violations of
international humanitarian law. All parties to armed
conflict must ensure and facilitate full, safe, immediate
and unhindered access for humanitarian and medical
personnel, their equipment, transport and supplies and
the timely delivery of medical assistance to affected
areas and populations in need.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
President Tshisekedi's focus on justice reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the
fight against impunity, as well as his promotion of the
National Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region.

We believe that the only way out for armed groups
is for them to lay down their weapons and surrender. For
its part, the Government must continue to strengthen

the processes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants and persons
associated with armed groups.

We call on the States members of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the
African Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie, the Southern African Development
Community and international partners to continue to
resolutely support the Democratic Republic of Congo in
order to promote stability and democratic governance.
We also encourage the Congolese authorities and
their regional partners to take the steps necessary to
strengthen cooperation and good-neighbourly relations
among the countries of the Great Lakes region,
including in the fight against armed groups and the
search for economic integration.

In conclusion, we emphasize once again the great
work for peace, security and stability being done by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the fact that
the Mission has risen to the occasion and successfully
carried out its work in accordance with its mandate in
such a complex context.

