Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I

wish to thank Nigeria for taking the initiative to

convene this open debate. I would also like to thank

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Under-Secretary-

General Holmes and High Commissioner Pillay for
their statements.

During his term of office, Sir John Holmes has
made an outstanding contribution to the work of the
United Nations in the area of humanitarian assistance. I
would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation and to wish him all the best in his future
endeavours.

In recent years, the Security Council has attached
great importance to the protection of civilians and
made vigorous efforts to that end. However, owing to
the changing nature of armed conflicts and various
complex factors, civilians in many regions of the world
still find themselves under threat in situations of armed
conflict. The international community faces an uphill
battle in ensuring the protection of civilians. We are
deeply concerned that, in some armed conflicts,
civilians are subject to threats and violence, and we
urge the parties to such conflicts to abide by
international humanitarian law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions and to protect the lives
and property of civilians and their legitimate rights and
interests.

China urges the Security Council to make further
efforts to strengthen the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. In that regard, I wish to underscore the
following points.

First, we must start from the source and address
the issue holistically. As the organ entrusted with the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, the Security Council is duty-bound
to address the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict. The Council should focus on the root causes
of the problem, invest more energy in the prevention
and monitoring of conflicts, and, at the same time,
place the protection of civilians in the overall context
of the political process for the peaceful settlement of
disputes.

Secondly, we must stress the responsibility of the
States concerned and respect their wishes. National
Governments have the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians. While the international community
can provide constructive help, it must do so in
compliance with the provisions of the Charter of the
28

United Nations and while respecting the sovereignty of
the countries concerned and refraining from
intervening by force. Dialogue between the United
Nations and non-State armed groups should be carried
out within the framework of cooperation between the
United Nations and the countries concerned, with the
consent of the Governments concerned. With regard to
combating impunity, we are in favour of letting the
domestic judicial systems of the countries concerned
play the role of principal channel.

Thirdly, progress must be made step by step and
we must concentrate on implementation. In connection
with the protection of civilians, we already have in
place a comparatively set of international legal rules.
The key now is to ensure the comprehensive, equitable
and effective implementation of those rules. The
relevant United Nations organs and international treaty
bodies should continue to play an important role to that
end. The Security Council has already adopted a
significant number of resolutions and presidential
statements on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Our task in the next phase should be to push
for the effective implementation of those documents.

Fourthly, we must proceed from the actual
situation and adapt to local specificities. Giving a
United Nations peacekeeping mission a mandate to
protect civilians is a decision to be made by the
Council on a case-by-case basis. In our view, in
designing the mandate for civilian protection, it is
necessary that we base our work on actual needs and
take into full consideration the situation on the ground
and the resources and capacities of the peacekeeping
mission concerned. It is imperative not to resort to
generalizations. We are not in favour of invariably
endowing all peacekeeping operations with mandates
to protect civilians in disregard of practical conditions.
Adhering to the three principles of the consent of the
country concerned, impartiality and the non-use of
force except in self-defence is the key to the success of
peacekeeping operations. Any deviation from those
basic principles will cause more conflicts and
problems, even to the point of jeopardizing the success
of the peacekeeping operation concerned, rather than
help to protect civilians.

Most ongoing conflicts are taking place in areas
with backward economic and social conditions. The
United Nations should actively mobilize international
resources to provide financial and technical assistance
to the countries concerned so as to help them to
10-43853
develop their economies and eradicate poverty, thereby
eliminating the source of conflict. We look forward to a
greater role in that regard to be played by the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
United Nations Development Programme, international
institutions such as the World Bank, and regional
organizations.

