The President: I would now like to make a
brief statement in my capacity as the representative
of Sweden.

Earlier this week, during our open debate on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace (see S/PV.7857), my
Foreign Minister noted that prevention efforts require
us to address the root causes of conflict and instability
before the crises concerned reach the Security Council's
agenda. The subject of today's briefing is a vivid
example of the consequences of the failure to act early
in response to fragility and underdevelopment.

As stated by many, there is a clear need for a
comprehensive regional approach, focusing not only
on the immediate insecurity and humanitarian crisis,
but also on longer-term challenges and root causes. The
aim of putting the Lake Chad basin region on today's
agenda is not to stigmatize a region, but rather to put
the spotlight on a silent and often neglected crisis and
to pave the way forward for increased engagement in
the region and with the region.

The situation is a complex one. The conflict and
violence that has led to immense human suffering and
humanitarian needs in the region are the result of an
insurgency by Boko Haram, which has indiscriminately
been targeting civilians, even attacking them, even in
places to which they have fled to find shelter and safety.

However, the root causes run deeper. They include
the challenges presented by a growing population of
young people with little hope for the future and a lack
of investment in the region. It includes climate change
and its impacts - drought, land degradation and
desertification - which lead to resource scarcity and
food insecurity, which, in turn, generate conditions that
spur conflict.

I believe that we need to ensure that the United
Nations system can provide adequate risk assessment
related to climate change, as has been requested by many
African and Pacific island States. I think that that would
also improve the way in which the Council understands
the connection between climate and security. The large
number of vulnerable, malnourished and displaced
persons was mentioned by Mr. O'Brien, and they
are almost impossible to comprehend. I just wanted
to remind the Council of the picture that Ms. Askira
painted for us earlier. Her voice was powerful, but the
line was slightly weak. She said,

"Picture a woman lying sick in the sand,
covering herself with a tattered rug. Her children,
four, six and seven years old, sitting right next to
her, with no idea of what to eat that day".

Progress and scaled-up assistance in recent months
by the United Nations system and partner organizations
deserve to be recognized as part of the regional efforts
to address the crisis. But the desperate conditions
persist, and recent weeks have once again seen an
upsurge in suicide bombings and attacks on civilians
and displaced persons. So what do we do?

First, we must step up humanitarian assistance. The
conference to be held in Oslo on 24 February presents
an opportunity to mobilize additional support and
reinforced engagement on the part of the international
community. We must also bring in development
actors and international financial institutions more
robustly, so as to enable recovery, reconstruction and
longer-term development, which is crucial for creating
conditions for the return of displaced populations and
for building resilience.

We must also heed the voices of women in their
diverse roles. Ms. Askira's powerful briefing to the
Council presents clear evidence of that. I think that
we also need to work more closely with and support
national Governments and regional organizations,
including in their efforts to make progress on the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, on which we
have all agreed and which needs to be implemented. As
many have mentioned, we need to support Governments
in their fight against Boko Haram, so as to replace
Boko Haram's savagery with the rule of law, justice
and benevolent State authority. The nature of the crisis,
which involves challenges that do not respect borders,
requires an integrated and comprehensive response
for the whole region. I think the idea behind today's
briefing was precisely to raise awareness, but we must
remain engaged across the board and follow up. As the
next step, I think that it makes perfect sense to follow
up with a trip by the Council to the region.

I now resume my functions as President ofthe Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Nigeria.

