Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 28 member States of the European
Union (EU). The candidate countries, Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Iceland, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement. The full
text of my statement is being distributed. I will try to
limit my statement to a few remarks.

The first one is to thank Sweden for its initiative
in organizing this open debate, the second one to thank
Secretary-General Guterres for a very convincing
outline of what needs to be done and for reminding us
of the clear imperative for all of us to work as hard as
we can, collectively, on finally getting prevention right,
because we know that we have often failed on many
fronts. As Mr. Guterres has said, "trillions of dollars are
spent destroying societies and economies". The human
suffering that we are currently witnessing is immense
and, frankly, shameful. We therefore wholeheartedly
support the Secretary-General's call to "put peace
first", and welcome the strong emphasis that he places
on prevention.

Security and development are closely interlinked and
mutually reinforcing, and are key to preventing crises
and to achieving sustainable peace. The link permeates
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
General Assembly and the Security Council have both
agreed that sustaining peace is the joint responsibility
of Governments and societies and is supported by
the international community. The high-level reviews
underlined the need to prioritize prevention in order to
break the cycle of responding too late.

Prevention is better than firefighting, and sustaining
efforts for peace reduces human and financial costs
immensely in the long run. We know that we must
develop a political culture of acting sooner in response
to the risk of violent conflict. And we must act together,
if we want to have any chance of success.

The European Union's new global strategy
entitled "Shared Vision, Common Action: A Stronger

Europe" emphasizes the importance of acting promptly
on prevention. It also emphasizes the importance of
an integrated and comprehensive approach to conflict,
and the EU's commitment to working through the
multilateral system, with the United Nations at its
core. Building on the comprehensive approach and
working in an interconnected manner, the EU will use
the global strategy to step up its efforts and capacities
to strengthen the way we bring together institutions,
expertise and instruments and work with member
States on prevention, resolution and stabilization.
Making coherent use of all the policies at the EU's
disposal is essential, much as the United Nations
tries to work coherently across all of its pillars. The
EU is working with the United Nations on early-
warning capacities. If we are to prevent the emergence,
re-emergence and escalation of violent conflict, early
warning is indispensable. But generating early action
is the key. Mediation is recognized as an effective tool
for preventing conflicts, as well as for resolving them.

Building and sustaining peace is inescapably
linked to inclusive development, resilience and human
rights. The best ways to prevent conflicts continue to
be democratic governance, the rule of law and respect
for human rights, teamed with inclusive economic
development. In that context, the proposed new
European consensus on development puts forward a
shared vision for development cooperation for the EU
and its member States, aligned with the 2030 Agenda
and designed to respond to current global challenges.
It also aims to help build resilience among individuals,
societies and States, and emphasizes our strong
engagement with the countries most in need. We work
in partnership with Governments in countries at risk
of conflict and fragility and with external partners
and civil society, as defined in the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States. Peaceful and inclusive
societies, good governance, the rule of law, independent
judiciaries, reliable police forces and public sectors free
of corruption are the best guarantees of sustainable
peace and sustainable development. Sustaining peace
requires that human rights and fundamental freedoms
be respected, protected and fulfilled.

The implementation ofthe Paris Climate Agreement
will be a crucial factor in reducing susceptibility to
crises throughout the world. Much of that work will
have to be tackled outside the Security Council. But
the Council has a particular responsibility to address
situations in danger of deteriorating, effectively and
in a timely manner. Given the role foreseen for the
Secretary-General by Article 99 of the Charter of the
United Nations in bringing issues to the attention of the
Security Council, it is essential that the Council and the
Secretariat cooperate smoothly and efficiently.

We must also develop more creative approaches
to diplomacy, including by continuing to promote the
role of women in peace efforts, for we need them to
be at the forefront in creating and sustaining peace. In
order to be prepared to respond in a timely and effective
manner, the Council could explore new and innovative
ways to work with other actors, including civil society.
Existing tools such as Arria Formula meetings are
very useful in that regard. Horizon-scanning briefings
could be reinvigorated, and the Human Rights Up
Front initiative, as an early warning tool, should be
maintained and strengthened. We urge members of
the Security Council not to vote against credible draft
resolutions on timely and decisive action aimed at
preventing or ending mass atrocities.

In conclusion, the Council should ensure that
longer-term peacebuilding is considered in mission
mandates, along with reflections on how to design
transitions and strengthen the advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission. What we need most is to
translate what we know into action, so that the United
Nations can deliver effectively on its core tasks in a
coherent manner. A strong, effective United Nations is
more essential than ever.

