Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madame
President, on presiding over this important meeting.
We in Latin American and the Caribbean are very
pleased with the veritable political success achieved by
the Mission of Brazil in convening us for this debate.
The issue of the interdependence between security and
development is not only essential to the life of the
Organization. Brazil's demonstrated ability to bring us
together, as evidenced by the number of Ministers and
Deputy Foreign Ministers who are participating today,
clearly attests to the importance of Brazil's initiative.

As we have heard today, the maintenance of
international peace and security is an indispensable
condition for the social and economic development of
peoples, as well as a crucial goal that must guide the
action of the United Nations. It is therefore essential to
develop a transparent and democratic collective
security system, with consolidated multilateral
institutions that provide for the respect of international
law and stimulate development.

Under certain conditions, the low level of
development in a country or countries can lead to, or
have a negative influence on, a domestic or
international conflict, or even create an environment
that fosters non-traditional threats to international
peace and security such as terrorism, the illicit arms
trade, the illicit drug trade, transnational organized
crime, cybercrime and piracy, among others.

Of course, the idea of a delicate interdependence
between security and development is not new. It is thus
clear that the Security Council should not take over the
responsibilities of other bodies of the United Nations
system, such as the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission or
the World Bank.

It is also clear that peacekeeping operations
cannot become development operations, fulfilling the
responsibilities of the United Nations Development
Programme or other agencies. The key lies instead in
thinking about how the Council can take into account
the issue of development in making decisions related to
international peace and security so as to make these
decisions more effective. In that respect, a task still to
be completed is improving the working methods of the
Security Council and its relationship with the General
Assembly in order to allow for more fluid and
transparent interaction with other United Nations
agencies whose mandates are related to development.

In that regard, the role of the Security Council
should be to listen to those bodies and consider their
points of View, rather than to impose its own priorities.
This would allow the Security Council to have more
elements available when making decisions on the
continuation, withdrawal or reconfiguration of a given
peacekeeping mission, in particular with regard to the
degree of stability achieved on the ground.

In that connection, it is clear that in cases such as
Haiti the fact that basic peace and stability conditions
have been met, but without corresponding institutional,
social and economic development, is a necessary but in
sufficient condition for the withdrawal of the mission.
As has happened in similar situations in the past, a
precipitous withdrawal can cause the deterioration of a
security situation that was achieved at great cost.

In that regard, allow me to recall a concept that
has been developed over some time now, namely, that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts should be
carried out in parallel, not in sequence. This concept,
along with integral planning for peacekeeping
missions, can help both to reduce the time during
which troops need to be on the ground and to mitigate
the risk of relapse into conflict due to factors
specifically related to a lack of development.

As has been indicated in several presidential
statements by the Council, peacebuilding is the
mediator between the maintenance of peace and
sustainable development in the aftermath of a conflict.
That is why sustainable peacebuilding requires an
integrated approach that strengthens coherence
between security and development activities by
promoting human rights and the rule of law. It is
therefore important to highlight the need for better
coordination in the work of bilateral and multilateral
donors, which, in any case, needs to be undertaken by
the United Nations in keeping with the priorities
established by local authorities.

