Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would first like to thank Special Representative
Viegas Filho, Ambassadors Vieira and Ndong Mba and
Ms. Tavares Pinto for their insightful briefings on the
recent developments in Guinea-Bissau. I would also
like to take this opportunity to welcome Prime Minister
Gomes to today's important meeting.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to
underscore the following three points. The first is the
importance of the full implementation of the Conakry
Agreement, particularly regarding the holding of
legislative elections on 18 November and the signing
of a stability pact. The second is the importance of the
inclusion ofwomen in political processes, as highlighted
by Ms. Tavares Pinto, and the third is the importance of
the continued engagement of the Economic Community
of West African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB).
Letme startbyreiteratingthatthefullimplementation
of the Conakry Agreement and the six-point road map
is the only way forward in Guinea-Bissau. As so many
people highlighted yesterday, prevention should be our
priority, and implementing and abiding by agreements
like this one are important steps towards sustainable
peace in Guinea-Bissau. We commend the efforts of
the newly formed Government to organize legislative
elections and reiterate the necessity of organizing free,
fair, credible and inclusive elections on 18 November.
While we recognize the positive steps taken in Bissau,
we are not there yet.

A draft of the stability pact, which will be the
foundation of the national round-table dialogue, has
been circulated among political stakeholders. An
inclusive stability pact is crucial for Guinea-Bissau,
laying the foundation for collaboration among the
various actors and paving the way for equally important
constitutional reform. We therefore urge all the relevant
stakeholders to finalize it as soon as possible and before
the legislative elections in November.

As stipulated in resolution 1325 (2000) and
the sustaining peace agenda, the role of women in
peacebuilding cannot be overestimated. As Ms. Tavares
Pinto indicated, women have played an extremely
important part in breaking through the political
impasse in Guinea-Bissau. I also want to reiterate the
importance of women's continued engagement both
in the upcoming elections and in the country's future
political life. In that regard, we want to welcome the
establishment of the Bissau-Guinean Council of Women
and to request that the Government of Guinea-Bissau,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau and the other international actors on the
ground - the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the European
Union - continue to collaborate with that new body to
ensure women's full and equal participation in Guinea-
Bissau.

Lastly, I would like to highlight the important
role that ECOWAS has played in Guinea-Bissau,
especially through the presence of ECOMIB, which
is essential to Guinea-Bissau's stability, and while
expressing our appreciation we also express the hope
that ECOWAS extends its mandate at least until the end
of the presidential elections. A longer-term extension
of its mandate will give the Bissau-Guinean population
security and help to ensure the holding of elections, both
in November of this year and in 2019, when presidential
elections are scheduled.

Guinea-Bissau is at an important crossroads in its
history. Its stability depends largely on the organization
of free, fair, credible and inclusive legislative elections
on 18 November. They are the next step in resolving
the country's lingering political impasse. It is the
Council's responsibility to continue to support Guinea-
Bissau at this important time, and we look forward to
its continued active engagement.

