Mr. Assay: Mr. President, I thank you for giving me
the opportunity to address the Council on a matter of
extreme gravity and concern to the Organization of the
Islamic Conference.

At the outset, I would like to extend to you my
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Argentina, for his able
performance in steering the work of the Council during
January.

The Middle East peace process, in particular the
negotiations on the Palestinian-Israeli track, has entered a
new turning-point following the signing and implementation
of the Declaration of Principles regarding the interim
home-rule arrangements in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the
Gaza Strip and the Jericho area, and the transfer of the
President of Palestine to the city of Gaza. Indeed, the
Declaration constituted a serious start to the realization of
a just and comprehensive peace which will enable the
Palestinian people to regain their rights and restore the
occupied Arab lands to their lawful owners.

The agreement came within the framework of the
peace process which started in Madrid, based on the
resolutions of international legality, particularly resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1973). It constituted an
important step towards a comprehensive solution, which
involves a just resolution of the question of Palestine,
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the occupied Syrian Golan, and the
occupied Lebanese and Jordanian territories.

As regards the peace process on the other tracks, a
notable development occurred on the Jordanian-Israeli
situation with the signature by the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan and Israel in Washington on 25 July 1994, of an
agreement ending the state of war between them. We have
indeed welcomed the progress achieved on the Jordanian
track following the signature of this declaration between the
Jordanian and the Israeli parties as a step towards the
desired peace. In this framework, we also stress the need
for substantive progress on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks,
guaranteeing complete Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian Golan and Southern Lebanon.

Regrettably, the positive developments which have
taken place on the Palestinian question during this past
period are not really reflected in the field. Israel is still
establishing and expanding settlements in all the occupied

 

territories, and around Al-Quds Al-Sharif in particular; it
is still pursuing its repressive measures and practices
against the Palestinian people, sealing off towns and
villages and depriving citizens of the freedom of
movement, in blatant violation of Palestinian human
rights.

Instead of taking steps that would contribute to a
confidence-building atmosphere, and begin reversing their
expansionist settlement policies, the Israeli authorities are
continuing with their policy of establishing settlements as
well as expanding existing ones in the occupied
territories, in general, and around Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in
particular, in flagrant violation of the international
resolutions which oppose the establishment of Israeli
settlements, consider them illegal, call for their removal
and consider them an obstacle to the progress of the
peace process.
In spite of continuing to implement the home-rule
agreement and hold without further delay the eagerly
awaited Palestinian elections, the Israeli occupation troops
are still laying siege to Al-Quds Al-Sharif and denying
access of Palestinian people from other occupied
Palestinian territories to Al-Quds, aimed at isolating it
from the rest of these territories and creating new
obstacles in the path of the peace process.

The Seventh Islamic Summit Conference, held in
Casablanca recently under the chairmanship of His
Majesty King Hassan II, the King of Morocco, discussed
the cause of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and Palestine in great
detail and passed several relevant resolutions. It adopted,
inter alia, a resolution expressing its solidarity with the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in its just
struggle to remove the consequences of Israeli occupation
and establish Palestinian national institutions. It called on
member States to continue strengthening their solidarity
with the Palestinian people. It affirmed that a
comprehensive and just peace cannot be realized without
total and unconditional Israeli withdrawal from all the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, including
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the occupied Syrian Golan and the
occupied Lebanese and Jordanian territories.

The Summit Conference expressed its support for the
peace process and emphasized resolutions of international
legality, including Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), and the restoration of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
to Palestinian sovereignty as capital of the State of
Palestine. It called for the dismantling of the settlements
already established, since they are unlawful, and for a halt

 

to further Jewish settlements in occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Syrian
Golan, as required under the relevant resolutions.

It also called on the international community and the
Security Council to compel Israel to comply with United
Nations resolutions, particularly resolution 487 (1981); to
accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons; to implement the resolutions of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) calling for the subjection
of all Israeli atomic facilities to the IAEA comprehensive
safeguards system; to proclaim its renunciation of nuclear
armaments; and to submit a full report on its stockpile of
nuclear weapons and materials to the Security Council and
the International Atomic Energy Agency, as those steps are
essential for the establishment of a just and comprehensive
peace in the region.
I would like to assure the Council that the
Organization of the Islamic Conference has made immense
efforts on the road to peace in the Middle East and in
Palestine, and stands ever ready to assist the United Nations
and all other bodies in their quest to bring a just and
honourable peace to the region.

We believe that, by adopting a new series of measures
of determination, the Council can help all the parties
involved in the peace process, but it can especially assist
Israel to take the required bold measures conducive to
accomplishing an honourable and lasting peace in the
region. Otherwise, the thorny issue of the settlements,
involving a few thousand, with many criminal-minded
fanatics among them, will continue to mortgage the entire
peace effort in the area for an indefinite period. The area in
question is occupied Palestinian and Arab territory to which
Israel has no legitimate claim whatsoever, as declared
repeatedly in numerous resolutions of the body most
responsible for global peace and security, the Security
Council, over the past 28 years. The occupying Power,
Israel, before anything else and without further delay,
should remedy and legitimize this illegal situation.

In conclusion, as I have previously told the General
Assembly, the Organization of the Islamic Conference
yearns for the day when the flag of Palestine will be
unfurled over its own territory and will proudly wave here
also, amidst those of the other Member States of the United
Nations. When that day comes, Israel will also be able to
savour the sweet taste of full recognition and cherish all the
blessings of peace.

 

