Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): Sir, let me extend to you
warm congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
also, through you, to your predecessor, Pakistan, on the
able manner the affairs of the Council were directed
last month. Let me also join other friends of the
Russian Federation in wishing you congratulations on
your national day today.

Members of the United Nations have collectively
conferred on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, under Article 24 of the Charter. In a
conscious effort to ensure the pacific settlement of
disputes between and among sovereign States, the
International Court of Justice was established, along
with the other specialized international arbitral bodies.
However, those bodies deal only with inter-State
disputes.

Global resentment against impunity and against
individuals who have committed crimes against
humanity was first expressed in the establishment of
the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg in
1945. The same resentment also informed the
establishment of the International Criminal Tribunals
for the trial of those accused of impunity in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. Furthermore, the
establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and
the ongoing plans to establish one in Cambodia were
born out of the same considerations. Regrettably, the ad
hoc nature of these courts and tribunals not only makes
them expensive, but also greatly limits their scope and
effectiveness.

It is to remedy the shortcomings and the
proliferation of such ad hoc judicial bodies that the
International Criminal Court was established. In that
regard, it is gratifying to recall that the 18 judges of the
Court, who were elected in February 2003, have since
been inaugurated, on 11 March 2003. It is also
encouraging that the Prosecutor of the Court was
elected by consensus, thus giving overwhelming
credibility and acceptability to that office.

As I speak, the Court has 90 States as members.
This contrasts with the 60 States that were members at
its inauguration on 15 July 2002. This encouraging
growth indicates that the Court is seen as necessary in
the global fight against impunity. The Court will serve
the global community creditably as a permanent
international criminal judicial institution.

Nigeria recognizes the non-retroactive nature of
the jurisdiction of the Court: the Court can consider
only crimes committed after 15 July 2002. By the same
token, we appreciate that the Court will exercise
jurisdiction only when national jurisdictions are either
unable or unwilling to carry out investigations or
prosecutions of crimes under article 17 of the Statute.
Given the international stature, professional
competence and integrity of the Prosecutor as well as
the individual integrity and competence of the judges,
the Court cannot be expected, by any stretch of the
imagination, to undertake frivolous prosecutions. We
are convinced that the safeguards provided will
guarantee and protect genuine national concerns. For
that reason, we wish to urge States that are not yet
Parties to the Statute to become so. For our part, we
wish to reaffirm our commitment to the integrity of the
Court.

One principal way of maintaining international
peace and security is through peacekeeping operations
under Chapter VII of the Charter. My delegation is
convinced that article 16 of the Rome Statute was
intended to facilitate peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council. Accordingly,
Nigeria holds the View that the Court would normally
exercise jurisdiction in respect of all cases arising from
peacekeeping operations unless the Security Council
has invoked the provision of article 16. The article was
thus intended to be invoked in a practical situation as
demonstrated and reinforced by article 13 (b) of the
Rome Statute, which provides for

"A situation in which one or more of such
crimes appears to have been committed is
referred to the Prosecutor by the Security Council
acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations."

It is our view that article 16 was intended to be
invoked by the Security Council only after a crime
under article 5 is alleged to have been committed by a
member or members of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Furthermore, the allegation must be under
investigation by the Prosecutor with a view to carrying
out prosecution in the Court. It follows that article 16
was not intended to be invoked pre-emptively or in
anticipation of future crimes by United Nations
peacekeeping personnel in a mission area.

Although the judges and other principal officers
of the Court have been elected, the Court is not yet
fully operational or functional, and is thus unable to
receive requests from the Security Council as
envisaged under article 16 of the Statute. Indeed, the
renewal of resolution 1422 (2002) has the potential of
undermining the integrity of the Court and impedes the
implementation of the rule of law and international
humanitarian law. Nigeria holds the view that the
invocation of article 16 of the Rome Statute with
respect to the renewal of resolution 1422 (2002), in the
present circumstances, is unnecessary. Consequently,
we urge members of the Council to exercise restraint in
the use of that article and stress that the article be
invoked constructively and only to further the intended
cooperation between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court.

Just as international terrorism is an affront to
civilized conduct and a threat to international peace
and security, so also are impunity and crimes against
humanity an affront to the world's conscience, and
indeed a threat to international peace and security.
Therefore, as the Security Council is proudly leading
the international community in the global fight against
international terrorism, so also should the Council lead
in the fight against impunity by helping to nurture the
newly established International Criminal Court. For the
Council, that role has become inescapable given the
fact that it has primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security as well
as for keeping the conscience of the world.

The International Criminal Court offers the
international community a unique opportunity to write
the final chapter of global resentment against impunity
and crimes against humanity. Let us therefore accept
and assume our collective and individual
responsibilities in that regard. To do otherwise would
be a disservice to humanity.

