Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We too would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the
situation in Darfur.

The observations we have heard today and the
disturbing news we receive from Darfur every day
confirm that the situation in Darfur has continued to
deteriorate since the adoption of resolution 1706
(2006). We have witnessed another wave of attacks on
civilians, humanitarian workers and United Nations
and African Union (AU) personnel. Looting and
gender-based violence have also been on the rise,
increasing the suffering of the people of Darfur and
threatening another round of massive displacements.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
situation of civilians in Darfur is desperate and that
there is an urgent need for immediate action by the
international community to stop the violence and
alleviate the suffering of the increasing number of
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) to
whom there is no humanitarian access.

When the Security Council visited IDP and
refugee camps in Darfur and eastern Chad we
witnessed the inhumane conditions in which refugees
and IDPs were living and we heard horrific stories
about their suffering. The people of Darfur desperately
urged us to help them to end their plight. The
international community is obliged to do this without
further delay.

We believe that resolution 1706 (2006) provides a
good basis for action by the international community to
protect civilians on the ground and to facilitate the
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement. The
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) must

urgently be strengthened. We also need to immediately
start the preparations for the transfer to a United
Nations-led operation, which will have a robust
mandate, as envisaged in resolution 1706 (2006).

However, we are very concerned about the
reaction of the Sudanese Government as regards
resolution 1706 (2006), as well as about its statements
threatening to eject African Union peacekeepers. We
believe that the absence of AU forces would lead to the
further deterioration of the security situation and to the
escalation of the conflict in Darfur. In that regard, we
agree with the Secretary-General that if there is no AU
or United Nations presence and if the number of people
suffering or being killed continues to grow, the
Sudanese authorities will be placing themselves in a
situation where the leadership may be held collectively
and individually responsible for what happens to the
population in Darfur.

The Government of the Sudan should understand
that a United Nations-led operation in support of the
effective implementation of the Darfur Peace
Agreement is the only viable option for reaching
lasting and sustainable peace in Darfur. It should also
understand, based on previous experience in dealing
with the crisis situation in the South of Sudan, that the
United Nations is not an invading or occupying force,
but an impartial broker that is there to help the
Sudanese people solve the conflict and to assist the
Government in exercising its responsibility to protect
all its citizens.

The United Nations has always respected the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of its Members. It
has, however, a responsibility, which was confirmed by
our leaders in last year's world summit outcome
document, to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
We must not allow another Rwanda or Srebrenica,
where the international community watched helplessly
while innocent civilians were slaughtered, to happen
again.

In that regard, we are also very much disturbed
by the recent steps of the Government of the Sudan to
pursue a military solution in Darfur, which is in
violation not only of the Darfur Peace Agreement, but
also of the Security Council's resolutions. We believe
that the Darfur Peace Agreement is the best tool for
advancing the peace process and for addressing the
root causes of the conflict in Darfur. However, it
should not become a pretext for military action against
those who have reservations against it or those who
refused to sign it. The years of protracted conflict in
Darfur have proved that there is no military solution to
the crisis there. We therefore urge the Government of
the Sudan to immediately stop its military campaign
and engage in a political dialogue with the non-
signatories.

In conclusion, we would like to call on the
Government of the Sudan to start complying with
resolution 1706 (2006) and to engage in a constructive
discussion with the United Nations on its speedy
implementation, avoiding further escalation of the
conflict and the destabilization of the whole region. In
that regard, we regret that the representatives of the
Sudanese Government missed yet another opportunity
to have a meaningful discussion today with the
Security Council on the ways to resolve the crisis in
Darfur, with the United Nations support and assistance
offered in resolution 1706 (2006).

Finally, we hope that the whole international
community, and especially such regional organizations
as the League of Arab States, the African Union and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, of which
the Sudan is a member, will use their influence and
bilateral political dialogue to convince the Government
of the Sudan that an active United Nations assistance
and engagement in the peace process in Darfur is in the
best interests of all Sudanese people.

