Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should first like to express the appreciation of the Egyptian
delegation for the spirit of constructive cooperation in
which the consultations took place leading to the text on
which we will vote today. The new text takes into account
the numerous comments that we made, and those put
forward by other delegations. Although the draft resolution
before us still includes certain elements with which we are
not totally satisfied, the message contained in the draft is
that implementation of the resolutions of the Security
Council should be supported. It is fundamentally different
from the original text about which my delegation had
expressed many reservations based on the Charter, law,
policy and procedure - reservations that would have led us
to oppose to that draft text if it had been put to the vote.

In this respect, I wish to emphasize the following
points. First, the original text contained additional sanctions
to be imposed upon Iraq at a time when the regional Arab,
African and Islamic organizations and those associated with
the Non-Aligned Movement wish the Special Commission
to end its mission so as to put an end to the suffering of the
Iraqi people.

Secondly, the original text did not refer to respect for
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Kuwait and Iraq - principles that
are in conformity with the provisions of the Charter and
reaffirmed in all the relevant resolutions of the Council.

T hirdly, the provisions of the Charter give the Council
the main responsibility for safeguarding international peace
and security. The general position of the original text would
have led the Council to give up its prerogatives by handing
them over to a technical commission under the Council,
which would have been an extraordinary, non-constitutional
and unprecedented measure.

Fourthly, the original text would have created an
imbalance in the provisions laid down by resolution 687
(1991), the comprehensive resolution under which the
sanctions system was set up in an organized, institutional,
balanced framework guaranteeing political control by the
Council over the work of the Special Commission.
Those are some of our comments with regard to the
original draft. As I said, the new draft text takes into
account many of those comments. The delegation of
Egypt also wishes to stress that paragraph 2 of the draft
resolution, which relates to the mandate of the Special
Commission, should be understood to mean that the
Commission should implement all Security Council
resolutions and written and oral agreements between the
Commission and Iraq, as well as the declaration of 22
June last year.

The Egyptian delegation has always stressed the
need for Iraq to cooperate with the Special Commission
in implementing the mandate conferred upon it by the
Council. In this respect we must emphasize that when we
express our appreciation in the Council for the work of
the Special Commission and the progress that has been
achieved with regard to its mandate, and when we pay
tribute to the efforts of Ambassador Ekeus, this position
certainly includes an implicit recognition by the Council
of the fact that Iraq has, in effect, cooperated with the
Commission. We hope that this cooperation, which was
emphasized in the last comprehensive report of the
Commission, will continue and be further consolidated
without any obstacles.

In conclusion, the Egyptian delegation wishes to
reaffirm that its vote in favour of the draft resolution is
based on the fact that it does not contain any new
sanctions against Iraq. This support is in conformity with
the firm position of Egypt that, on the one hand, Iraq
should respect its obligations and implement all the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and, on the other,
that the territorial sovereignty and integrity of Iraq should
be respected. Iraq and the Special Commission should
respect the provisions of the agreements concluded,
especially the Joint Programme of Action and the
arrangements for inspecting the sensitive sites.

