Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
As we do every month, we once again thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his very complete and
detailed briefing. Above all, we thank him for his work
and that of his team, which indicates a seriousness and
a commitment to the task entrusted to them that should
be justly valued and recognized. He can continue to
count on the full support of Uruguay.

We appreciate the presentation of the fourth
quarterly report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). We reiterate once again, as we have done
throughout this year, that, in future, these reports,
as well as all other reports submitted to the Security
Council concerning issues on its agenda, should be
circulated in writing before the meetings, so as to enable
Security Council members to analyse and comment in
greater detail on their content.

With only a few days left before our time as a
non-permanent member of the Council comes to end,
and this being the last time that Uruguay will make
a statement on an issue to which it attaches great
importance, and to which it has been commmitted since
1947, when the General Assembly adopted resolution
181 (II), allow me to summarize our position on this
question, as well as to discuss our expectations for
the future.

We hope that the voting to be carried out following
this meeting, undoubtedly important, will not detract
focus from other matters of great importance in relation
to this long and complicated conflict.

The year 2017 was one ofa number of anniversaries
relating to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. It marked a
century since the Balfour Declaration, the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), which decreed the partition of
Palestine, and a half century since the Six-Day War,
which resulted in the occupation by Israel of territories
in the Middle East. We hope that 2017 will not be
remembered as the year in which certain notorious
events seriously affected the possibility of reaching
a negotiated peace between Israelis and Palestinians
and the two-State solution. The voting that will take
place today is intended to blot out the negative effects
of such measures, and to prevent similar events, caused
by other States or by the parties themselves, from
being repeated.

We express our satisfaction for the fact that so
many countries recognize and wish to protect the
special status of Jerusalem, which was derived from
General Assembly resolution 181 (II), and which several
States did not support at the time. Despite numerous
multilateral, regional and unilateral initiatives that
attempted to put an end to this conflict, we are still
a long way from seeing a peaceful and mutually
acceptable solution.
On 23 December 2016, the Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016) with the intention of noting
that certain trends on the ground, including the
Israeli settlement policy and violence, were seriously
undermining prospects for peace. Nearly one year
since that day, which has been qualified as historic,
we deeply regret that none of the provisions of the
resolution have been respected. The resolutions of
the Council, the primary responsibility of which is
to maintain international peace and security, must be
implemented. We cannot be selective in that respect,
that is, demanding compliance with certain resolutions
and completely ignoring others. All Security Council
resolutions must be respected in order to achieve the
proposed end.

The two-State solutionremains the onlyviable option
to end this conflict. It will be necessary to relaunch,
as quickly as possible, bilateral direct negotiations that
can clarify all pending issues. Whatever the forum,
Uruguay will continue to support all initiatives in
that regard. To achieve that goal, it is necessary that
current trends on the ground be reversed, including
the settlement-construction policy, legal measures to
appropriate Palestinian lands, the demolition of housing
and forced displacement of communities, including
most recently Jabal Al-Baba, Ein Al-Hilweh and Umm
El-Jamal. Otherwise, it will be extremely difficult for
Palestine to consolidate territorially its State, which is
consistently smaller on maps. On another note, maps
should be updated and distributed by the Secretariat as
often as possible, so as to reflect the Israeli settlements
and outposts that are still being constructed in the West
Bank and in Jerusalem.

Uruguay maintains strong ties of friendship with
both the State of Israel and the State of Palestine.
We underscore once again the right of Israel and of
Palestine to live in peace, within secure and recognized
borders and in an environment of renewed cooperation,
free from any threat or act that interferes with peace.

The Fatah and Hamas reconciliation agreement,
signed in October in Cairo, and the recent return of
the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip to regain
control after a decade are undoubtedly important
steps to achieve Palestinian unity. The reunification
of Palestine under a single, legitimate and democratic
Government is essential to be able to work towards
the aspirations of the Palestinian people and make it
possible to improve the living conditions in that area,
which has been submerged in a serious humanitarian
crisis since the 2007 armed conflict.
In order for that agreement to be successfully
implemented, it will also be essential that those
measures be accompanied by agreements on security,
the disarmament of Hamas and the renunciation of
violence, the incitement and glorification of violence
and the destruction of Israel as a declared objective.
Likewise, the obstinate non-recognition of Israel
as a State by several countries in the region is a
wholly negative sign for a favourable climate for the
peace process.

In that still very complex scenario, although with
some signs of hope, it is necessary more than ever
that the Security Council and the entire international
community remain united in their desire to see a
peaceful resolution, in all its aspects, of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. Only in that way can we exert
due pressure on the Israeli and Palestinian authorities
to stop the trends that jeopardize the process and ask
them to be sufficiently flexible and reasonable to
understand at last that peace is a much more valuable
objective than the violence, hatred and injustice that
have characterized the region over recent decades.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that Uruguay
has presented its candidature to once again become
a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
for the period 2034-2035. We hope that, by that date,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will be part of history,
and both peoples will finally be able to live together
in peace and security, without grudges and with equal
opportunities for the development and well-being of
future generations.

