I thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership over the last several years on this issue. Ireland aligns itself with the statement of the European Union on climate and security (see annex 18). As the Secretary-General recently reminded us, by 2050 accelerating climate change will affect hundreds of millions of people through malnutrition, disease, migration and extreme weather events. It is self-evident that such a profound disruption to the lives of so many will affect the stability and security of our societies. The coronavirus disease and its broader societal and economic impacts look set to exacerbate this disruption universally. The science is clear. Without concerted action, global temperatures will continue to rise. While we must endeavour to do all we can to limit further warming, we also need to understand, prepare and react to this ever-changing reality. We cannot simply ignore that climate change presents a real and immediate challenge to our peace and security. This link is being factored into the planning of armed forces around the world and it is urgent that the international community formally acknowledges this reality. Climate change on its own does not cause conflict. However, it will intensify social, economic, demographic and political challenges. Unpredictable weather patterns in the Sahel are exacerbating conflict dynamics, rising sea levels threaten the very existence of some small island States represented in this meeting. While risks vary across distinct geographical regions, a constant is that the impacts are acutely felt by the most vulnerable, who, ironically, did least to contribute to climate change in the first place. Therefore, protecting vulnerable populations and safeguarding human rights must be part of our response. More effective risk- assessment and management strategies will help us better understand local climate and security contexts and build early-warning systems. We must complement our global efforts by reinforcing local and regional institutions. The work of the African Union has demonstrated the importance of this. We should design our climate interventions and conflict-resolution mechanisms with local ownership at their heart, strengthening institutions and consensus-building forums. Robust analysis must inform the work of the United Nations across all its operations. We call on the Secretary-General to fulfil the request of the presidential statement of 20 July 2011 (S/PRST/2011/15) to include contextual information on the possible security implications of climate change in his reporting to the Council. The Climate Security Mechanism is an important start in bringing together the different elements of the United Nations system. This needs to be built upon. We support the appointment of a special representative on climate and security, which would further reinforce these efforts. In our peacekeeping work, we cannot just ignore the fact that, irrespective of mandate, our peacekeepers are often responding to climate-related crises. We support the full implementation of the Department of Field Support's Environment Strategy to ensure that peacekeeping operations do not exacerbate the environmental strain on local populations. We urge Council members to continue working to enhance the inclusion of climate-related security risks into peacekeeping operation mandates. Ireland has a strong engagement on the women and peace and security agenda, which is interconnected with the climate security agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals. To ensure climate justice, we must place the distinct experiences of women, youth and children at the heart of analysis, response and peacebuilding efforts. The Peacebuilding Commission is well situated to collaborate with the Security Council to integrate a climate resilience lens in conflict-affected countries and post-conflict reconstruction efforts. In conclusion, all United Nations agencies have a role in addressing the myriad of challenges related to climate change, the main forum for that being the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change process. The Security Council must play its part by addressing the peace and security challenges of climate change that are undoubtedly now present and by rallying the United Nations system as a whole. I welcome the announcement of the establishment of an informal group of experts of the Security Council on climate and security. This debate is a crucial step forward in that process. As an incoming elected member of the Security Council, Ireland will seek to advance further progress on that agenda.
