Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): It is a
genuine pleasure for me to congratulate you, Madame,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. Allow me also to welcome the presence of
Mr. Mahmoud, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

We welcome the high-quality report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/611) to the Security Council
on the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). It gives a true
picture of the reality on the ground and makes relevant
observations and recommendations that should be
taken into account by the Security Council. That allows
us to limit our statement to the absolute minimum,
given that the Security Council is already
overburdened by the many crises taking place across
the globe.

If the Security Council will allow me, we would
like to stress in particular that the non-renewal of the
MINURCAT mandate is fully justified, and we
welcome the successful implementation of the
agreement between Chad and the United Nations on the
drawdown of the Mission from eastern Chad and the
transfer of responsibilities to the Chadian Government.
Since the drawdown process began, we are pleased to
have seen that the security situation has improved in
eastern Chad, and that improvement has taken place
despite some isolated and minor cases of insecurity.
Therefore, we are far from seeing the catastrophic
situation that some parties said would arise when the
Government of Chad asked for the withdrawal of
MINURCAT from eastern Chad, although we still need
the continued support of the international community
to strengthen our financial, technical and material
capacities in terms of protecting civilians.

The Chadian Government, through me, would
like to reiterate its commitment and determination to
continue to efficiently fulfil its mission to protect
civilians, particularly refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDP), including their voluntary return to their
homes. To do so, we are counting, of course, on the
support of the international community in many forms,
particularly in terms of financing a plan for sustaining
the Detachement integre de securite (DIS), because that
original police force, which was set up within the
framework of the MINURCAT mandate, has always
played a vital role. It was the DIS that ensured security
in the refugee and IDP camps and the areas
surrounding them. It has provided security escorts and
ensured security in the zone in coordination with the
National Gendarmerie and the Nomad National Guard
of Chad. In 2011, our plan for sustaining the DIS
foresees a budget that will cover operations and
logistics at a cost of about $20 million, which is far
less than the hundreds of millions of dollars going to
10-69165

MINURCAT each month. For that reason, we are
optimistic that the Security Council will be diligent in
ensuring that the international community will
continue to support us in fulfilling our security and
humanitarian missions after the full withdrawal of
MINURCAT.

For our part, we have taken measures to support,
as best we can, the protection of civilians in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
Among other initiatives, the Coordination Nationale de
Soutien aux Activite's Humanitaires et au Detachement
Integre de Securite (CONSAHDIS) was created to
replace the Coordination nationale d'appui a la force
internationale a l'est du Tchad (CONAFIT), which is
well known.

I cannot close without expressing my pleasure at
the excellent cooperation that has always existed
between the United Nations and my Government in
dealing with the security and humanitarian challenges
resulting from the situation reigning in the eastern part
of my country. Of course, MINURCAT was not as
perfect a mission as we had hoped it would be. That
United Nations mission of a very special nature, in
which many hopes were placed, did not meet our
numerous expectations.

Nevertheless, in a very special environment and
at a given point in time, MINURCAT did play a
positive role in terms of protecting vulnerable people,
refugees, displaced persons, humanitarian workers and
others. We should acknowledge that role and pay
tribute to it. The international community, in particular
the Security Council and the peace- and justice-loving
countries, should be thanked here. The institutions and
donor countries that provided troops, funding and
equipment should also be warmly thanked.

We also recognize and thank the generous donors
who have set up the special trust fund for financing the
DIS. We also recognize the tireless efforts of the
humanitarian workers, particularly those of the various
non-governmental organizations, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme, the United Nations Development
Programme, and so forth. They should be both thanked
and acknowledged by us. Nothing would have been
possible and nothing will be possible in the future
without their multidimensional support and their
efforts on the ground.
5

