Mr. Williamson (United States of America): The
Security Council quite properly has devoted a great
deal of time and attention to the war in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is among the most costly anywhere in the
world. The terrible conflict continues to destabilize the
Great Lakes region of Africa and the horrendous toll in
human suffering is staggering. Millions of people have
lost their lives as a result of that war, both those killed
in violent clashes and those who have died due to the
consequences of war - disease and famine. That
bloody conflict has created millions of internally
displaced people and refugees. As described in the
Security Council last week by Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Deputy Carolyn
McAskie, the humanitarian suffering is staggering. It is
agonizing. This conflict must end.

In that regard, we must continue to support the
various political efforts to end the warfare, including
the inter-Congolese dialogue, the Pretoria Agreement,
the Luanda Agreement and any other efforts that might
constructively contribute to the path to peace.

We must also be mindful of the various things
that ignited this conflict and prolonged it. Refugee
flows, ethnic hatred, regional insecurities and the lust
for power and land are among the factors that have
inflamed this terrible struggle that has imposed such a
horrendous cost in terms of human lives lost and
humanitarian suffering endured. Another significant
reason why the conflict has gone on for so long and
imposed such a terrible cost is greed - the quest for
money from the illegal exploitation of resources from
the Congo.

In the light of this, the United States is especially
pleased by this open meeting of the Security Council to
discuss the report of Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2002/ll46). The independent Panel of Experts has
produced a valuable and detailed report, outlining
issues of key concern to the United States.

My delegation is still studying the report. We are
listening closely to the comments being made on the
report in the Council today by interested Governments.
We intend to factor them into our conclusions on how
to move forward. In that regard, I would like to share a
few of my Government's initial thoughts on the report.

We congratulate Ambassador Kassem and the
other members of the Panel for identifying those
suspected of involvement in exploiting the Congo's
natural resources - diamonds, copper and cobalt. It
takes great courage to speak the truth to those in power.
The Panel has done that. We commend it for that.

The report is convincing in the connection it
makes between the money flows from the illegal
exploitation and the continuation of the violence in the
Great Lakes region. That illegal exploitation threatens
to derail the progress achieved in the peace process.
That cannot be allowed to happen.

Corruption thrives in darkness. It takes root
behind doors closed to public inspection and media
scrutiny. The naming of those involved and the
description of how they work is, in and of itself, a
valuable tool. It puts a spotlight on this corruption for
the public to see. Where the public is free to express its
outrage and concern, the Panel's report gives the public
the tools to pressure Governments in the region to act
to stop this looting. As an example of this, we note the
extensive discussion of the report and its findings in
the newspapers and other media in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Panel's conclusions and its
naming of Government officials possibly involved in
corruption achieved a primary goal: public scrutiny and
debate.

This, in turn, has led the Attorney General of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to open
investigations into each of the Government and
military officials named in the report. It was certainly
not an easy step for the Government to take. We
commend the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We contrast its actions to the categorical
denials of many other Governments whose officials are
named in the report.

It is the responsibility of all those States whose
officials, military leaders or business people are named
to take action to fully address the allegations made.
This responsibility is especially the burden of the
Governments that the Panel has identified as having the
most ties to those carrying out this exploitation:
Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe.

Where States have named special investigators or
created special commissions, there must be a
commitment to see those investigations to the end, no
matter where the trail of corruption may lead. Uganda,
for example, cannot assume that the creation of a
Commission to investigate these allegations is enough.
The Panel has pointed out the need for that
Commission to have real authority to investigate,
obtain evidence and follow up where the trails lead.

The responsibility of Governments to respond to
the Panel's report does not fall just on the States in the
region, however. The United States Government notes
with concern that nine American companies have been
identified in the Panel's report. The United States
Government will look into the allegations against these
companies and take appropriate action. We will not
turn a blind eye to these activities. Also, the United
States will continue to support work and to provide
leadership to efforts to strengthen and to extend the
Kimberly Process, intended to prevent African
warlords from fuelling their conflicts through blood
diamonds, including in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Yesterday and today, there are meetings in
Interlaken, Switzerland, to approve new rules intended
to ensure that diamonds will be certified as untainted.
The goal is to prevent illicit diamonds from being used
to pay for the weapons used in war throughout Africa,
including the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
United States Government wants to see that legally
binding rules for a diamond certification process are in
place by 1 January.

We encourage all United Nations Members,
whether named in the report or not, to respond to the
report's findings by seeking ways to encourage
transparent business practices that will benefit, first
and foremost, the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also encourage States to investigate and
prosecute the illegal activities highlighted in the
Panel's report and to cooperate with other States in
such investigations.

My delegation believes regional organizations,
such as the African Union, the East African
Community and the Southern African Development
Community, should use their influence to pressure the
parties involved to end the patterns of exploitation.

The report of the Panel of Experts clearly
demonstrates that further investigations are warranted,
especially since the problems posed by illegal resource
exploitation and unregulated weapon flows are found
not only in the Democratic Republic of the Congo but
also in a number of other States in Africa.

