Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the People's Republic of China for
having convened today's open debate, which provides
an ideal opportunity to discuss the important and
necessary need to enhance African capacities in the
areas of peace and security.

Similarly, my delegation thanks the Secretary-
General and the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security for their valuable contributions to
today's debate.

Despite the progress achieved in strengthening
democracy in Africa and the continent's vast potential,
its security is threatened by the presence of violent
extremist groups, terrorism and transnational organized
crime. In that regard, for many years the United Nations
has been establishing regional offices and peacekeeping
missions to address those threats. Peru is pleased to
participate in that initiative by contributing military
observers, administrative staff, officers and troops to
five peacekeeping operations in Africa, including an
engineering unit in the Central African Republic.

In addition, the Organization has built strategic
partnerships with various regional and subregional
initiatives on the continent, which are all part of that
joint effort, such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Group of Five
for the Sahel, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
Mano River Union. Peru acknowledges and commends
the leadership demonstrated by the African countries
spearheading those initiatives, which has created a
virtuous circle of cooperation and positive synergies at
the global, regional and subregional levels and among
the States involved.

Since its establishment, in 2002, the African Union
has played a fundamental role in maintaining peace
and security in the region. Through its Peace and
Security Council, it works to implement a common
African defence and security policy and to establish
the continent's Peace and Security Architecture. In that
regard, Peru welcomes the ever-closer relations and
complementarity between the African Union and the
United Nations, in particular with the signing in April
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security.

My country believes that the Council's firm
commitment to security is important, as it continues
to supporting African countries in the fight against
radical groups, as stipulated in resolution 2359 (2017),
which authorizes the deployment of the Group of Five
for the Sahel Joint Force to restore peace and security in
the region. That measure seeks to combat the terrorist
threat, transnational organized crime, trafficking in
illicit weapons and drugs, and trafficking in persons.
Peru believes that such schemes can also be used in
other African subregions.

Although the initiatives I mentioned are examples
of the way in which joint efforts can help to combat
threats to peace and security, many challenges remain.
The establishment and renewal of peacekeeping
mission mandates are opportunities for partnership
with African countries and regional and subregional
organizations, which should be analysed by all
organizations concerned and equipped with the
necessary resources. Similarly, acknowledging that
peace and development are directly related, we feel that
it is essential for the international community to take
part in building the capacity of Governments so as to
enable them to address the threats to peace and security
in Africa, within the framework of what is referred to
as sustaining peace. To that end, Peru underscores that
several countries in the region have been implementing
constitutional, institutional and political reforms.

In conclusion, Peru acknowledges that States and
African organizations are called upon to shoulder
greater responsibilities in the joint endeavour of
promoting peace and security in the continent. That
will be possible only through close cooperation among
the Security Council, United Nations agencies and the
various African subregional and regional organizations
in order to capitalize on each entity's comparative
advantage, based on the knowledge of the threats posed
and unique circumstances on the ground.

