Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to have voted in favour of resolution
2036 (2012). The Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia (TFG) and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) need to work together in fighting
Al-Shabaab. This resolution supports that goal. The
expansion of the AMISOM. troop contingent and the
accompanying growth of the logistical support package
administered by the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM. could make a decisive difference in
weakening terrorism and bringing peace. In the short
term, we hope that the strengthened United Nations
commitment will help to make tomorrow's London
conference on Somalia a success.

The United States will continue its strong
bilateral support for AMISOM. troop-contributing
countries, which to date has totalled over $338 million.
We urge other Member States to also provide
assistance. We call on new donors to play a part in the
effort to support the TFG's national security forces,
which urgently require assistance. We look forward to
a strong, continuing conversation in the Council and
between the Security Council and the African Union
(AU) on AMISOM's progress, needs and challenges.
We will continue to monitor how best to support
AMISOM. in the months to come.

We regret that the Council did not include support
for maritime assets for AMISOM. at this stage. We
consider maritime assets to be valuable in achieving
AMISOM's overall security objectives, and we hope
that the Council will revisit that discussion in the
coming months.

With today's resolution, the Security Council is
demonstrating its backing for an African-led regional
security initiative. We commend the Governments of
Burundi and Uganda for their commitment, and we
welcome Djibouti's initial deployment. We urge all
countries contributing troops to AMISOM. to adhere to
prescribed command-and-control arrangements. We
also welcome today's decision to incorporate Kenyan
military efforts into AMISOM's strategic objectives
and mandate. We urge other African Union partners to
contribute troops as soon as possible to help AMISOM
reach a strength of 17,731 uniformed personnel and to
12-23786
capitalize on AMISOM's historic successes against
Al-Shabaab.

Of course, the situation in Somalia cannot be
resolved by military force alone. The Transitional
Federal Government must seize the opportunity
provided by AMISOM. and the Somali national security
forces. It must complete the tasks laid out in the
Kampala Accord, the road map to end the transition in
Somalia and the Garowe Principles. There must be no
extension of the TFG's mandate beyond 20 August.
The time for political progress is now.

At the request of the TFG, the Security Council
has taken important steps today to further degrade
Al-Shabaab by cutting off one of its primary revenue
streams - charcoal exports. The charcoal ban will also
reduce a serious environmental threat that impacts food
security in Somalia. We urge all Member States to take
rapid, effective steps to meet their responsibilities to
comply with that obligation and to immediately
implement the ban on charcoal.

In concluding, let me emphasize the United States
ongoing commitment to Somalia, to the AU and to
AMISOM. We will continue to work with the
international community to help end the threat of
terrorism to and the suffering of the Somali people.

