Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Our
delegation wishes at the outset to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your accession to the presidency of the
Council for this month, for we are well aware of your
experience and capabilities. We also wish to express
our thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador Moctar
Ouane of the Republic of Mali, for his excellent efforts
in steering the Council last month. My delegation also
wishes to express its appreciation to you and to all the
members of the Council for convening this meeting,
which affirms the Council's credibility in undertaking
one of the most important tasks it has been entrusted
with under the United Nations Charter: maintaining
international peace and security.

Kuwait wishes to affirm that the massacres
perpetrated by Ariel Sharon, with the blessings and
support of the Israeli Government, against the
Palestinian people and the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, are indeed
blatant threats to international security, not to mention
the fact that they are also blatant provocations of the
feelings of the Arab nation and the Islamic world alike.

Our delegation finds it very difficult to describe
our emotions when faced with the massacres and the
tragedy to which children, youth and the elderly are
being subjected in Palestine; massacres that continue
through today, and in which more than one person has
been killed and hundreds have been wounded,
according to the media. We can never forget the images
seen by the entire world of the martyrdom of the
Palestinian child, Mohammed Al-Durra, and other
Palestinian children who have fallen victim to the
savage and barbaric acts of the Israeli occupying
forces.

What makes it more painful to us, as human
beings first of all, before being Muslims and Arabs, is
the reaction of the United Nations, which recently
declared at the Millennium Summit its commitment to
spare no effort to protect the vulnerable, particularly
the children - the generations of the future.
Unfortunately, this leads us to pose many questions
concerning the credibility of what has often been
declared in this Organization and what has been
implemented over a long period of time. I refer in
particular, first, to the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949; secondly, to the Security Council meetings on
the protection of civilians during armed conflict, and
particularly resolution 1261 (1999), adopted by the
Security Council in this connection; thirdly, to the
Secretary-General's report on children and armed
conflict and his appointment of an international
representative for this purpose; fourthly, to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989; fifthly,
to the results of the Millennium Summit - the ink of
the Declaration is not yet dry; and, sixthly, to the
special session of the General Assembly for follow-up
to the World Summit for Children, to be held next year.

Bearing in mind all the above within the context
of what we have been witnessing over the past few
days - the tragedies and the deliberate murder of
unarmed children - can we really convince our
peoples today that the United Nations has the capacity
to prevent the likes of Ariel Sharon if they decide to
put an end to the innocence of childhood? Can the
United Nations alleviate the suffering of every
Palestinian child who has fallen victim to recent
repressive Israeli practices? Our delegation will leave it
up to the members of the Security Council to answer
those questions.

The Government of the State of Kuwait, as
represented by the Council of Ministers, has denounced
those savage Israeli practices against the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories and
Al-Quds Al-Sharif resulting from the Israeli forces'
resorting to extreme measures against civilians there.
Kuwait has expressed its rejection and condemnation at
all levels of Ariel Sharon's provocative visit to the holy
city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the desecration of holy
Islamic shrines. Moreover, Kuwait considers these
Israeli practices blatant violations of Security Council
resolution 1261 (1999), which firmly condemned any
operations directed against children in armed conflicts.
They are also violations of the principles of
international law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

It has become very clear to world public opinion
how sensitive the issue of Al-Quds Al-Sharif is for us
all. It has become clear that the Arab and Islamic
peoples will never give up their rights to those holy
shrines, particularly Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the third
holiest Islamic site. In this respect, Kuwait reaffirms its
position on the need to support the demands of the
Palestinian people, their right to self-determination and
the right to establish their independent Palestinian State
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

Establishing a just and comprehensive peace in
the region must be based on the implementation of the
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and on the
principle of land-for-peace and Israel's withdrawal
from all Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Arab Syrian Golan.

In conclusion, we call upon the Security Council
to assume its responsibilities, end Israel's repressive
practices against the innocent unarmed civilians of
Palestine, condemn Israel's practices, ask it to
withdraw its forces from Al-Haram Al-Sharif, and all
Palestinian territories, and call for an international
investigation of the crimes perpetrated against the
Palestinian people, in particular the crimes committed
against children. Moreover, the Council should hold
the Israeli Government fully responsible for all its
actions.

Kuwait would like to express its appreciation for
the efforts to establish peace and normalcy in the
region made by the Governments of the United States
of America and France, as well as those made by Egypt
under the leadership of President Hosni Mubarak and
his Government.

