Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
also thanks Nigeria for convening this meeting, and the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for staying with
us this morning. We are strong advocates of the role of
regional organizations and of the need for cooperation
between the United Nations, especially the Security
Council, and regional organizations.

African leadership on this issue is important,
but we must also acknowledge at the outset that
these are not challenges solely limited to Africa and
that the issues discussed today affect other regional
organizations around the globe. The experience in our
own region has been that regional organizations can be
highly effective. They frequently have the comparative
advantage that the Secretary-General has referred to,
because of their immediate needs and interests in local
stability, their understanding of the local context and,
where necessary, logistical ease of deployment.

As the Secretary-General has noted this morning,
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
has strongly endorsed the role of regional organizations
and made encouraging recommendations for better
synergy with the United Nations, and especially the
Security Council. We have seen many successful
examples of regional organizations responding to
emerging crises to prevent the emergence of conflict.
However, we need to be honest. In addition to the
issues of finance and capacity, which have already been
highlighted today, there are other significant challenges
to effective cooperation with regional and subregional
engagement on peace and security issues. The result is
that there are still too many situations where regional
action is not proving sufficient to prevent or resolve
crises.

Cooperation with the Security Council, particularly
in the case of key organizations, such as the African
Union, is still largely reactive and ad hoc. Interventions
such as the African-led International Support Mission
in Mali (AFISMA) were highly challenging, not only
in terms of resourcing, but also in vision and shared
understanding. That hugely complicated the process of
transition to a post-AFISMA operation.

A key part of the problem, as we see it, is a failure
of approach on both sides. There is just not enough
political energy going into cooperation to produce
the necessary collective partnership between the two
Councils. Such structured cooperation between the
Security Council and regional entities on developing
coordinated approaches should begin at the outset
when crises are emerging. The Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council need to do a better
job of working in unison to complement each other
and of utilizing each other's comparative advantages,
starting with conflict prevention. We also believe that
both organs should be less concerned about sequencing
and should focus more on working together and
simultaneously. Again, the High-level Panel has useful
recommendations in that regard. At the end of the day,
both the United Nations and the African Union (AU)
have responsibilities to fulfil. They cannot avoid those
by arguing that they were waiting for the other to act.

If cooperation is going to work in the long term, it
requires a more systematized arrangement, based on the
View that the two organizations recognize the threats in
the region and wish to work with each other to address
them. There is a clear capacity gap, not only in terms
of the organizations themselves, but also in terms of
the national capacity that Security Council members
themselves deploy to promote effective cooperation.
As a result, we are still some distance from the kind
of coordinated approach to the assessment of key
regional threats and the development of appropriate and
coordinated responses that we all seek.

Furthermore, we cannot simply wish away the
uncomfortable financial realities. Capacity is still a
major issue for the AU and for its Peace and Security
Council. The shift towards a greater role for regional
actors over the past decade has put real pressure on
regional and subregional organizations to build a
complex apparatus over a short period of time. There
needs to be a sustained long-term focus on building
effective regional conflict management frameworks so
that regional organizations are fully equipped to take
on tasks on behalf of the international community.

In our View, the United Nations has a clear role to
play in providing assistance. Indeed, it is in the United
Nations own interest to assist, because as the experiences
in Mali and the Central African Republic have clearly
shown, the only alternative is the United Nations
itself taking on more and more highly dangerous and
expensive operations and paying the full cost. Those
whose positions are driven by fiscal considerations
should think about how much they would have saved
if those operations had been funded under some kind
of innovative formula that would have resulted in only
part of the cost being funded from the United Nations
budget.

We suggest that the Security Council continues to
have a very important role to play. The Council should
continue to provide institutional support to regional
organizations through dedicated United Nations
resources, such as the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the United Nations Office to the African
Union. They are useful for building strong collaborative
relationships with the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union, and have had
effective results on the ground.

The Council should also look to identify effective
and practical ways to improve interaction between the
members of the Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. The Council must also face up to the challenge
of how to fund regional and subregional peacekeeping
operations, including by improving the efficiency of
the existing mechanisms. The recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
concerning predictable financing for AU-led peace
support operations under Security Council mandates
are a useful starting point for discussion, as the
Secretary-General told the Council this morning.

For our part, New Zealand supported the inaugural
meeting between the 10 elected members of the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Counci in Addis Ababa at the start of this year, and
with Spain, we have been meeting at the start of each
month with the Chair of the AU Peace and Security
Council to discuss the joint agendas of each Council.
We have also sought the views of key regional actors
ahead of and following key Security Council decisions.
In our view, the communication between the Councils
in New York and in Addis Ababa needs to be informal,
regular and substantive if it is to be effective. Most
of all, it must become part of the regular business of
both organizations. That will indicate that we have the
partnerships that the Secretary-General has rightly
identified must be our objective.

