Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to express my
gratitude to Mr. David Shearer for his efforts in
promoting the peace process as part of his remit as well
as for his outstanding briefing, which clearly illustrated
the manner in which the situation in South Sudan
has evolved.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the progress made in implementing
the political and security tasks that have been achieved
during the period covered by the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/722) during the six-month
extension of the pre-transition period. These include the
submission of the report of the Independent Boundaries
Commission, the drafting of key legislation, the
planning of transition security measures, and the trips

made by President Salva Kiir and the signing ofbilateral
agreements with his counterparts in Kenya and in
Uganda. All of these are important steps forward on the
path towards the country's return to peace and stability.

We also believe that this period of transitional
Government has been a successful stage in the peace
process and therefore urge the parties to step up their
efforts to achieve a general agreement on security and
on the cantonment and unification of the security forces.
We would like to remind the parties to the conflict
that the time has come for them to assume their
responsibilities and demonstrate the political will that
is necessary for the full and timely implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan, as it has been made clear on
other occasions that an inclusive political solution is the
only way to achieve peace in South Sudan.

My country maintains the hope that the parties
will make concrete and rapid progress in resolving the
necessary transitional arrangements during the allotted
period. We deplore the persistence of sporadic fighting
between Government forces and the opposition, in
particular in Central Equatoria, as well as among
opposition groups. We also deplore the continued
prevalence of sexual violence and violence against
civilians, and we therefore urge the parties to spare no
effort to bring to justice all those who are responsible
for such atrocities.

We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation. The attacks against humanitarian workers
and United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
personnel are unacceptable. That is why we would urge
all the parties, in particular the Government, to ensure
a more secure and propitious environment for personnel
who are working tirelessly to provide assistance to the
most vulnerable civilians in South Sudan.

Given the concerns that I have just set out, it should
also be noted that some events there give us reason for
hope, such as the recent visit by Mr. Riek Machar to
Juba a few days ago to meet with President Salva Kiir.
Direct contact between these two leaders gives rise
to hope that the agreement could be implemented in
its totality.

With this in mind, we are encouraged to know that
during their meeting the two leaders reiterated their
commitment to the agreement and to the formation of
a transitional Government of unity during the month
of November. Following through on this commitment
will be an important sign of real progress in the peace
process in South Sudan.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea appreciates the
mediation and commitment of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to United Nations personnel,
UNMISS and non-governmental organizations for all
their efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people and commends the African Union Commission
on its active involvement in the collective efforts in
favour of peace in South Sudan.
I wish to conclude my statement by appealing to the
international community to back the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations and neighbouring
countries in order to support the political actors in
general and in particular leaders Salva Kiir and Rick
Machar, so that they can move forward resolutely
and without setbacks to achieve a definitive peace in
South Sudan.

