Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing on the
latest developments in Kosovo. I also welcome the
presence of the President of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Aleksandar Vucie, at today's meeting, and thank
him for his remarks. I also thank Mr. Hashim Thaci for
his statement.

Our position on the issue of Kosovo has always
been consistent and clear. We would like to reaffirm
our support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Serbia and for the peaceful and amicable resolution
of all outstanding issues between Belgrade and
Pristina, in accordance with the Brussels Agreement.
We expressed our views on this issue at the briefing we
had last month (see S/PV.8399).

With regard to the latest developments, we take
note of the statement issued by the Secretary-General
expressing concern about the adoption by the Assembly
of Kosovo of three draft laws aimed at strengthening
the role and capacity of the Kosovo Security Force
(SG/SM/19408). As the Secretary-General rightly
underscored, resolution 1244 (1999) provides the sole
legal framework for the international security presence,
the Kosovo Force, which was entrusted with the
responsibility to ensure a safe and secure environment
in Kosovo. Therefore, any action taken that is contrary
to what is stipulated in resolution 1244 (1999) would
not help but to undermine efforts aimed at finding a
solution to the Kosovo issue through dialogue. That is
why we echo the call made by the Secretary-General
to the parties to exercise restraint and refrain from
actions that could raise tensions and cause further
setbacks in the European Union-facilitated dialogue for
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina.

Ethiopia fully supports the work that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
has been undertaking in discharging its mandates in
line with resolution 1244 (1999). We also recognize
the significant role of the European Union on matters
concerning Kosovo.

In conclusion, the security and stability of Kosovo
and the region will ultimately be ensured when there is
political will and resolve on the part of both sides. In
that respect, we once again encourage both parties to
remain committed to dialogue and negotiation with the
view to finding a mutually acceptable solution.

