Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour for their
briefings.

In recent years, with the joint efforts of the Sudan,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and international partners, the
situation in Darfur has improved substantially. Since
the second half of last year, when UNAMID began
to implement the transition plan through gradual
reconfiguration and drawdown, the situation in Darfur
has continued to be stable. That fully demonstrates that
the Sudanese Government has the capacity to assume
its responsibility to maintain peace and security on its
own. The international community should continue
to provide assistance to Darfur through bilateral and
multilateral channels so as to consolidate the results
achieved and to advance peace and reconstruction in
the region.

China would like to emphasize the following three
points.

First, we should always respect the leadership of
the Sudanese Government on the issue of Darfur. The
Sudanese Government bears the primary responsibility
for maintaining peace and stability in Darfur. When
helping solve the Darfur issue, the United Nations
and the international community should effectively
strengthen communication and coordination with the
Sudanese Government, earnestly heed their opinions
and suggestions and focus on supporting the Sudanese
Government in strengthening security and capacity-
building.

Secondly, we should continue to promote the
peace process in Darfur. China hopes that all parties
concerned in Darfur will continue to exercise restraint
and call on the opposition parties and armed groups that
have not yet joined the political process to effectively
abandon the military solution, resolve disputes and
differences through dialogue, consultation and other
political means and work together to safeguard peace
and stability in Darfur.

Thirdly, we should continue to provide
humanitarian and economic assistance to support the
peacebuilding efforts of the Sudanese Government
in Darfur. The current focus is to help facilitate the
return and settlement of internally displaced persons
in Darfur. China welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations Development Programme, the Peacebuilding
Commission and others to provide the necessary
support for the construction and development of Darfur

China commends the contributions of UNAMID to
the maintenance of peace and stability in Darfur and
supports the extension of its mandate. China welcomes
the recent joint submission to the Security Council
by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission of the UNAMID strategic
assessment report (S/2019/445). The report indicates
that the overall security situation in Darfur is stable
and suggests that, in accordance with resolution 2429
(2018), the drawdown of UNAMID should continue.
We hope that Council members will attach importance
to the recommendations in the report and, on the basis
of respecting the will of the Sudanese Government,
make proper arrangements for the future mandate of
UNAMID to make sure that the mission will complete
its withdrawal as planned, in 2020.

China has always supported the peace process
in Darfur. As one of the major troop-contributing
countries for UNAMID, over the years we have made
positive contributions to the maintenance of peace
and stability in Darfur. China is ready to work with
the rest of the international community to continue to
play a constructive role in realizing peace, stability and
development in Darfur.

