Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Presidents Fausto Pocar and
Dennis Byron and Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte and
Hassan Bubacar J allow for their reports and statements
today. Belgium would like to reiterate its ongoing
support for the Tribunals in their fight against
impunity, their work to restore the rule of law and their
contributions to national reconciliation. We believe that
support should be especially forceful, at a time when
the demand for international criminal justice is
unfortunately often neglected, or even relegated to a
secondary concern. I should also like to reiterate the
tribute I paid to Ms. Del Ponte last June for the
determination and Vision with which she carried out
her work. I wish similar success to her successor, Serge
Brammertz.

The reports of the two Tribunals convincingly set
out the efforts made to implement the completion
strategies for the Tribunals' work. We all regret the fact
that the work of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia in the area of trial proceedings must
be extended beyond the end of 2008. Nevertheless, it
seems that, as compared to the original date, the delay
is due to circumstances that are completely beyond the
control of the Tribunal and to other unforeseen issues.

In that context, we think it is important to recall
that Belgium believes that the deadlines for the
completion of work established in resolution 1503
(2003) are guidelines that can be extended if there are
valid reasons. As it did in June, my delegation calls
upon senior officials of both Tribunals to continue their
efforts to ensure that, to the extent possible, the work is
completed within the deadlines referred to in
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).
My delegation appreciates the problems caused
by the departures of some highly qualified Tribunal
staff, as well as by other administrative and
organizational matters referred to here by the
representatives of the Tribunals. Moreover, we
recognize that the Security Council cannot ask the
Tribunals to complete their work within certain
deadlines without providing them with the reasonable
resources needed to complete their work.

The Tribunals will not be considered as having
properly rendered justice if indicted fugitives are not
tried. That is especially true of fugitives accused of the
most serious crimes, including Radovan Karadzic,
Ratko Mladic and Felicien Kabuga. We call on all
States concerned to fully cooperate with the Tribunals,
as they are obliged to do, in order to apprehend those
persons and transfer them to The Hague.

Belgium takes note with regret of the information
provided by Ms. Del Ponte today regarding Serbia's
deteriorating cooperation with the Tribunal. We urge
the Belgrade Government to do everything possible to
fully cooperate with the Tribunal.

Finally, the residual functions that must be
carried out following the closing of the Tribunals as
they are currently constituted must be addressed
without further delay. The joint study carried out by the
Tribunals clearly identified the various residual
functions. That is an excellent basis for the work of the
Security Council. Belgium is prepared to take an active
and responsible role in that essential discussion.

