Mrs. J akubone (Lithuania): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United Nations System Coordinator on
Ebola, Mr. David Nabarro, and the Head of the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response,
Mr. Anthony Banbury, for their comprehensive
briefings and for their leadership and tireless efforts in
coordinating the United Nations response in the fight
against the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. I also thank
Mr. Thomas Mauget for his briefing and dedication.

Our thoughts are with the families of more than
5,000 victims and patients, as well as with all the
courageous and dedicated doctors, health-care and
humanitarian relief workers, educators and burial team
members who, at a risk to their own lives, have been
doing all within their power to stop the further spread of
this deadly disease. Although the exponential increase
in Ebola cases is no longer evident, the virus continues
to claim lives. The European Union (EU) Ebola
Response Coordinator, Commissioner Stylianides, and
Commissioner for Health Andriukaitis paid a visit to
the most affected countries in West Africa last week.
One conclusion from the visit was that the affected
countries are still in urgent need of international
support. Our collective response should flexibly adapt
to the changing dynamics of the epidemic. Efficient
operational coordination among key actors at the
country level should be further strengthened.

Our attention should also be focused on
strengthening response capacities, preventive and
awareness-raising measures in the neighbouring
countries, notably Mali, which has registered new Ebola
cases, and Guinea-Bissau, which is still very fragile
and where Ebola, if it should get there, would have
devastating consequences. My delegation commends
the African Union and Economic Community of West
African States leadership in galvanizing efforts in
the region, including through the deployment of the
African Union Support to the Ebola Outbreak in West
Africa, which is overseeing the rapid deployment of
trained medical and support personnel to the affected
countries. We also commend other bilateral and
multilateral donors for their sustained commitment.

Lithuania has contributed through the World Food
Programme and is closely coordinating responses with
its EU partners. The European Union leaders earlier in
October committed to strengthening the comprehensive
EU response to the Ebola epidemic, setting a target
of €l.l billion. Among other steps, the EU has sent
medical and humanitarian experts, deployed mobile
laboratories, shipped vital supplies to affected countries
and set up a system for the evacuation of international
and humanitarian workers who have contracted Ebola
for treatment in Europe.

Ebola has struck countries that have only recently
emerged from devastating conflicts - Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone. The outbreak has turned into a
complex emergency with significant political, social,
economic, humanitarian and security dimensions
that the Governments of the affected States have
been working tirelessly to address since its outset. It
threatens to cancel the hard-won reconstruction and
development gains of those countries. The Ebola crisis
has affected basic health care, food security, livelihoods
and education, with a disproportionate impact on
vulnerable groups, such as pregnant women, children
and the elderly. Ebola orphans have emerged as a major
issue, demanding enhanced efforts on the part of the
United Nations and other international partners to
ensure adequate child protection. Ebola survivors face
stigmatization when reintegrating into their daily lives.

While we focus our efforts on ending the Ebola
outbreak, it is crucial to have a parallel advanced
reflection on the post-Ebola phase, which will require
comprehensive and coordinated long-term strategies to
rebuild the capacities of the health-care systems and
strengthen the resilience of post-conflict societies. We
remain ready to actively engage with our partners in
such efforts.

