Mr. Patimapragorn (Thailand): Thailand is
honoured to be part of the deliberations today. We
welcome this opportunity to contribute our thinking on
the very important topic that we are addressing today.

Since the establishment of the United Nations,
much of the world's hopes and aspirations for peace
and security have depended upon how well the Security
Council carries out its responsibilities. What is clear
is that the issues impacting our common peace and
security have become more complex - be they
inter-State or intra-State conflicts - and that there has
been an increase in non-traditional security challenges.
It is in that changing context that the work ofthe Council
must go beyond conflict resolution. Increasingly, the
Council must gear its work towards conflict prevention,
in particular addressing root causes.

Many of the conflicts that we have
witnessed - be they within or between States - are
rooted in the underlying problems of poverty, social
injustice and inequalities and disparities within and
between countries. Those give rise to frustration,
marginalization and alienation, which breed extremism
and lead to conflict. We therefore have to tackle the root
causes if we are to stem the rising tide of extremism as
we have saw in recent shocking events.

We know that sanctions and military means are
simply not enough to combat extremism and terrorism.
Instead, promoting inclusive political, economic and
social policies must also be part and parcel of the
solution. Thailand believes that inclusive development
in which no one is left behind and all have equal access
to opportunities for a better future would serve to
advance our goal of sustainable peace and security for
all. That is true at both the national and international
levels. Inclusiveness must therefore be at the core of
the post-2015 development agenda. In so far as peace
and security are concerned, inclusive development
must be an integral part of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding.

Thailand believes that inclusive development
is about placing people at the centre of our efforts.
Therefore, the work of the Council should always bear
in mind the nexus between development and security
and the direct impact on the lives and livelihoods of
the people. To promote inclusive development for peace
and security, all aspects of the work of the United
Nations - human rights, development and peace
and security - must go hand-in-hand. Therefore,
we must ensure coherence among key bodies in the
United Nations system. That will help us to develop
the capacity to take early and timely action to address
conflicts at their root causes.

Inclusiveness also applies to the work of the
Council. We welcome the ongoing efforts to engage
with non-members and all the relevant stakeholders so
that all voices are heard and heeded in the Council's
deliberations, because they bear upon the peace and
security of all.

Before I conclude, I wish to pay my warmest
tribute to President Bachelet for her commitment
throughout all these years to the promotion of the rights
and empowerment of women. Thailand supports the
women and peace and security agenda. We encourage
the Council to do more to increase the numbers of
female peacekeepers, women leading peace operations
and female mediators in negotiations. I hereby pledge
my support for the "HeForShe" initiative for gender
equality and strong commitment to do more towards
that goal.

Lastly, may I also congratulate the new members
of the Council. I am confident that they will not only
invigorate the Council, but also provide it with the new
ideas and fresh thinking that will further advance the
Council's mission in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

