Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation thanks the French presidency for
the holding of this important meeting on the issue of
famine, which requires a coordinated, effective, lasting
or even definitive international response.

Let me also thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his important briefing and for his ongoing
decisive efforts to mobilize the international community
to fight famine.

In addition to costing millions ofpeople their lives,
famine foments social instability and perpetuates the
vicious circle of poverty and aid dependency. What is
worse, in situations of conflict, it dangerously increases
the vulnerability of the populations affected, especially
children, women and the elderly.

That is no doubt why, at the beginning of the year,
the Secretary-General rightly sounded the alarm, so
as to draw the attention of all Member States to the
plight of the millions of people threatened by famine
in several countries, including in north-east Nigeria,
South Sudan, Somalia and Yemen, to name only the
most urgent and concerning cases; a total of 20 million
people are at risk.

This humanitarian crisis, possibly the worst since
the end of the Second World War - as the then Under-
Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs pointed out
during his briefing to the Security Council last March
(see S/PV.7897) - could get even worse ifwe do not act

quickly, especially in terms of access, the mobilization
of funds and sustainable political solutions.

In Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and the north-
east part of Nigeria, the challenges to humanitarian
action are primarily linked to difficulties in accessing
people in need and to conflict-related insecurity. That
is why we reiterate our call on all parties to those
conflicts to comply with international humanitarian
law, by which they are bound to ensure the protection of
civilians, including their property, as well as of civilian
infrastructure, and to allow full and unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance.

Moreover, the response to the crisis requires
immediate, adequate and easily mobilized funding. In
that regard, we welcome the fact that more than 60 per
cent of the $4.9 billion needed to respond urgently to
the identified needs in Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia
and north-eastern Nigeria has been secured. We
encourage more contributions from both States and the
private sector so as to enable the full implementation
of existing assistance programmes, including the
humanitarian response plans developed by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

At the beginning of my statement, I spoke of the
need for a lasting or even definitive response to the
famine crisis, as my delegation is convinced that the
world has the necessary resources, capacity and means
to permanently eradicate hunger and the spectre of
starvation in the world, once and for all.

Moreover, the impact of any alternative approach,
even if based on immediate and unhindered access,
adequate and available funding and a quicker and more
robust mobilization of humanitarian and development
actors, would of necessity be limited in terms of time
and space.

Additionally, since conflicts are the cause of many
cases of famine, the Security Council, as the principal
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, must use all means at its disposal to
engage the parties involved in good faith in the quest
for political solutions. In our view, it is the only way to
put a lasting end to the suffering of peoples.

Senegal is convinced of the virtues of prevention.
As such, it calls for reliable and rigorous warning
systems that are based on honest cooperation with
all relevant stakeholders, in particular regional and
subregional organizations, in order to prevent, to the
extent possible, the outbreak of conflict. My delegation
also deems it key that we work to promote respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms and to solve
economic, social and cultural problems.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of Senegal to sparing no effort to ensure
a successful international mobilization. In addition to
the tribute I paid earlier to the Secretary-General for
his dedicated actions, I would like also to extend my
gratitude to all organizations and to all stakeholders in
general - whether within the United Nations or within
non-governmental organizations - that participate
in the humanitarian sphere to help the millions of
crisis victims.

