Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for his comprehensive and
very informative briefing.

As we know that the ongoing conflict continues to
have an impact on the lives of civilians in Syria, we
strongly support humanitarian actors, including United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations,
operating across the country in saving lives. We voted
for resolution 2449 (2018) today, as we did for every
resolution during our two-year term in the Security
Council in which the issue of humanitarian aid
and access was discussed. In so doing, Kazakhstan
stresses the importance of abiding by the humanitarian
principles ofneutrality and impartiality, with assistance
provided to all, whether in Government-controlled or
non-Government-controlled areas, thus leading to an
even distribution of humanitarian aid.

We commend UNICEF and the World Health
Organization for their work in Syria, especially
the lS-month-long intensive vaccination campaign,
which has been impressive and ended polio and virus
outbreaks in and around Deir ez-Zor. Global experts in
public health, urology and epidemiology confirm this
conclusion.

With respect to the talks in Astana, we welcome
the participation of the representatives of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) in the recent round of the Astana process on
28 and 29 November, for that led to ways of mitigating
the humanitarian situation during discussions with the
delegations of Iran, Russia and Turkey. At the same
time, in the disaster zones, we see the lack of control
over the fair and efficient distribution of food, fuel,
drinking water and medicines, especially when the
resources flow into the hands of the armed groups and
not the civilian population.
Humanitarian aid must not be politicized. It is
therefore necessary to implement a mechanism for
coordinating the activities of the ICRC, the Syrian
Red Crescent Society, United Nations agencies, the
Government of Syria and the guarantor countries. We
see the great value of the United Nations initiative on
demining and restoring the infrastructure of territories
liberated from terrorists so as to enable humanitarian
operations to begin. This will also assist refugees,
including those in the Rukban refugee camp, in
returning home.

Kazakhstan considers the initiatives and
programmes of the Food and Agriculture Organization
most relevant, and appeals to other countries to support
and promote the organization's programmes, including
providing Syrian farmers with free or subsidized seeds
and fertilizers, in order to improve the food situation in
the country.

Finally, we acknowledge with deep appreciation the
contribution of all participants in the Astana process
and in particular the guarantor States. The Astana
negotiations on Syria will focus on consolidating
peaceful efforts in Syria and ending the human
suffering. This is possible, it is evident, through an
inclusive Syrian-led political process that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. It is only
when the political tensions ease that the humanitarian
crisis will be relieved over time.

