Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you first of all for
convening this debate on the situation in Haiti, a
brother country that in recent months has had to
respond to the great challenges posed by the
devastating earthquake it suffered in January.

I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his
comprehensive briefing and for the huge work he and
his team have been carrying out in Haiti. I thank him
very much. We would also like to thank Ambassador
Merores of Haiti for outlining his Government's view
on the main challenges that it faces.

With special gratitude, Chile associates itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
and takes this opportunity to reaffirm our ties with
Haiti and its efforts at reconstruction, peacebuilding
and long-term development.

Chile's participation in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
constitutes an expression of our resolute commitment
to multilateralism in a concerted response of the
international community represented in the major
forum of the United Nations. It is also an expression of
the importance of that region to our foreign policy.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/446), one of the main challenges facing Haiti
will be the holding of presidential and legislative
elections in November. We trust that peaceful elections
will contribute to the consolidation of an atmosphere of
political stability. The full validity of the democratic
system and the strengthening of the rule of law will no
doubt constitute essential elements in the success of the
recovery and long-term development efforts being
carried out in the country.

We take this opportunity to recognize the
important work of MINUSTAH in such areas as the
protection of vulnerable groups, including women and
children, community violence reduction and enhanced
support for State institutions, inter alia. We also voice
our support for the renewal of MINUSTAH's mandate.

We believe that attention should be paid to the
link between security and development because the
consolidation of sustainable security conditions will
depend in no small measure on the existence of
opportunities and better living conditions for the
population. We value the contributions that the
Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti can offer on this matter.

All international efforts must be aligned with
definitions set forth by the Government of Haiti in line
with the principle of national ownership of the
country's reconstruction and long-term development.
We take this opportunity to acknowledge the leadership
of the Haitian Government in its response in long-term
reconstruction and development processes.

Chile favours direct action to support Haitian
women, whose ability to play a central role will make a
huge contribution to the reconstruction process. We
support the work carried out by MINUSTAH with the
Ministry of Women's Affairs and Rights and local
authorities, including the provision of legal assistance
to women and young people who are victims of
violence. In accordance with our national plan for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), we reiterate the importance of developing
sustainable initiatives that will reinforce and promote
the involvement of women in MINUSTAH's activities.

