Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): Like all the members of the Security Council we
are motivated by the desire to see Iraq discharge its
obligations in regard to the resolutions of the Security
Council and, with this end in mind, by the wish to
strengthen our support for the work of the Special
Commission, and to make sure that the cooperation
between the Special Commission and Iraq produces the
anticipated results as soon as possible.

We based our judgement on the report submitted to
us by the Special Commission, a report in which many of
us found sections that were - happily and finally -
positive. We also noted the recommendations of the
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission, which
did not contain any request for the immediate imposition
of additional sanctions.

We based the abstention which we just exercised on
a consideration of the merits of the text of the resolution,
but also in the light of a very strong principle, which was
expressed with great conviction by the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission. This principle
highlights the advantage, as far as possible, of seeking
unity within the Council so as to underline the authority
of the activities entrusted to the Special Commission by
the Council. And it is this unity - which for some years
now the Council has shown in its actions in regard to
important texts pertaining to Iraq - that, we feel, has
contributed to the achievement of the significant progress
noted in the last report.

 

We agree that the text we have just voted on respects
a fundamental principle: the sovereignty of the Council in
its decision-making process. We deem it positive that those
Council members who took part in the discussion of the
text were able to demonstrate their unanimous agreement
with that basic truth. However, bearing in mind the idea of
proportionality referred to earlier, we had wanted the
wording of the text to be such that it would not give rise to
any hasty or erroneous interpretations, such as the belief
that an additional sanctions process had already been set in
motion - contrary, I repeat, to the appeal that we felt was
contained in the report of the Special Commission.

We regret that the wording of certain paragraphs,
which could have been improved upon, might lead some to
believe that additional sanctions already existed. For that
reason, we regret that the technical proposals that could
have done away with these ambiguities were not approved.

The resolution's preamble acknowledges that progress
has been achieved. That is good and shows that efforts
were made by all Council members to reflect the
conclusions reached by the Commission. But in this same
vein, because progress was made, we think that the
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission should
have received some encouragement, however modest, to
continue with his efforts and enhance further the
effectiveness of the Special Commission's cooperation with
the Iraqi authorities. We regret that that appeal was not
heeded.

We had hoped also that the Council, in the future
exercise of its prerogatives, would continue to use very
precise wording in its work in order to avoid situations in
which people who are not directly responsible for the
problems encountered might find themselves facing
sanctions. We deem it unfortunate that this suggestion was
not taken into account. We also regret that a number of
suggestions - which in our View would have helped
improve the text by making it more strict and precise -
were not acted on, because we believe that that final effort,
which would not have taken much time, would probably
have enabled us to get closer to the very desirable objective
to which I referred earlier: unity within the Council. We
could have demonstrated the Council's solidarity with the
Special Commission and thus also strengthened the
Commission's work in order to achieve all of the objectives
of resolution 687 (1991).

It is in the light of these considerations that we were
compelled to abstain in the voting.

