Ms. Zemene (Ethiopia): We were indeed shocked
by the Westminster terrorist attack in London
yesterday, and we would like to offer our condolences
to the families of the victims. We also join others in
condemning that heinous attack in the strongest terms
and expressing our solidarity with the people and the
Government of the United Kingdom.

Turning to the business of the Council today, we
would like to thank the United Kingdom presidency
for organizing this meeting on Somalia. We are very
pleased to see you, Mr. President, presiding over this
meeting only a few days after your important visit
to our region, including Somalia. We were also very
happy to hear from His Excellency President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo. We would all like to
thank him for his important remarks outlining his
Government's vision for a peaceful and stable Somalia.
And we are grateful to Mr. Keating and Ambassador
Madeira for their respective briefings.

It was two weeks ago that Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres undertook his first field visit to show
solidarity with the Somali people, who are facing a dire
humanitarian situation. His appeal to the international
community to scale up assistance to Somalia was
quite crucial and very much appreciated. It is in that
same spirit that the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki, visited Mogadishu over
the past weekend, thereby making Somalia the first
country to be visited by the new leader of the African
Union Commission. The symbolism is remarkable.

We do indeed need to act swiftly if we are to avert
a humanitarian catastrophe in Somalia. We commend
President Farmajo, who demonstrated his political
leadership immediately after taking office by convening
a high-level conference in Mogadishu to mobilize
assistance for the humanitarian response. The severe
drought is threatening the lives of millions of people in
Somalia and the wider region. It is in that context that
we would like to reiterate the call made by the Council
of Ministers of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which met last week in Addis
Ababa, for enhanced support from the international
community to complement efforts at the national and
regional levels. For our part, we are supporting the
United Nations response to the drought situation by
allowing UNICEF to purchase supplies from our local
markets and by facilitating easy-access corridors for
the humanitarian supplies to reach Somalia.

Somalia is facing this humanitarian challenge
at a time when it has made significant gains on the
political and security fronts. That is why we should do
everything possible not to allow the drought situation
to undermine those gains. That is also why we should
act fast and act now. There is no better indication of the
progress in Somalia than the recent election, which, by
all measures, and considering the security challenges
the country is facing, was the most competitive
and participatory that the country has had in a very
long time. It is indeed a significant achievement for
Somalia and its nascent institutions. The international
community, which has invested so much in supporting
peace and stability in Somalia, should also draw a
measure of satisfaction from that achievement.

It should be stressed that the country has also come
a long way in restoring peace and stability in much of
its territory. Somalia unquestionably continues to face
formidable challenges in the security area, but that
should in no way cloud the tangible progress that has
been made. Yes, Al-Shabaab cannot yet be dismissed
as a mere nuisance, and the series of attacks carried out
by that terrorist group recently in Mogadishu and other
parts of Somalia are clear indications that it is still
capable of causing great damage in terms of the loss
of human life and the destruction of property. But one
thing is for sure - Al-Shabaab has been significantly
weakened, and it no longer controls large swathes of
Somali territory.

We welcome the strong commitment made
by President Farmajo to defeat Al-Shabaab by
working closely with the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). Provided that there is adequate
international support, the total elimination of
Al-Shabaab is in fact no longer a remote possibility.
AMISOM. is marking its tenth anniversary in Somalia
this year, and its contribution to laying a foundation for
enhanced peace and security in the country has been
remarkable. However, AMISOM. was never intended
to be more than a stopgap measure. Its mission is to
provide security support to Somalia in the short term
until the security forces of the country are fully ready
to take over full responsibility. That cannot be too far
away now, and the effort to achieve that goal should be
taken up more seriously than ever.

In the meantime and in tandem, ways and means
have to be found on the part of the United Nations
and the international community to make sure that
the support provided to AMISOM. is predictable and
dependable, so that it can finish the job and pave the
way for its gradual drawdown and exit. We very much
hope that the Secretary-General will come up with
concrete proposals in that regard. Of course, as has
already been indicated, the long-term and sustainable
solution to the issue is to build the capacity of the
Somali National Army, and much remains to be done
in that area, including the coordination of international
efforts within the context of full country ownership.

Despite its recent positive trajectory, there is
no doubt that Somalia continues to faces enormous
challenges and difficulties. The country is building its
institutions, as well as regional and local administrative
structures, more or less from scratch. The recent
election has shown us that what we are seeing in Somalia
today is more than just a light at the end of the tunnel.
There is hope for the country's future. Now is the time,
therefore, for scaling up support for Somalia's post-
conflict reconstruction and development endeavours.
For that reason, the pledges that were made at the
Brussels and Istanbul conferences on Somalia should
be honoured.

Finally, we welcome the announcement that you
made, Sir, together with President Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo in Somalia, about the holding of
the London conference on Somalia in May. We look
forward to participating and hope it will contribute to
supporting the long-term stability and reconstruction
of Somalia. We in the region will continue to support
our sisterly country in overcoming its many challenges.
In that context, a special summit of IGAD will be held
in Nairobi on Saturday to find a sustainable and durable
solution to the plight of Somali refugees. I would like
to conclude by expressing the hope that this regional
effort will be complemented by support from the
international community, including the United Nations.

