Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and the
countries associating themselves with this statement.

Let me start by thanking Ambassador Sir Emyr
Jones Parry for his highly informative and very useful
briefing on the Security Council mission to the Sudan
and the region. The European Union entirely shares his
assessment of the situation and of what needs to be
done urgently.

We have welcomed the Darfur Peace Agreement
as the indispensable basis for peace and security and an
end to the suffering of millions of people in Darfur. We
will continue to work for its full and rapid
implementation. We urge the remaining factions to
commit themselves to the Peace Agreement and we call
on all parties to implement it without delay.
7

There still are a number of misunderstandings in
the Sudan about the Darfur Peace Agreement and the
role of the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS)
and the United Nations. We therefore need to explain
the Agreement and its benefits better to the people in
the region. The refugees and internally displaced
persons in the camps, as well as the civilians outside
the camps, need an urgent and visible improvement in
their living conditions. The following steps are
imperative.

First, the worsening humanitarian situation
demands immediate action. Attacks on humanitarian
workers must be stopped immediately. The European
Union calls on the Government of the Sudan and all
parties in Darfur immediately to remove existing
obstacles to the delivery of aid and to end any
obstruction of humanitarian work or assistance
rendered to AMIS.

Secondly, protection of civilians must be
provided and impunity for abuses ended. We call on the
Government of the Sudan to bring the perpetrators to
justice for crimes committed in Darfur and to stop the
violence against internally displaced persons,
especially sexual violence against women and girls.
Protection of victims and witnesses needs urgently to
be strengthened. We reiterate our full support for the
ongoing investigation by the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and urge all parties, in particular, the
Government of the Sudan, to fully cooperate with the
ICC.

Thirdly, the African Mission in Sudan (AMIS)
needs to be strengthened in order to be able to fulfil its
mandate, taking into account, in particular, the new
tasks arising from the Darfur Peace Agreement. The
European Union will continue to provide planning,
technical, financial and equipment support to both the
military and police components of AMIS. Together
with the African Union and the United Nations, the
European Union is organizing a conference on AMIS
on 18 July in Brussels.

Fourthly, we must ensure a smooth transition
from AMIS to a United Nations-led operation in
Darfur. We are encouraged by the unity of opinion on
this subject between the Security Council and the
African Union. The joint United Nations-African
Union assessment mission to Darfur, which has just
returned to New York, has our full support and we look
forward to its recommendations for a future United

Nations mission. As Secretary-General Annan said last
Friday, the situation on the ground in Darfur is
indefensible.

If the Government cannot fulfil its responsibility
to protect its own citizens, it has an obligation to
accept outside help. We therefore strongly urge the
Government of the Sudan to accept the help of the
United Nations and to welcome the planned United
Nations mission in Darfur. We continue to believe that
sanctions must be applied against those who impede
the peace process. We welcome the action taken by the
Security Council so far.

The international community needs to show
strong continued commitment to secure peace and
long-term development in Darfur. The European Union
is ready to respond positively to requests for support
for the implementation of the Agreement, including the
Darfur-Darfur dialogue, which plays a crucial role in
involving civil society in the implementation process.
We need to establish the structures of this dialogue so
that it can begin its work promptly. The Pledging
Conference on the reconstruction and development of
Darfur, to be organized by the Netherlands, needs the
support of the whole international community.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the regional destabilization caused by the Darfur
crisis and by the increasing insecurity in the refugee
camps in Chad. The Security Council's missions report
bears testimony to the appalling situation in the refugee
camps, the suffering of the local population in Chad
and the danger of the camps serving as recruiting
centres. We call on the Sudan and Chad to comply fully
with their obligations set out in the Tripoli Agreement
of 8 February 2006 to put an end to any support for
rebel groups in the other country.

At the same time, the situation in Southern Sudan
remains fragile. The implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) is behind
schedule. Difficult issues remain to be resolved. The
European Union reaffirms its commitment to continue
supporting the implementation of the Agreement. It
offers the only way to a peaceful, democratic and
prosperous Sudan. In this context, we welcome the
agreement on a ceasefire and a framework for peace
talks between the Sudanese Government and the
Eastern Front. We call on both sides to start substantive
negotiations in good faith immediately and to invite
international observers to this process.
The problem of the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) needs specific attention. We recognize the
intentions of the Government of South Sudan to
persuade the LRA to enter into serious peace
negotiations with the Government of Uganda. We hope
that this can lead to a dissolution of the LRA, while
scrupulously respecting the arrest mandates and
injuctions from the ICC.

In conclusion, the European Union would like to
stress that it is our collective duty to make sure that all
players involved understand that accepting the help of
the United Nations in Darfur is in their own best
interest.

