Mr. Costa: I am honoured to have been invited to
address the Council, and will add just a few words to
the exhaustive briefing given by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I will look at
the situation in Afghanistan from the particular angle
of drugs and crime, which I consider twin threats to the
country's stability and development.

The Afghan drug problem is, indeed, both a cause
and a consequence of crime. Both are the inevitable
result of weak rule of law and of still-lagging
enforcement and judicial capabilities. Before looking at

that bigger picture, let me first brief the Council on the
latest trends in opium cultivation this year.

My Office - the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) - has just completed its spring
survey, combining aerial and ground observation. We
estimate that in 2005 opium cultivation in Afghanistan
will decline. The total area under cultivation will still
be enormous: possibly well over 100,000 hectares.
Even so, when we release the annual opium survey in
September, the data will most likely show a reverse
trend with respect to the past few years.

What are the reasons for the decline in opium
cultivation in Afghanistan in 2005? Our surveyors have
confirmed that the eradication campaign conducted by
the Government, with foreign assistance, has yielded
results. However, the decrease in cultivation must be
attributed in particular to the self-restraint of farmers
who simply decided to reduce the opium harvest in
2005. That good news is tempered by two concerns.
First, the crop decline seems uneven nationwide. In
some provinces, UNODC has actually noted a strong
increase in poppy cultivation this year. Secondly, good
weather conditions in the spring increased productivity
in the fields. We therefore expect higher opium
yields - more kilogrammes per hectare - this year
than in 2004.

Several factors explain farmers' self-restraint this
year. We are, no doubt, seeing a market correction at a
time of abundant stocks and declining opium prices.
Above all, our surveyors have noted the growing
impact of the Government's persuasion campaign, as
well as the impact of faith-based motivations.

It is time to reflect on the reality of present-day
Afghanistan, where poverty is still overwhelming. In
the affected villages, the revenue previously derived
from a main cash crop - opium - needs to be
replaced by alternative sources of income. This will
strengthen the Government's credibility with farmers.
It will also reduce the risk of a humanitarian crisis. In a
recent meeting, President Karzai manifested the fear
that his moral authority would be undermined in the
villages if peaceful eradication and voluntary lower
cultivation were not supported by development
assistance. We both agreed that the current market
correction towards lower opium output could easily
reverse itself, thereby causing higher opium crops in
2006 and beyond.

Before concluding my comments on this issue, let
me add that, in today's Afghanistan, development
assistance not only translates into survival for hundreds
of thousands of poor villagers; it may also mean
survival for the first democratically elected
Government in the nation's history.

By and large, opium farming is driven by poverty.
Traffickers, warlords and corrupt officials, on the other
hand, are motivated by greed, and should face
retribution. That would do two things. First, it would
free villagers from the bondage imposed by big
profiteers and insurgents. Secondly, it would help to
counter the perception that many ordinary Afghans
have that counter-narcotics measures are hitting the
weakest link in the drug chain - the farmers - and
not those who profit the most from the drug trade.

Today in Afghanistan, drug traffickers, warlords
and insurgents control quasi-military organizations and
run military-type operations. An effective response
depends on the deployment of corresponding force.
Not long ago, I saw a real-life example of that at a drug
bazaar - an open-market drug bazaar - in Helmand
province's Garmser district, on the Afghanistan-
Pakistan border, which has long been known as a major
centre for heroin processing and trafficking. When I
was in Afghanistan a few weeks ago, the Special
Narcotics Forces of Afghanistan raided the bazaar,
deploying heavy artillery. The local people welcomed
the operation, and applauded the Afghan Minister of
the Interior, Mr. Jalali, who was present. He was very
pleased, and stated, "This operation demonstrates that
our Special Narcotics Forces have the ability to strike
anywhere, at any time". I do not think that that was an
overstatement.

Indeed, I agree. Operations of this complexity are
the result of badly needed collaboration between
counter-narcotics and counter-insurgency forces, the
result of information-sharing - which needs to be
improved - and the result of mutual support against a
common threat. I salute the lead nation on counter-
narcotics assistance, the United Kingdom, for its
tireless efforts in this regard. I also welcome the
decision by some of the nations participatory in the
International Security Assistance Force to consider
embedding civilian drug expertise in their provincial
reconstruction teams so as to foster that inter-force
collaboration.

I would like now to look at the broader picture
and to place the Afghan drug problem within a suitable
context. Despite the progress that I have described,
lawlessness still prevails in Afghanistan, as the Special
Representative made clear in his briefing. State
institutions are fragile and vulnerable; corruption and
intimidation are rampant. Democracy and the rule of
law are stymied by the absence of a viable criminal
justice system.

The foundations of a credible administration of
justice have been laid down, but the resources
generated through drug trafficking - more than
$2 billion, perhaps $2.5 billion, in 2004 - are
routinely used to undermine justice. Warlords, inept
provincial chiefs and corrupt officials make the Afghan
opium industry more flexible and better prepared to
evade controls. They help to move crops into new
areas - up in the mountains, for example - where
insurgents provide protection. They facilitate the
logistics for the import of chemical precursors for the
processing of heroin - about 10,000 tons a year,
imported from abroad. They assist the money-
laundering networks. In provinces where the
eradication campaign failed, most notably Kandahar,
we see clear examples of corruption and profiteering
by local officials.

I believe that it is impossible to oppose
Afghanistan's narco-industry when investigation,
prosecution, the courts and detention systems are weak
or non-existent. I therefore salute Germany and
Italy- lead nations in related sectors - for the
assistance that they have provided. I call upon all
Member States to help address today's priorities in
Afghanistan: the establishment an adequate rule of law
and a vigorous fight against corruption.

We now have a window of opportunity and a
chance to act, but that window is closing fast. The fear
has been expressed that some of the more dangerous
characters in the troublesome provinces will run for
office in the forthcoming election, seeking impunity
through parliamentary immunity. I was relieved to hear
the statement in that regard made by the Special
Representative a few minutes ago.

I suggest that in Afghanistan we view drug
control measures in conjunction with efforts to
alleviate poverty in the countryside and to restore
justice throughout the country. That will help us move
forward on other fronts as well and remove major
impediments to democracy, security and development
in general. I count on the support of, and guidance
from, the Council.

