Mr. Dejammet (France)(interpretation from French):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council and to congratulate you on
the remarkably effective and precise manner in which you
have been guiding our work. Allow me also to associate
myself with the unanimous tribute which has been paid to
your predecessor, Ambassador Lavrov for his effectiveness,
celerity, determination and impartiality. Finally, I would
like to welcome the five new members of this Council,
whose presence among us gives me great pleasure.

The resolution, extending the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) for six
months was adopted as a presidential text. The French
delegation approves this decision. Indeed, the unanimous
support of the Council constitutes a serious message
addressed to the parties.

A political solution to the conflict in Abkhazia is
indispensable, with full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia, within its
internationally recognized borders. Within that framework,
Abkhazia must have an appropriate political status, and
arrangements can be envisaged that fully guarantee the
rights of the population of Abkhaz origin, in accordance
with the highest standards defined by the international
community.

Such is the unswerving position of our Council, and
it has been determinedly reaffirmed here today.

From that point of view, our urgent appeal to the
parties to make progress in the political negotiations as
quickly as possible is addressed in particular to the
Abkhaz side, which must shoulder its responsibilities and
not gamble on one or another unlikely external
circumstance in order to cling to its position of rejecting
the facts.

The current efforts under United Nations auspices,
with the support of the Russian Federation as facilitator,
are the best way to reach a peaceful and equitable
solution to the conflict that will respect the rights of all
the region's populations. It is imperative that this way be
pursued.

In another, equally important, area, the Council has
attached particular importance to the tragic plight of the
refugees and displaced persons. That the Abkhaz side is
not respecting its undertakings to facilitate the return of
refugees is unacceptable, as is the increased violence in
the territories under Abkhaz control, which is aimed at
preventing the return of any displaced persons. That is
why the Council has used unprecedentedly firm language
on these matters. We condemn all such violence and
abuses, and we unequivocally recall the responsibilities of
the Abkhaz side in the areas under its control.

The Council also demands with great firmness full
respect for the commitments made by the Abkhaz side
with respect to the return of refugees. Here, developments
in the Gali region will test the good will of the Abkhaz
side; the Council will follow with special attention the
developments in that region, including the support of the
parties for the activities of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

The establishment of machinery to monitor respect
for human rights in the areas under Abkhaz control is
another important demand by the Council, which
unreservedly supports the efforts made under United
Nations auspices. Concrete results must be achieved
speedily.

The importance of all these pending tasks justified
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia for six months, subject to
parallel changes that may be made in the mandate of the
peace-keeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States. Close cooperation between UNOMIG
and those forces is necessary; the French delegation is
pleased at the excellence of contacts on the ground, and
keenly encourages all initiatives to strengthen them.

 

France wishes also to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the dedication of all the United Nations personnel
involved in this difficult mission. We wish finally to
express our gratitude and full support for the work of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Brunner, and his resident Deputy, Ambassador Bota, and
for that of the Russian Federation.

