Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to express our most sincere
congratulations and appreciation to Ambassador Meza-
Cuadra and Ambassador Dj ani, as well as their respective
teams, for their informative briefings and excellent
work as Committee Chairs, as they strive to implement
the mandates of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of
weapons of mass destruction, respectively.

I take this opportunity to reiterate, as we have
been doing, that the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
strongly and categorically opposes terrorism and the
proliferation ofweapons of mass destruction, which are
serious threats to international peace and security. In
that regard, today's briefing is an excellent opportunity
to jointly address those very important cross-cutting
issues, as finding solutions for and eradicating them
fall within the mandate of the Security Council.

We note with deep concern the impact of the flow
of foreign terrorist combatants, their return to their
countries of nationality or origin and the growing nexus
between transnational organized crime and terrorism.
Through the excellent work of the 1373 Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
and the 1267 Committee, concerning Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida, and
its Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, we have been able to build on the work of the
1373 Committee and its Executive Directorate. We
remain abreast of new global challenges resulting from
changes in methodologies, capabilities and impact
with regard to exploiting people, natural resources and
new technologies in order to finance and conduct their
criminal activities. In that regard, we recognize the
recent focus on preventing and combating the financing
of terrorism through resolution 2462 (2019) - a French
initiative co-sponsored by Equatorial Guinea - to
ensure that the response ofthe United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations and States to terrorist
threats is more effective and efficient.

The work of the 1267 Committee has also
reinforced the message regarding the importance of
curbing the financing of terrorism to prevent attacks
by Da'esh, Al-Qaida and affiliated groups. That is
why it is necessary to invest in preventing the criminal
exploitation of new financial technologies, such as
cryptocurrency and mobile payment services. As
Ms. Mercy Buku, an expert in anti-money-laundering
and countering the financing of terrorism, recalled
two months ago in the Chamber (see S/PV.8496), those
new technologies used to transfer capital could be the
most effective contribution to global efforts of financial
inclusion to ensure that the 1.7 billion people in need
are lifted out of poverty in the regions of the world most
affected by terrorism and conflicts. In that regard, we
encourage the work of the 1373 and 1267 Committees
to continue to take that issue into account and to
support the work of States in not suppressing financial
inclusion. That should be achieved by implementing
measures to combat the financing of terrorism through
the regulation and facilitation of services that contribute
to sustainable development.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is the first international
instrument that has comprehensively addressed the very
complex issue of the possible use of nuclear, biological,
chemical and radiological weapons by terrorist groups.
Therefore, the work of the 1540 Committee in ensuring
its implementation of its mandate is an important basis
for the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and for
mobilizing international cooperation for the nuclear
disarmament of State and non-State actors. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea believes that Africa should go
even further by implementing nuclear non-proliferation
in its geographical area, thereby complementing the
principles of the Treaty of Pelindaba with a total ban on
the direct or indirect supply and marketing of mineral
resources from African soil, specifically uranium and

plutonium, for the production, use, manufacture or
research of weapons of mass destruction, as well as
military activities.

Recent events lead us to believe that there is a
serious global risk ofa resumption ofthe arms race, due
not only to clashes caused by disagreements stemming
from the balance of power but also by the ambition of new
States to possess such weapons as a deterrent strategy,
which creates worldwide concern and insecurity. Given
that scenario, the Security Council must not tolerate
rhetoric that threatens the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and human existence and must act
firmly as the helm and defender of international peace
and security. We must strive to make this world a place
of renewed peace and order among States. We must
strive to ensure an environment conducive to social,
political and economic progress. We must also strive to
ensure a secure environment for all.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea supports the
States Members of the United Nations in their efforts
to mitigate and prevent conflicts within their borders
and among themselves. We encourage the Committee
to continue working with States to promote educational
programmes that contribute to disarmament,
non-proliferation and public awareness, in collaboration
with international organizations and various sectors
of society.

Today's briefings remind us that the threats of
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction have changed, but they have not diminished.
We must be able to improve our collective efforts and
anticipate events in order to counteract and eliminate
those threats and lessen their impact on the most
vulnerable, in particular children, women, refugees,
displaced persons, the elderly, persons with disabilities,
members of minority groups and others. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea remains firmly committed to
implementing Security Council resolutions to ensure
that such important work is conducted. For those
reasons, and in conclusion, we would like to make the
following recommendations.

First, we need to be innovative in our collective

response in order to be able to face new threats and, at
the same time, do so in a way that does not hinder the
sustainable development of countries and communities.
In that regard, we commend the role played by the
three Committees and their Groups of Experts for
their growing and increasingly robust collaboration, as
well as for their cooperation with other United Nations
entities, such as the Office for Disarmament Affairs
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as
well as INTERPOL and others. We also acknowledge
their collective efforts and encourage them to continue
bolstering their cooperation with other international
and regional organizations, particularly with the
African Union.

Secondly, we deem it important to cooperate with the
private sector, civil society and other sectors to ensure
that efforts in these areas are more effective, always
with full respect for the sovereignty of States and their
laws. We also reiterate that the most effective method of
preventing and countering the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, terrorism, violent extremism and
conflicts is to invest in sustainable development.

Thirdly, we acknowledge the efforts of the three
Committees in ensuring the implementation of their
mandates and in supporting States in that regard. This
will require improving transparency in the Committee's
discussions. We therefore commend the efforts being
made to increase accountability through ensuring
the participation of States in debates and informative
briefings and facilitating the participation of interested
Member States in informal meetings, particularly when
their interests could be affected by the inclusion of
persons or organizations on the sanctions list.

Finally, we urge the Committees to further bolster
such initiatives.

