Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): The

Permanent Representative of Slovenia will soon deliver

a statement on behalf of the European Union, with

which France fully associates itself. I would now like
to make a few comments in my national capacity.

First of all, like previous speakers, I would like to
thank Mr. J can-Marie Guehenno for his briefing and to
welcome the presence of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Kai Eide, to whom we address our
warmest congratulations on his appointment. Like his
predecessors, Mr. Kai Eide can rely on the full and
active support of France in the vital mission that he
must carry out on the ground. We note with satisfaction
that his appointment enjoys broad international
consensus and that the Afghan authorities have
expressed their wish to work closely with him. He thus
has all the authority he needs to carry out his essential
role of coordination.

Six years after the fall of the regime which made
Afghanistan a haven for international terrorism, we
find ourselves at a crucial moment. The military
situation has been stabilized, but it remains difficult. It
is not yet led to decisive weakening of an adversary
that does not hesitate to use terror, as we were
tragically reminded by this morning's attack on the
Canadian contingent in Kandahar.

The development of drug trafficking, which is
closely related to the development of insurrection, is a
particularly disturbing phenomenon. Its eradication
through determined and sustained action must remain a
priority for the Afghan authorities as well as for the
international community. First and foremost the
Afghan State authorities has yet to establish the rule of
law in many regions of the country and to ensure that it
is respected, and the problem of governance remains
critical, in particular at the local level; this weakens the
undeniable progress that has been achieved since 2001.
The years to come will be decisive in this respect,
especially with regard to the elections planned for 2009
and 2010. These are steps that the international
community must help the Afghans successfully take.

In our view, we must address four key challenges
in order to move forward in restoring Afghanistan and
in fulfilling the objectives defined in London in 2006.

First of all, the international community must
confirm its long-term commitment in order to persuade
the Afghans that nothing will undermine our

determination to bring an end to attacks by those -
terrorists, drug-traffickers and illegal armed groups -
who hope to see our withdrawal. The peace and
security both of Afghanistan and of the entire world
depends on this. To be effective, this mobilization of
the international community, which has already led to
commitment of considerable resources and to
substantial results, requires greater coordination among
all the players. As has already been stated, Mr. Kai
Eide's endeavours should make a major contribution to
this.

The civilian and military commitment should be
part of a greater context - and this too has been said
by previous speakers - to enable the Afghans to
decide their own future and to live in peace in their
country. The gradual transfer of responsibilities to the
Afghans must be our ongoing objective. This is
especially important in the security sphere; beginning
with Kabul, training efforts must be strengthened to
that end.

Finally, we must consolidate the comprehensive
strategy drawn up at the London Conference in January
2006. In that spirit, France, at the request of President
Karzai, will organize in June 2008 a conference in
support of Afghanistan. It will aim to publicize the
achievements of six years of joint efforts, to reaffirm
the international commitment and to establish a road
map for the years to come. It will, in particular, take
stock of the London Compact and will enable us to
refocus the London strategy around realistic priority
objectives. Of course we want to closely associate the
United Nations with the conference, in particular the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative.

Afghanistan is a priority for France and for the
European Union. The President of the French Republic
reaffirmed our long-term commitment during his visit
to Afghanistan last December, both as regards civilian
reconstruction assistance and as regards security,
through our participation in the International Security
Assistance Force and our support for the training of the
Afghan police and army.

We see this bilateral and European commitment
as part of a close partnership at all levels with the
United Nations. Only the United Nations has the
legitimacy, the impartiality and the expertise which are
necessary for the development of a comprehensive
approach to consolidating the democratic process in
support of action by the Afghan authorities.

It is in that spirit that we support the extension of
the mandate of UNAMA, along the lines set out by the
Secretary-General in his report, including strengthened
authority for the Special Representative, a sharpened
mandate focused on a few priorities for action, and a
strengthened presence on the ground in close
coordination with other actors. UNAMA will thus be in
a position to more effectively carry out its main role of
restoring Afghanistan in order to bring to its population
the freedom, security and prosperity which, like every
other people in the world, it deserves.

