I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Commissioner Chergui and Managing Director Vervaeke for their briefings today. First and foremost, today we wish to congratulate the Government of the Central African Republic on its efforts to advance preparations for credible, free and fair elections. We were especially heartened by the Constitutional Court's recent decision emphasizing that "any slippage of the electoral calendar should derive from broad national consultations seeking a consensual solution." We further commend the Government for issuing two decrees that are crucial for the timely holding of the elections. The first set the voter registration period, which starts today and ends on 28 July, with the final voters list released in September. The second decree specified that the Central African diaspora will be allowed to vote overseas in 13 countries, including the United States. According to the Secretary-General's most recent figures, the United Nations recognizes there are approximately 697,000 internally displaced persons in addition to the 616,000 Central Africans registered as refugees in neighbouring countries. Today we reaffirm our support for efforts aimed at enabling and encouraging the full participation of refugees and internally displaced persons in the elections. The United States remains committed to helping the Central African Republic hold credible and timely elections that will confirm the legitimacy of the elected Government, improve the long-term stability of the country and reinforce the democratic progress achieved by Central Africans in recent years. We also continue to support the United Nations Development Programme's role in providing, together with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), essential assistance, and we will conduct complementary programming ourselves. However, the United States remains deeply concerned that some armed groups continue to interfere with the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic with the resurgence of acts of violence perpetrated by armed groups in Birao, Bria, Ndele, and Obo. Following the Secretary-General's 23 March call for a global ceasefire to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we note that the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique, the Front democratique du peuple centrafricain, and the Retour, reclamations et rehabilitation armed groups publicly declared their adherence. However, the Secretary-General has observed that those declarations have yet to translate into action on the ground. It is deeply troubling that the same armed groups professing a commitment to a ceasefire are conducting military operations against their competitors and unarmed civilians. As we have said before, MINUSCA's top priority, as directed by the Security Council, is the protection of civilians. There is no contradiction between protecting civilians and using MINUSCA's good offices to support the success of the peace agreement. Indeed, the two efforts are mutually reinforcing. Finally, we understand MINUSCA suffered its first fatality from COVID-19 on 11 June, and we would like to take this opportunity to express our sincere condolences to the entire Mission and to the late staff member's family.
