Mr. Oshima (Japan): Allow me, first,
Mr. President, to warmly welcome you to the United
Nations as the new Permanent Representative of the
United States of America, and to say that Japan looks
forward to closely working with you and the United
States Mission in the months ahead.

I wish to thank the Chairs of the Council's three
counter-terrorism-related committees for their detailed
briefings. We appreciate having this opportunity for
regular briefings by those bodies, not only in terms of
the importance of the work they carry out, but also in
respect to promoting transparency in the Council's
work.

Last September, building upon the efforts made
by the Security Council and other relevant organs of
the United Nations, the General Assembly adopted the
landmark United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288). The
adoption of a shared strategy by all Member States
represented a significant step towards the strengthening
of global counter-terrorism activities. With its
adoption, what matters now is to ensure steady
implementation by Member States of that Strategy.
And, in that endeavour, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and its Executive Directorate
(CTED), the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
Committee and the 1540 Committee each play
important roles in their respective areas of
responsibility. Member States should cooperate with
those bodies as they carry out their increasingly
important task of supporting Member States in their
efforts to implement the Strategy.

With regard to the CTC and the CTED, we
strongly hope that through active site visits and the
preparation of Preliminary Implementation
Assessments, they will facilitate the identification of
challenges and needs for technical assistance among
Member States and will bring about more effective
cooperation among States.

With this in mind, and with a View to working
towards making a voluntary contribution to assisting
the work of the CTC and the CTED, the Japanese
delegation sponsored a study, shortly after the adoption
of the Global Strategy by the General Assembly, in
order to look at some of the problems of
implementation of the Strategy and how those
problems might be addressed, with a special focus on
the Asia-Pacific region. This study was entrusted to the
Center on Global Counter-Terrorism Cooperation,
which is a research centre of repute specializing in
international counter-terrorism cooperation.

Last month, the report came out, with useful and
interesting findings. Based on that report, we organized
a seminar with the participation of interested Member
States and relevant United Nations and other organs.
The report recommends, among other things,
strengthening of a regional approach for the CTC and
the CTED through such measures as the appointment
of a regional CTED representative, the convening of
regional and subregional meetings involving
Government experts and rationalization of site visits
and reporting requirements. Those useful
recommendations are under further consideration with
a view to putting them into practice. However, the
report has clearly shown that there are important gaps
that exist, as well as gains to be made by Member
States by filling those gaps through a regional
approach for the implementation of the Strategy and
thereby identifying needs for cooperation through
dialogue within regional groups.
We realize that the coordination of efforts for
effective technical assistance and other forms of
cooperation requires both time and consistent efforts,
and we look forward to the continuing contributions to
be made by the CTC and the CTED in this regard.

With regard to the activities of the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions Committee, Japan welcomes the
efforts that have been made to improve the
Committee's listing and delisting procedures. We
would like to request the Committee to continue its
efforts relating to the reviewing and updating of the
list. For example, as last November's Security Council
mission to Afghanistan pointed out in its report
(S/2006/935), a review of the Taliban-related list would
be in order at an early date, in View of the political
developments that have taken place in that country. We
also welcome the Committee's strengthening of
cooperation with the relevant organizations, including
Interpol.

Concerning the work of the 1540 Committee, my
delegation notes with appreciation the fruitful seminar
on technical assistance held last March. It came out
clearly from the discussions in that seminar that the
question of how best to coordinate the technical
assistance that is provided by donor States,
international organizations and regional organizations
with the work of the 1540 Committee remained a key
concern. We expect a concrete proposal on measures to
address this matter soon, bearing in mind that the
group of experts has now fulfilled its mandate. As the
mandate of the 1540 Committee itself is going to
expire in April next year, we would also like to urge
the Committee to set clear goals and a timeline to
advance its work urgently.

In addition, we look forward to seeing efforts by
the three terrorism-related committees to establish a
mechanism by which they could share lessons learned
on technical assistance, site visits and the reporting
obligations of Member States. Some measures have
already been taken by the three committees in that
regard, but we would like to see further efforts in their
future reports.

Finally, terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction are issues of the gravest
concern to the international community today. The
successful implementation of the Global Strategy must
be a matter of high priority. A continuous debate on
these matters, such as in open debates like this,
provides an indispensable opportunity to bring synergy
to the necessary discussion. The Japanese delegation
stands ready to continue to make constructive efforts
and contributions in support of the Strategy and of the
resolutions concerned.

