Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): In
the past few months Afghanistan has passed a series
of historic milestones. The elections of 5 April and
the runoff contest on 14 June were both significant
achievements. Threats from the Taliban and other
insurgent groups aimed at disrupting and discrediting
the democratic process did not deter the Afghans, who,
with many women and young people among them,
came out in their millions to cast their ballots in both
rounds. The fact that so many Afghans, particularly
so many women, participated in the electoral process
in order to make their voices heard, despite the efforts
of insurgents to discourage them, shows the degree to
which the Taliban has been marginalized among the
people of Afghanistan.

(spoke in English)

Canada acknowledges the work of the Ministry
of Interior and the Afghan national security forces in
ensuring that the elections could proceed. That they
succeeded, despite threats by insurgents to disrupt
them, is a testament to the increasing capacity of these
vital security institutions. Canada remains committed
to supporting the national security forces and to
strengthening their capacity to respond to threats and
provide security for the Afghan people. Nevertheless,
we are deeply concerned by the recent allegations of
fraud that have been made. We urge the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission to take all measures
necessary to investigate and resolve in a thorough and
transparent manner all allegations of fraud that have
been registered, in order to maintain confidence in
the electoral process. It is essential that the process,
including the adjudication of complaints, enables the
will of the Afghan people to be heard.

(spoke in French)

The months ahead will put Afghanistan's new
leader to the test. Given that the international forces
will be leaving the country this year, Afghanistan's
stability and security will depend increasingly on
well-trained and -equipped national security forces.
The international community has indicated that it
is committed to helping Afghanistan strengthen its
security forces, but that can be realized only if adequate
arrangements are put in place on the ground. We urge
the Government of Afghanistan to sign the bilateral
security agreement proposed by the United States and
conclude a status of forces agreement with NATO as
soon as possible, in order to enable the international
community to begin planning the next phase of military
assistance to Afghanistan. It is also essential to ensure
accountability and transparency for the international
financing, including Canada's commitment of
$330 million over three years starting in 2015, that has
been pledged in support to the Afghan national security
forces.

(spoke in English)
The commitment of the Afghan people to a
secure and democratic future is clear, and Canada
is committed to supporting that path. However,
Afghanistan's full potential will never be realized until
the rights of all its citizens, especially women and girls,
are fully protected and realized. The future success and
stability of Afghanistan will be a direct result of the
full participation and empowerment of Afghan women.
Canada will continue to emphasize that more must
be done to ensure that women's voices are heard and
listened to in all decision-making processes. In order
for Afghan women to be empowered, we must also
make sure that they are safe and secure.

Afghanistan must meet its international
commitments and implement its law on the elimination
of violence against women in order to protect Afghan
women and girls from sexual violence, abuse and
forced, early and child marriage. We have seen around
the world that successful peace agreements are those
that listen to the voices of women and girls, who are
the foundation of a society. The rights of women and
girls must be central to any eventual peace agreement.
Looking ahead to the parliamentary elections of 2015,
it is essential that the voice of Afghan women not be
diminished. We will continue to strongly support the
full political participation of Afghan women throughout
that process. As half of the population and more than
one third ofthe voters in the recent election, their voices
and their opinions are essential to building a stronger,
more secure and prosperous Afghanistan.

It is also imperative that Afghanistan's new
leader ensure that the country continues to fulfil its
commitments under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. Canada's $227 million in development
assistance between 2014 and 2017 are contingent upon
those key reforms. The Afghan Parliament has already
taken important steps towards achieving some of the
outstanding benchmarks. The anti-money-laundering
and combating the financing of terrorism laws are in
the process of being adopted. Such laws are essential to
helping curb corruption and increasing the transparency
of Afghanistan's financial sector.

We also welcome the approval of the Minerals Law
by the Wolesi Jirga, which, once adopted, will help
to lay the groundwork for Afghanistan's long-term
economic development. There is still work to be done
to strengthen the mining regulations in order to guard
against corruption, to increase transparency and to
guarantee water rights for all Afghan communities, as
well as to ensure that Afghanistan's extractive sector is
developed in a responsible and sustainable manner. We
urge the responsible ministries to put such regulations
in place as soon as possible.
(spoke in French)

In conclusion, this year, Afghanistan has taken
significant steps to ensure the stability and security
of its territory. However, there are still challenges to
overcome. The Afghan Government must continue
its efforts in the areas of security, transparency and
respect for human rights. The terrorist networks
from neighbouring States that have set up on Afghan
territory must be held accountable for their actions.
Protecting the human rights of all Afghan citizens, in
particular women and girls, must be at the centre of a
possible peace agreement. Those are great challenges
but Canada is committed to working with the next
leader, chosen democratically by the people, so as to
help Afghanistan move forward without the undue
interference of its neighbours.

