The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms all its
previous resolutions and the statements of its
President concerning the situation in Somalia, in
particular the statement by its President dated
26 October 2004.

"The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia and its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of Somalia,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress made in the Somali national
reconciliation process, in particular the

establishment of the Transitional Federal
Parliament, the election of the Speaker of the
Parliament and the President and the appointment
of the Prime Minister, which provides a sound
and solid framework to achieve a comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Somalia situation. The
Council reiterates its expectation of the
establishment of a broad-based, all-inclusive and
effective Government inside Somalia that will
continue the reconciliation efforts with all Somali
parties.

"The Security Council stresses that it is the
responsibility of all Somali parties to work
together to consolidate the gains made so far and
to achieve further progress. The Council calls
upon them to seize this historic opportunity for
peace in Somalia by developing a programme of
action and timetable for the transitional period,
creating a favourable environment for long-term
stability and making determined efforts to rebuild
the country.

"The Security Council commends member
States of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), in particular the
Government of Kenya, as well as other countries
and organizations for all their constructive efforts
to facilitate the Somali national reconciliation
process.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the commitment of the African Union to assist
the transitional process in Somalia, in particular
the planning for a mission in Somalia, including
options for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

"The Security Council encourages and urges
donor countries, regional and subregional
organizations to provide support for the future
Somali Government's and institutions' efforts to
ensure their ability to function inside Somalia and
to assist in the reconstruction of Somalia. The
Council encourages a dialogue between the
international donor community and the future
Transitional Federal Government on the
principles and modalities of international
coordination under discussion, including at the
Stockholm meeting of 29 October 2004, and
welcomes the United Nations lead facilitating

role in that dialogue and in the subsequent
coordination arrangements.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the peace process in Somalia and the
commitment of the United Nations to assist the
regional and subregional efforts in this regard.

"The Security Council expresses its
determination to continue to monitor the situation
closely."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/43.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its

agenda.

The meeting me at 4.50 p.m.
