Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
very informative briefing on recent developments
in Mali. I would like to focus on three issues: the
political process, the human rights situation and the
security situation.

First, on the political process, we commend the
Malian people for their peaceful and successful holding
of the presidential elections within the time frame
set by the Constitution, despite several anomalies
and some security incidents in northern and central
Mali. Following the re-election of President Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, we welcome his renewed commitment
to the swift and full implementation of the remaining
key provisions of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. In that regard, we commend
the Government of Mali and the United Nations for
signing a pact for peace, in accordance with resolution
2423 (2018), at the last session of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee in October. The pact represents
new momentum for political reforms in areas such as
decentralization, the security sector and the rule of
law, as well as socioeconomic development based on
greater inclusiveness and with the coherent support of
international and regional partners.

Secondly, the human rights situation remains
alarming. We therefore call on the Malian Government
to prevent human rights violations and abuses,
including those committed by Malian armed forces
when conducting counter-terrorism operations. Full and
timely investigations into all allegations are essential,
as are measures designed to bring perpetrators of these
crimes to account.

We also want to underline the responsibility of the
Malian authorities to take every action necessary to
swiftly investigate and prosecute perpetrators of crimes
and grave human rights abuses against civilians, as well
as those responsible for attacks against humanitarian
workers, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
international forces and Malian defence and security
forces. Taking into account MINUSMA's crucial role
in stabilizing Mali, we welcome its efforts aimed at
improving the security of United Nations peacekeepers,
which have resulted in a reduction of fatalities and
casualties in the Mission.

The impact of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel on the stabilization of the region cannot
be ignored. We therefore welcome the efforts made
towards operationalizing the Joint Force, including
its police component, which will ensure continuity
between Joint Force operations and the judicial
systems, in accordance with the rule of law and human
rights. We also take note of the appointment of the Joint
Force's new Force Commander, General Hanena Ould
Sidi of Mauritania, and his assumption of his duties.

In conclusion, Poland commends Special
Representative Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his
excellent leadership, and all United Nations civilian
and uniformed personnel for their continued hard work
in a challenging environment. We also welcome the
appointment of Lieutenant General Dennis Gyllensporre
of Sweden as Force Commander of MINUSMA.

