Mr. Vukasinovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
We also thank the leadership of the ICTY and the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their respective reports and today's
detailed briefing on the progress of legal proceedings,
completion strategy implementation and the transfer
of the Tribunal's functions to the Mechanism. We also
take note of the report (S/2016/441) of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services and the observations and
recommendations contained therein.

The achievements of the International Criminal
Tribunals have been an invaluable contribution to the
development of international criminal law and justice
in the past two decades. They stood at the forefront of
the fight against impunity, bringing to justice many of
those responsible for serious crimes against humanity
and playing a crucial role in promoting the rule of law at
both the international and national levels. Their legacy
is important for the future of international criminal
justice.

With the Mechanism having taken over all of the
remaining functions of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda as of 1 January, and a date
foreseen for the closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslvia (ICTY) now in 2017,
we are mindful that the important work of the ICTY
is yet to be completed. We encourage the Tribunal to
complete its work expeditiously by the targeted date.
We acknowledge the judges' efforts in identifying
further measures to expedite the pending cases, as
well as overall efforts to ensure the smooth transfer
of functions to the Residual Mechanism in accordance
with resolution 1966 (2010).

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains dedicated to the
fight against impunity. Our full and steady cooperation
with the ICTY throughout the years reflects that
dedication and will continue with the Mechanism.
We are pleased to see that the Mechanism is in full
command of its designated operations. We trust that it
will continue to effectively carry out its work. Fighting
impunity at the domestic level is a prerequisite for
achieving national reconciliation and long-term
stability in a country and the region. The completion of
the ICTY mandate does not mean the end of the fight
against impunity in my country. We remain committed
to strengthening the national justice system at all
levels in order to bring to justice persons responsible
for atrocity crimes. Our national war crimes strategy
has improved the consistency of judicial practices
throughout the entire country at all levels, thereby
ensuring the protection and support of victims and
witnesses.

The implementation of a national strategy for
processing war crimes, regardless of the national or
religious origin of the perpetrators and victims, is of
crucial importance to a complex, multinational State.
During the reporting period, efficiency in war crimes
cases prosecutions at all levels steadily increased
and, as noted in the Prosecutor's assessments, further
progress has been made by the Prosecutor's Office
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in resolving outstanding
category 2 cases and in issuing important indictments.
However, as of 1 January there are 335 cases pending
in the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The implementation of the national war crimes
strategy has also played an important role in post-
conflict reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the support of the European Union in the
implementation of the strategy and the support of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Development Programme,
particularly in connection with witness protection
activities and providing appropriate assistance and
support to victims. In September 2015, the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted ajustice
sector reform strategy for the period 2014 to 2018. The
strategy will contribute to the long-term reinforcement
of the rule of law and further consolidate the judicial
system, including measures to improve judicial
independence and efficiency.

As noted by the ICTY Prosecutor, regional
cooperation has significantly advanced over the
past decade through the dedicated efforts of judicial
officials, but more political will and support is now
needed to make accountability a regional issue and
advance solutions to current challenges. Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains committed to the promotion of
stronger and more coordinated regional cooperation,
and the best possible continuation of the work of the
Tribunal and preservation of its legacy. In our joint
efforts in delivering justice for numerous victims of our
region lies the true strength of reconciliation.

The successful completion of the Tribunals'
mandates will mark the end of one historic chapter,
changing the landscape of international criminal justice
forever. But our work in fighting impunity does not stop
there; we must reconfirm our strongest commitment
to accountability and the advancement of justice,
and deliver on that commitment without selectivity
or hesitation. That is the best possible tribute to the
groundbreaking achievements of those two institutions.

The meeting rose at] p.m.
