Mr. Konishi (Japan): Permit me at the outset to offer
my congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of April. Please be assured that
Japan stands ready to extend its full support as you
continue to lead the work of the Council. I also wish to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
representative of the Republic of Botswana, for the
excellent manner in which he guided the Council's business
during the month of March.

Japan has been closely following recent developments
in Afghanistan. In the light of information it has received
from the survey teams it dispatched to the country and from
other sources, it is particularly concerned by the human
suffering resulting from the ongoing fighting, and by the
danger that the civil war could spill over and threaten the
stability of the entire region.

My Government shares the views contained in the
Secretary-General' s recent report to the General Assembly
(A/50/908). Japan believes that the conflict should be
resolved through the framework of the United Nations,
and it continues to support the Organization's mediation
efforts to help bring lasting stability to Afghanistan and
to the region.

It should be stressed, however, that the destiny of
Afghanistan can only be determined by the Afghan people
themselves. It is they who must decide on the elements to
be included in a peace settlement, such as the form which
their future government is to take and the means for
ensuring domestic security.

The parties in conflict must lay down their arms and
go to the negotiating table as early as possible. As a
country that maintains good yet neutral relations with
those parties, Japan believes it can play a useful role in
helping to build the necessary confidence among them to
create an environment conducive to the achievement of
peace. Specifically, Japan is in a position to facilitate
talks between the United Nations and the various Afghan
parties as well as between the United Nations and the
neighbouring countries. On various occasions, the parties
have expressed to Japan their strong hope that the United
Nations will play a more active role to achieve peace in
Afghanistan, and that Japan will further contribute to
efforts for a political settlement.

The Government of Japan thus intends to develop its
contacts with the parties concerned. In addition, a
Government mission is now holding talks with a number
of concerned countries. Japan also hopes to send a
political officer to work for the United Nations Special
Mission when an understanding is fully reached with the
Secretariat on the modus operandi for that officer.

Japan would like to call attention to the View
expressed in the Secretary-General's report that arms
exports and other forms of foreign interference are
prolonging the civil war. It is essential that the countries
concerned halt such assistance immediately and rally
behind the United Nations peace efforts. The Secretary-
General's proposal that an international conference be
convened to address this problem as an integral part of
the overall Afghanistan problem is worthy of
consideration.

 
In this context, my Government has followed with
interest the question of an arms embargo against
Afghanistan. Japan wishes to contribute as much as possible
to efforts within the framework of the United Nations in
such a direction, keeping in mind that before any decisions
on concrete measures are taken, the efficacy of such
measures would require careful study.

