Mr. Heller (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Chairmen of the three subsidiary organs of the Security
Council established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) concerning
counter-terrorism, I should like to update the Security
Council on ongoing cooperation among the
Committees and their groups of experts. Taking into
account the fact that the full statement of my briefing
has been distributed to members of the Council, I shall
deliver a summarized version.

During the past six months, the cooperation
among the Committees and their respective groups of
experts has grown, pursuant to the requests made by
the Security Council in recent resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1805 (2008), 1810 (2008) and 1904 (2009).
The three Committees attach great importance to
coordination and cooperation among their groups of
experts, namely, the Monitoring Team, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the experts of the 1540 Committee. In that context,
I also wish to recall that cooperation and coordination
have been facilitated through the joint use of facilities
by the experts in the framework of the Capital Master
Plan, as requested by the Security Council in resolution
1904 (2009).

The three expert groups have continued to
implement the common strategy on dealing with non- or
late-reporting States through exchanges of information
and joint visits, when appropriate, and in assisting
Member States in submitting their responses to the three
Committees on their implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Since the most recent
briefing, the three expert groups have invited one
10-35734
another to relevant workshops. Those workshops
continue to provide an excellent opportunity for the
three expert groups to assist Member States in
understanding the differing but complementary roles
and mandates of the three Committees. They also enable
the expert groups to exchange information on a regular
basis with national counter-terrorism contacts and
coordinators.

CTED has made its list of national coordinators
available to the other two expert groups. Furthermore,
CTED and the 1267 Monitoring Team have made a
reciprocal arrangement for access to their electronic
databases and are preparing an extension arrangement
to the 1540 experts group. The Monitoring Team has
already provided access to its database to the 1540
experts. In addition, the 1540 legislative databases and
the information from matrices are already available on
the official website. CTED has also begun sharing the
monthly reports of its Executive Director with the
other two expert groups.

With respect to new themes for a common
strategy among the three groups, they have prepared a
common paper focusing on the enhancement of
cooperation with selected intergovernmental
organizations. Consultations are ongoing to finalize the
modalities of a common approach towards relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations. In
the meanwhile, the three expert groups have continued
their cooperation with the Pacific Islands Forum, which
is one of the four organizations mentioned in the
common paper. Meetings between the expert groups
and the permanent missions of the Forum have
continued to deepen the mutual understanding and
cooperation between the States members of the Forum
and the experts of the three Committees.

The expert groups continue to coordinate their
visits to Member States, explore whether these could
be conducted jointly, and coordinate their participation
at relevant conferences. When an expert group does not
participate in a visit, information on the Member State
that is to be visited is exchanged. In addition, the three
expert groups also share their reports on their visits
whenever possible. Since the last joint briefing,
Monitoring Team members have participated in two
Counter-Terrorism Committee visits, for a total of 17
joint trips.

The three expert groups also continue to
coordinate their work within the framework of the
10-35734

Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF). The expert groups contribute to the work of
several CTITF working groups, and the Monitoring
Team and CTED have assumed leading functions. In
this regard, a joint meeting was held between the three
expert groups and the CTITF on 7 April to discuss
common issues and to identify other areas that could be
benefit from their respective areas of expertise and
capacity within the United Nations system as partners
in a joint effort to assist Member States to better
implement the respective resolutions pertaining to their
work. It was also agreed that the CTITF could provide
a further link to relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations.

In addition to the aforementioned activities,
regular meetings are held between the expert groups in
New York. Moreover, Counter-Terrorism Committee
regularly invites the Monitoring Team, the 1540
Committee experts, CTITF and the relevant United
Nations offices to its thematic briefings in the
framework of its official meetings. Recently, the
coordinator of the 1540 working group on cooperation
with international organizations, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the 1267 Committee also invited the
Monitoring Team, the CTED and the CTITF to attend a
briefing by the International Atomic Energy Agency
during the informal consultations of the working

group.

An updated comparative table was issued at
previous briefings to highlight the main aspects of the
respective mandates and areas of competence of the
three Committees and their expert groups. The table
has proved to be a useful tool for Member States by
helping them to better understand the specificities and
complementarities of our work. The comparative table
has been further updated and posted on our respective
websites and will be distributed today.

Terrorism and the participation of non-State
actors in the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction continue to threaten international peace and
security. Cooperation is a crucial element in the efforts
to counter the threat of terrorism, including that from
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.

The three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and their respective expert groups are
committed to continuing to cooperate and to coordinate
their work, within their respective mandates, in order
to contribute to an effective and efficient approach to
3
this issue in the wider United Nations framework and
as part of the broader efforts of the international
community. In this respect, the Committees look
forward to receiving further guidance from the Council
in order better to coordinate their counter-terrorism
efforts.

