Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Let me express our deep
appreciation for your leadership, Sir, in driving the
water, peace and security agenda, both in the Security
Council and in other forums. Building on the Arria
Formula meeting you hosted in April, today's meeting
provides us with a very welcome opportunity to
consider the impact of water on peace and security.
Water impacts every major strand of life, from
agriculture and energy to transportation and health
care. The world is experiencing a surge of water-related
crises, and the World Economic Forum rated water
crises as the top global risk for the next 10 years. A
rapidly growing global population and a changing
climate threaten to skew the dynamics of supply and
demand of the single-most important resource we have,
and in ways we have never faced before. Two-thirds of
the world's population could be living in water-stressed
conditions by 2025.

Water scarcity affects security and strikes
disproportionately at the most vulnerable and the
poorest. It particularly affects security in fragile
settings where governance may be weak and
institutional capacity to deal with crises is low. We
witness this in places such as in the Sahel region and
around Lake Chad, where drought, land degradation
and desertification lead to resource scarcity and food
insecurity, generating conditions that risk leading to
competition, tension and conflict.

Against the increasing threat that a lack of access
to water can fuel conflict and threaten peace, Sweden
has made efforts to build experience in what we call
water diplomacy. The Stockholm International Water
Institute manages the Shared Waters Partnership,
which facilitates transboundary water management. We
are also host of the UNESCO International Centre for
Water Cooperation, which supports policy makers and
other practitioners in reducing conflict around water.

Our work on water diplomacy has shown that while
the threat of violence over water is real, water also
offers opportunities as a source of cooperation. There
are examples where water has even become a driver
of conflict resolution. Most of the world's freshwater
resources come from rivers, lakes and aquifers that are
transboundary by nature. While that is a challenge,
research on transboundary water management
demonstrates the many cases where States tend to
collaborate rather than enter into violent disputes over
shared waters. I think your country, Mr. President,
provides a very good example of reaching out to one's
neighbours to work constructively, as stated earlier by
the Secretary-General.

Cooperation over shared waters can have a far-
reaching positive impact and build trust far beyond the
issue of managing a shared resource. Institutionalizing
mechanisms for cooperation over shared water is a
long-term strategy for sustaining peace and a smart
investment in times of increasing pressures from
population growth, urbanization and climate change.

But to turn water into an opportunity for
cooperation, we need transparent and efficient
mechanism for information-sharing, participation
and dispute settlement. We need smarter and more
integrated water-management approaches. We need to
break down silos and put new incentives in place. We
need to be more creative in the use of technology. And
we need stronger partnerships.

Today's debate is another reminder of the strong links
between security and development. The implementation
of Agenda 2030 is also crucial in preventing conflict.
The importance of water for sustainable development is
highlighted in several of our common goals, not least
in Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6, on water,
and SDG 14, on oceans and seas. Sweden is a strong
proponent of the United Nations Conference to Support
the Implementation of SDG 14, which will take place
here in New York in June 2017, to be co-hosted by the
Governments of Fiji and Sweden.

