Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): I thank the
Secretary-General for being at this meeting and for his
commitment to peacekeeping. I also thank Chairperson
Mahamat for his briefing, and I have to tell Ms. Toure
that her advocacy and passion and the way she fights
for the people is to be admired. It is inspiring, but it is
to be listened to. She spoke of many truths today, and I
think that we need to make sure that when those truths
are spoken, they are acknowledged. It takes courage
to say those truths and we should not let that courage
fall by the wayside. We need to honour that courage by
responding, and so I thank her for her honesty. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for coming
to preside over this important meeting on the future of
United Nations peacekeeping.

Around the world, the Blue Helmet is the most
instantly recognizable symbol of this Organization's
mission. We send peacekeepers to take on some of the
world's toughest challenges: protecting defenceless
civilians, separating warring parties and helping to
build State institutions where the rule of law is nowhere
to be found. The Charter of the United Nations makes
no mention of peacekeeping. No one thought of those
kinds of missions when the Security Council first
met, but when given an appropriate mandate and when
properly managed and equipped, no one doubts that
those missions can play an essential role in supporting
peace and saving lives. That is why peacekeeping
reform remains a top priority for the United States.
When I arrived here, we laid out a few principles
that continue to guide our approach. Peacekeeping
missions need to support political solutions. They need
host country cooperation. Mandates must be realistic
and achievable. Missions need to have an exit strategy.
And we need to be willing to change mandates when
things are not working. Those principles do not reflect
the narrow interest of a single Member State, but rather
we should all agree that they can improve peacekeeping
across the board.

Every time the United States has looked at a
peacekeeping mandate, we have gone back to those
principles. We believe that missions are changing for the
better. Missions are becoming more effective and more
efficient. We reconfigured the Mission in Haiti to focus
on police and the rule of law. We changed the mission
in Darfur and downsized it to reflect current political
and security realities. We have supported responsible
drawdowns of peacekeeping missions, most recently
in Liberia, while pushing peacekeepers in Lebanon to
actually use all of their mandated authorities to be more
effective in carrying out their tasks.

Yet, we still have a lot to do. A prime example is
in Mali, where the Mission struggles to protect itself
from terrorist attacks that have made that Mission the
most dangerous peacekeeping assignment in the world.
We have a responsibility to make that mandate realistic
and achievable. However, when a mandate is no longer
realistic or achievable, we need to change it and focus
on addressing the most pressing priorities. When a
Government stands in the way of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission, we need to put real pressure on
the Government to change course. When a mission no
longer support a political solution, we need to get the
parties back to the table or ask ourselves: Should the
mission be there at all?

The United States strongly believes that we need
robust performance standards and data-driven analysis
on the performance of peacekeepers. The United States
encourages the Secretariat to develop and implement a
comprehensive performance policy that identifies clear
standards, evaluates the performance of all personnel
and includes measures to ensure accountability when
those standards fall short. We need to develop a culture
of performance when it comes to the peacekeeping
operations at the United Nations. The people the United
Nations serves deserve to know that when Blue Helmets
arrive, they are qualified, appropriately equipped and
ready to perform their duty.
As part of that effort, we must intensify our
work to eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping. The Secretary-General took positive
action to address abuses in the Central African Republic,
but that behaviour is still happening. There can be
no excuses. We encourage the full use of resolution
2272 (2016) authorities to end the culture of impunity,
including in responding to allegations concerning the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan. All
Member States need to support the Secretary-General
when he takes action to make sure that peacekeepers
meet the highest standards of conduct.

Resources are important for peacekeeping, of
course. The United States has long been the largest
financial contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
by far. That will not change, but peacekeeping is a
shared responsibility. With shared responsibility comes
shared burdens and shared cost. One country should
not shoulder more than one quarter of the United
Nations peacekeeping budget, and we look forward
to a more equitable distribution of the budget among
Member States.

Moving forward, the United States will not pay more
than 25 per cent of the peacekeeping budget. That is a
cap required by United States law. We pledge to work
with Member States and the Organization to ensure we
make that adjustment in a fair and sensible manner that
protects United Nations peacekeeping. All of us have
a role to play and all of us must step up. The Security
Council, the Secretariat, regional organizations, such
as the African Union, troop- and police-contributors
and host Governments have to work together.
As we move forward, we need to always remember
why we deploy peacekeeping missions in the first place.
We send peacekeepers to the front line to help those
who have been victims of war and who have often
experienced unimaginable atrocities. If we think about
the people whom peacekeepers are meant to serve and
keep them at the forefront of our minds, none of us
should hesitate to do our part to make peacekeeping as
effective as it can be.

