Mr. Butagira (Uganda): In keeping with your
advice, Mr. President, my statement will be circulated
and I will try to brief, giving only a summary of my
text.
I would like first of all to thank Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and the
Special Representative Hedi Annabi for their
thoughtful remarks.

As we have heard, the number and scope of
United Nations peace operations are approaching what
may be their highest levels ever, improving prospects
for conflict resolution but stretching the capacities of
the system.

Peacekeeping has changed dramatically over the
past two decades. The patrolling of static ceasefire
lines, which was once the norm, is no more; now it is
almost the exception. United Nations peacekeepers are
regularly charged with the responsibility not only of
protecting themselves, but in many cases, such as the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, of also protecting
innocent civilians in their areas of operation. As new
and peacekeeping missions are reviewed, it is therefore
imperative that they be properly trained, equipped and
ready to succeed.

In the immediate wake of the cold war, the
international community supported peacekeeping and
peacemaking initiatives around the world, including in
Africa. That brought some significant successes.
However, the inability of the United Nations to restore
peace in Somalia in the 1990s, culminating in the
Security Council's unprecedented decision to withdraw
from the country before completing its mission, clearly
dampened international support for conflict
intervention and precipitated a rapid retreat by the
international community from peacekeeping
worldwide. One tragic consequence acknowledged by
former Secretary-General Kofi Annan was the failure
of the international community, including the United
Nations, to intervene in order to prevent genocide in
Rwanda. The perception of the Organization's near
indifference by the international community over
Rwanda left a poisonous legacy that continues to
undermine confidence in the United Nations
throughout the continent.

But in any consideration of a peacekeeping
operation, there is a need for a clear understanding of
the prevailing situation in the country. That must be
studied well before designing mandates. This requires a
clear analysis of the situation on the ground. Clear and
measurable benchmarks should be set in the light of the
problems on the ground. Establishing the criteria for
determining when they are met is important. In
addition to exit strategies, entrance strategies also must
be well elaborated. It should be understood that a
conflict can flare up upon the departure of the
peacekeeping force if it leaves too soon, amounting to
the abandonment of a fragile peace. Exit conditions,
rather than the setting of dates for departure, are
critical.

There is no doubt that the international
community is slowly learning some of the lessons of
the major tragedies of the past. But we still find
ourselves engaged in some of the old debates. In a
crisis situation, the lingering questions remain. Do we
decide to call the attention of the world to the crisis
and bring the assets to that crisis, risking that we will
not have enough assets and that the crisis could turn
into a United Nations debacle, possibly damaging the
credibility of peacekeeping for years to come because
we are unsure of final support levels throughout every
step of the road? Or do we look the other way, thinking
that maybe the storm will blow away, that it will not be
a disaster and that it will go away without United
Nations involvement? That is the key dilemma of
peacekeeping, and we have to face it head on.

Once conflicts have ended, it is vital to undertake
actions to consolidate peace and prevent the recurrence
of armed confrontation. That requires not only
diplomatic and military action, but also measures
within an integrated peacebuilding effort to tackle the
various factors which have caused or are causing
threats of conflict. The crucial underlying need in post-
conflict peacebuilding situations is the security of
ordinary people in the form of real peace and access to
basic social facilities. That has been stressed by a
number of speakers. Such efforts must be timely,
multifaceted and adequately financed, and there must
be high-level strategic and administrative coordination
among a large number of actors.

Finally, before I conclude, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and all my colleagues for the very kind
words spoken about me. This being my last day and
meeting in the Council, I feel very nostalgic in saying
farewell to all my colleagues. It has been a pleasure
and great delight working with all of them. I appreciate
the support and cooperation that I have received from
all members of the Council within this brief period. I
trust that the same support will be extended to my
successors.
