Mr. Inderfurth (United States): The widespread use
of land-mines is one of the most critical challenges facing
the international community today and tomorrow. In
addition to the thousands of civilian lives that land-mines
take every year - and the thousands more injured -
they also cripple important international peace-keeping
operations and humanitarian relief actions.

Despite efforts by the United States and many of the
countries represented here today, the anti-personnel land-
mine problem is getting worse. The simple fact is that far
more land-mines are deployed in conflicts worldwide
every year than are removed by mine clearance personnel.
We estimate that some 64 countries are affected by the
worldwide land-mine crisis, littered with up to 110

 

million of these weapons. Approximately half of these -
about 65 million mines - have been laid since 1978.

These mines remaining deadly and active long after
conflicts cease, kill or maim an estimated 500 people,
mostly innocent civilians, per week - 26,000 people every
year.

The burden imposed by the proliferation and
indiscriminate use of land-mines is beyond calculation. In
the last several years the nature of the land-mine problem
has changed dramatically. Land-mines have become the
weapon of choice for many government and insurgent
groups: they are cheap, easy to manufacture and use,
difficult to detect and expensive and dangerous to remove.
They can be used as weapons of terror against civilian
populations to generate fear, inhibit refugee return, disrupt
economic reconstruction and, as we will discuss today,
hinder peace-keeping operations.

Land-mines are a major impediment to peace-keeping
operations in every part of the world. Land-mines are often
the greatest physical danger the peace-keepers face. Parties
in conflict often use land-mines to hinder the peace process
by effectively blocking the movement of people and
resources.

Let me now focus on three cases where land-mines
have directly hindered peace-keeping operations.

First, in Bosnia, a country with an estimated 2 million
to 3 million mines, United Nations peace-keeping missions
sustained more than 200 land-mine casualties, including 20
deaths since 1992. Bosnia ranks with the most heavily
mined countries in the world - Afghanistan, Angola,
Cambodia and Mozambique. The uncertainty about the
location of the mines in Bosnia denies much of the country
to civilian use. Peace-keepers have been required to clear
mines as part of their mission, thus diverting scarce
resources from other mandated tasks. Mines impeded
United Nations patrols and delayed or halted humanitarian
relief operations. The Implementation Force of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (IFOR) has been a victim as
well. To date, IFOR personnel have been involved in 47
mine incidents, resulting in 55 casualties, including 10
deaths and 45 wounded. The first United States casualty in
IFOR was the victim of a land-mine.

Secondly, in Angola, on 27 July two Zimbabwean
peace-keepers were killed and four were injured when their
truck ran over a land-mine. The peace-keepers were
returning from the opening of a UNITA site in the Lunda
North province. More broadly, the deployment of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) was delayed for months as United
Nations peace-keepers had to secure the key basing and
patrolling areas for the bulk of the forces.

Angola has paid a terrible price because of the threat
posed by land-mines: 70,000 amputees, 300,000 refugees,
and over 10 million unexploded land-mines. In addition
to peace-keeping costs, the humanitarian and social costs
to Angola will be staggering as Angolans attempt to
remove mines and repair their society. As land-mines
continue to take their tragic toll even after the conflict has
been resolved, they may well be the last, most tragic
legacy of Angola's decades of strife. We applaud the fact
that both the Government of Angola and UNITA have
agreed to begin destroying their stockpiles of land-mines.

Thirdly, in Georgia, the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) has literally been stopped
dead in its tracks. UMOMIG is mandated to monitor and
verify the cease-fire in the conflict in Georgia through
observation and patrolling. But UNOMIG is not patrolling
in the most critical regions due to the threat of land-
mines. On 9 March, a UNOMIG patrol vehicle drove onto
an anti-tank mine in the Gali sector, instantly killing the
driver, a military observer from Bangladesh. The other
passengers, a Hungarian military observer and a local
interpreter, were also injured. Other mine incidents were
narrowly averted. Mines have also killed local civilians
and members of the peace-keeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).

We do not know who is laying the mines, but it is
clear that they are people who prefer conflict and death to
a peaceful resolution. Missions under Chapter VI of the
United Nations Charter, such as UNOMIG, are unarmed
and depend for their security on the good faith of the
parties. The United Nations is taking steps to counter the
land-mine threat at enormous expense in spite of its
limited resources.

But the mines which interfere with the UNOMIG
and CIS peace-keeping effort is only a small part of the
story. Mines have also been laid in areas where they
threaten civilians and block peaceful economic activity.
But humanitarian demining cannot even begin until the
conflict is fully resolved. We encourage the Department
of Political Affairs (DPA) and the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs (DHA), as well as the Georgians,
the Abkhaz and other neighbours, to plan for the day
when they can begin that other demining job.

 

It is all too common that combatants do not remove
land-mines after a conflict ends. They are left for civilian
populations and peace-keepers to deal with. Although
international law now requires minefield recording and
measures to protect civilians in internal as well as
international conflicts, most mine-plagued countries are not
party to Protocol II of the Convention on Conventional
Weapons (CCW).

The United States, joining with others in the
international community, has taken a leading role in
conducting demining efforts worldwide. Since 1993, the
United States Government has worked with non-
governmental organizations and private voluntary
organizations, supported United Nations activities carried
out by the Department of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme and the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), and encouraged indigenous
mine-clearance centres to develop demining assistance
programmes. President Clinton's recently announced land-
mine policy directs the United States to expand its current
humanitarian demining programme and begin work on
developing new technologies to aid in land-mine detection
and removal.

The United States has spent approximately $91 million
from 1993 to the present on mine awareness and demining
training programmes in 14 countries with serious land-mine
problems, including, most recently, Bosnia. In June of this
year, President Clinton announced a new United States
initiative in Bosnia, committing up to $15 million to
develop an indigenous demining capability. In addition to
assisting peace-keeping operations there, the ultimate goal
is to give the Bosnians the skills and equipment to locate
and destroy the mines themselves. At the centre of the
strategy is the headquarters, a Mine Action Centre,
designed to coordinate all mine-clearance, mine-awareness,
and mine-data-gathering activities in Bosnia. Operating
temporarily under a United Nations mandate, the Mine
Action Centre and three regional offices will eventually
become an entity of the post-election Bosnian Government.

The United States provided $3.5 million to establish
the Centre and will contribute up to $15 million towards
continuing demining operations during fiscal year 1997.
This American effort is in conjunction with those of the
United Nations, the High Representative, the World Bank,
the European Union, NATO's IFOR and other nations to
establish a sustainable demining programme in Bosnia.
Together, all these groups are combining resources,
personnel and equipment to fund the longer-term mine-
clearance operations and training of Bosnian deminers.

In 1997 the United States Government plans to
provide approximately $50 million for research and
development and demining assistance programmes. These
programmes will assist humanitarian programmes and
peace-keeping operations in several countries. Among the
recipients are Afghanistan, Angola, Bosnia, Cambodia,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Jordan, Laos, Mozambique, Namibia,
Rwanda, and a regional Central American programme
administered through the Organization of American States
and the Inter-American Defence Board for Costa Rica,
Honduras and Nicaragua.

Demining assistance by the international community
is critical to addressing the land-mine crisis. But it is not
enough. These weapons must be banned. The United
States has been and will continue to be a leader in the
fight to eliminate anti-personnel land-mines.

In September 1994, President Clinton, addressing the
General Assembly, called for the eventual elimination of
anti-personnel land-mines and asked nations to join us in
concluding an agreement to reduce their number and
availability. He also called for Member States to adopt
export moratoria on land-mines - an effort that 32
nations have now joined.

The President took another major step towards that
goal by announcing on 16 May that

"the United States will aggressively pursue an
international agreement to ban the use, stockpiling,
production and transfer of anti-personnel land-mines,
with a View to completing the negotiation as soon as
possible."

The United States is dedicated to eliminating these
weapons, while taking into account our global
responsibilities and concern for the safety of our soldiers.

A global anti-personnel land-mine ban can happen
only with the leadership of all Security Council members
and support from Member States. We are committed to
initiating an international negotiation towards that end and
are now consulting with other States on what would be
the best forum for negotiations. We also intend to propose
a resolution this fall at the fifty-first session of the
General Assembly, urging States to begin work on
negotiating an international agreement to achieve a
worldwide ban, and we hope the United States can count
on the support of all Governments in this forum.

 

Finally, let me take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to the German presidency of the Security
Council this month for convening this important meeting on
such a vital subject. May I also express my Government's
congratulations to the German Government for its seven-
point programme on anti-personnel mines presented by
Foreign Minister Kinkel on 18 July. In dealing with the
worldwide land-mine crisis, every step, by all of us
speaking here today, draws us that much closer to our
goal - a world free of the terrible threat posed by anti-
personnel land-mines.

