Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): Since this is the first time I
am addressing the Security Council under your
presidency, Sir, let me congratulate you on the
assumption of your high office. Under your talented and
able guidance, the Council has been able successfully to
fulfil its responsibilities during the current month.

I would also like to take this opportunity to express
my admiration for your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Germany, for the excellent manner in
which he conducted the affairs of the Council.

It is with a sense of outrage and concern that the
Government of Pakistan views the recent action taken by
the Israeli Government in opening an entrance to the
tunnel extending under the western wall of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and the provocative attempts to permit the
observance of Jewish religious rites in the holy sanctuary
of Al-Haram al-Sharif. We have been equally shocked to
learn about the indiscriminate shooting by Israeli armed
forces of civilian Palestinian demonstrators, resulting in

 

an alarming number of casualties. Pakistan strongly
condemns all these actions.

The special significance of the Holy City of Al-Quds
al-Sharif for the international community in general and the
Islamic Ummah, in particular, requires no further
elaboration. These Israeli measures, which are aimed at
altering the legal status and demographic composition of
Jerusalem, are illegal and invalid.

These provocative Israeli actions have dashed the
hopes that the peace process would lead to the early
exercise by the Palestinian people of its right to self-
determination through the establishment of an independent
homeland. This required the complete withdrawal by the
Israeli authorities from all the occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories, including the Holy City of Al-Quds
al-Sharif.

Pakistan's support for the just struggle for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people is well known.
We have consistently stated that Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) continue to provide
a viable and just framework for a durable and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question.
It is imperative that the peace process, arrived at
through bold and courageous initiatives, should not
collapse. We fully share the expectations of the
international community that there should be no attempt to
derail the implementation of the agreements and accords
concluded so far. The provisions of these agreements and
accords must be sincerely complied with, both in letter and
in spirit. We hope that the new Israeli leadership in Israel
will concede to the realities on the ground and resolve all
pending issues with the Palestinian national Authority,
including the reversal of these recent alarming actions. We
strongly urge the demonstration of the requisite flexibility
and accommodation, as well as a sincere commitment to the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace that
will ensure security and stability in the Middle East.

The Government and the people of Pakistan are deeply
concerned at these latest actions by the Israeli authorities,
which are seriously undermining the peace process. It urges
the Security Council to uphold the just position taken by
the Palestinians on the issue of Jerusalem, a position which
was based on international law and justice. We also call
upon the Council not only to take urgent measures to
redress the current grave situation, as it imperils the peace
of the holy city of Al-Quds al-Sharif, but also to prevent
the further deterioration of the situation. We firmly believe
that the Council has the duty to call upon the Israeli
authorities immediately to end these unjust actions and to
desist from taking similar measures in future.

We are confident that the Security Council is
conscious of the importance that is attached to Al-Quds
al-Sharif by the entire Muslim world and of the dangers
inherent in allowing the prevailing resentment to fester.

