Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Permit me at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation has full knowledge of your diplomatic skills
and leadership qualities and is therefore assured that, with
you as President, the work of the Council is indeed in
capable hands. May I also take this opportunity to extend
our felicitations to your predecessor, Ambassador
Njuguna Mahugu of Kenya, for his outstanding leadership
and contributions to the work of the Council during the
month of February.

'My' delegation is deeply concerned over Israel's
decision on 26 February 1997 to pursue its unlawful
policy of establishing settlements in the Holy City of
Jerusalem. This decision to build new settlements in J abal
Abu Ghneim in Jerusalem represents the latest brazen
attempt at preempting the outcome of negotiations on
final status by changing the legal status and demographic
composition of Jerusalem. Over the years, we have
chronicled a series of Israeli policies and practices -
most recently, the decision to build another new
settlement in the Ras al-Amud region-and the opening of
the tunnel located within the Harem al-Shatif -- all of
which are aimed at creating new facts on the ground to
the detriment not only of the interests of the Palestinian
people, but also of the very peace process itself.

These actions were unacceptable then, are
unacceptable now and will be unacceptable in the future.
They are in clear violation of Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and incompatible with the
Declaration of Principles, subsequent agreements, both in
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption l)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

 

letter and in spirit, and indeed with generally accepted
principles of international law.

This latest negative development is particularly
unfortunate against the backdrop of recent signs that the
peace process has returned to its proper course despite
Israeli procrastination and attempts at reinterpreting
agreements already reached. This is fully demonstrated by
the agreement reached earlier this year on the complex
issue of Israeli withdrawal from Hebron. However, all of
this, not least of which is the mutual trust and confidence
which have assiduously been built over the past four years,
is being placed in jeopardy by Israel.

Furthermore, we are concerned that the arbitrary acts
by Israel may provoke a new wave of Palestinian anger and
frustration, with unpredictable consequences. Yet we should .
be clear where the onus of responsibility lies. The
Government of Israel cannot Shirk its responsibility for the
consequences emanating from its ill-conceived policies and
practices.

In this regard, the Islamic Group of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference (OIC) in New York, at its
meeting held on 3 March 1997, issued a communique in
which it calls on the Security Council, inter alia, to take
urgent steps to ensure that the Government of Israel
reverses its decision and renounces any settlement activity
in all occupied Arab territories, in particular East Jerusalem.
My delegation is therefore hopeful that our deliberations
today will lead to the adoption by the Council of concrete
measures to reverse these latest Israeli transgressions in the
occupied territories, as called for by the Islamic Group and
the Group of Arab States.

The peace process in the Middle East has raised hopes
for a new era of peace, stability and prosperity for the
peoples of the region, including the long-suffering
Palestinian people. Indonesia has long stood firm on the
principles of respect for the rights of the Palestinians and
their claim to sovereignty over their land. The peace
agreements signed by Israel and the Palestinians have been
the stepping stones to a new level of relations between the
peoples of Israel and Palestine. The peace process was to
mean that differences could be worked out through
negotiations and that the interests and needs of both parties
would be respected. Unilateral Israeli actions were to be
part of the past and violence would subside. Clearly,
however, challenges abound in the realization of such a
vision.

Given the provocative measures taken by Israel, my
delegation would like to commend the Palestinian
Authority for encouraging restraint and opting for
peaceful methods to resolve the current crisis. Moderation
should be a key word while the parties navigate the
difficult waters of establishing peace in the Middle East
base on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978). Actions that could jeopardize this
fragile process must be avoided and the endeavours for
peace must be madeirreversible.

The gains attained thus far in the peace process are
indeed of historic significance. It is now up to Israel
scrupulously to implement the provisions of the various
agreements reached with the Palestinians. The recent
agreement on Hebron should be followed by negotiations
on other contentious issues, most notably the future status
of Jerusalem, the question of settlements, refugees and
borders, as well as the final status of the occupied
territories.

Through peace, the Middle East has the potential for
great transformation, both economically and politically.
The peace process and the relevant agreements that have
been accepted by both parties must be implemented in
their entirety with consistency and fairness, not
selectively, sporadically and conditionally.

