Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General David Shearer for his sobering briefing but
also for the very energetic way with which he has begun
his mission under difficult circumstances. I would also
like to thank the representative of Senegal for his strong
leadership at the helm of the Committee established
pursuant to 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.

As many colleagues have mentioned this morning,
it was just over a month ago that the Security Council
met at the ministerial level (see S/PV.7906) to adopt a
presidential statement on South Sudan (S/PRST/2017/4).
We called for an end to the violence, for increased
humanitarian access, for the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) to be able
to do its work, and for support for implementation of
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. Two days later, on 25 March,
the Heads of State of countries members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
issued a communique deciding that all humanitarian
corridors should be immediately opened.

The IGAD extraordinary summit further declared
that the Government of South Sudan had agreed to
announce a unilateral ceasefire. In the month since
then, however, the parties have failed to deliver on even
one of these commitments and benchmarks. Instead,
the political, security and humanitarian situation in
South Sudan has continued to deteriorate, as we heard
this morning. Millions are starving, and millions more
are displaced either inside or outside the country.
Continued fighting and reports of increased ethnically
motivated violence is of deep concern. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, this is a
man-made disaster.

Attacks against civilians and reports of high levels
of sexual and gender-based Violence in Wau, Pajok and
Malakal are appalling. Yet in the face of the growing
desperation and suffering of the people, we continue to
see the denial of access for humanitarian actors and a
failure to take the steps needed to end conflict and build
peace. While the belligerents have continued their war
of attrition, they must by now realize that only a political
solution can resolve the conflict. Immediate adherence
to the ceasefire by all parties is critically needed to
allow for a meaningful political process. Such a process
should be closely supported by the United Nations, the
African Union and IGAD and aimed at revitalizing a
comprehensive and inclusive political dialogue, always
with the full and effective participation of women.

The innocent civilians trapped in the nightmare
in South Sudan cannot wait. While efforts to find a
political solution continue, there is a need to urgently
address the humanitarian situation to avoid catastrophic
consequences. Humanitarians must be able to do
their job. It is unacceptable that South Sudan remain
one of the most dangerous countries in the world for
humanitarian workers. We have just heard this morning
of the World Food Programme as being just the latest
entity to experience unacceptable obstacles to its work.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2017/224)
indicates that the Government's procedures change
regularly and that denials or delays in clearance appear to
be systematic rather than incidental. Any manipulation
of access to humanitarian aid for the civilian population
is inexcusable and must end. We call on all parties to
the conflict to uphold humanitarian principles and meet
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
The rapid, safe and unhindered delivery of relief across
South Sudan must be ensured.

Those responsible for human rights violations
and abuses must be identified and held accountable.
Accountability can be an effective deterrent of atrocity
crimes. We therefore encourage the President of the
Security Council to take forward the Panel of Experts'
proposal that we heard about this morning that the
Council write to the President of the Human Rights
Council and to the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to request that the Commission on Human
Rights in South Sudan receive the full legal and forensic
support needed to carry out its work.

It is essential that the Council stands united on the
situation in South Sudan, and there is no reason why we
should not. We must support further intensified efforts
by the African Union High Representative, former
President Konare, and by the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission Chairperson, former President
Mogae. We should also coordinate closely with regional
leaders to use their influence over the parties.

The region has indeed a critical role to play, but this
does not absolve the Security Council and the United
Nations of its responsibilities. We therefore welcome
the leadership shown by Secretary-General Guterres
and encourage him to continue to actively engage
on South Sudan, as many others have said here this
morning, using his good offices and bringing the United
Nations system together. Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Shearer and the United Nations
Special Envoy for the region, Nicholas Haysom, have
particularly important roles in these efforts and deserve
our strongest support.

The longer this conflict is allowed to continue, with
the deepening of ethnic hatred and fragmentation in
South Sudanese society by the day, the harder the road
for recovery, reconciliation and peace will be. We must
therefore make every possible effort to find a way to
urgently to break this spiral of violence.

