Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation would like to thank the
French presidency of the Security Council for July for
its initiative of organizing this debate, which
demonstrates once again the Council's resolve to end
the difficulties and suffering of children affected by
armed conflict.

We welcome the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. We are pleased to see that the Office is fully
functional and that Ms. Coomaraswamy is already
visiting the field. We support future such visits.

We also welcome the presence of the
representatives of UNICEF, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank at this
meeting.

Security Council resolution 1612 (2005)
represents a step forward in the implementation of
concrete measures to increase the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. We appreciate the
efforts of national Governments to end crimes
committed against children in conflict situations and to
avoid impunity.

At the same time, we stress the work of UNICEF,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the United Nations
peacekeeping missions, through child protection
advisers, to put into action and follow up in the field
the work of the monitoring and reporting mechanism.

We also highlight the activity of civil society and
non-governmental organizations, which have the
difficult and dangerous task of collecting information
on the abuses suffered by children and of denouncing
the perpetrators. We request the greatest possible
protection for them and for the relatives of the victims,
who often have to suffer the consequences of such
denunciations.

Regrettably, in spite of the efforts of the
international community in recent years, children are
still falling victim to forced recruitment and to grave
violations and abuses by armed groups. This is a
complex issue that must be solved through the adoption
of and ample focus on political, legal and socio-
economic measures, among which we stress the
following.

First, it would be important for the Security
Council to send a clear signal to all responsible parties
that the international community is not ready to
continue tolerating violations against children in
conflict, including the recruitment of child soldiers.
The presidential statement that the Council will adopt
at the end of this debate will fulfil that objective.
Secondly, it is necessary to support the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and to keep it
operative in all conflict situations in order to receive
more and better information on the situation of
children in the field. To that end, greater political
commitment is necessary and additional resources must
be allocated by Member States.

Thirdly, the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict should establish better coordination
with the existing sanctions committees in order to
consider the possibility of imposing sanctions against
those responsible for the most flagrant violations of the
human rights of children in conflict situations.

Fourthly, the Working Group must continue to be
active, accelerate its work and develop all aspects of its
mandate, including the elaboration of
recommendations on the protection of children in
armed conflict to be incorporated into the drafts of the
Security Council.

Fifthly, the Working Group should also consider
other issues relating to the special vulnerability of
children in conflict, such as the necessity of integrating
all aspects of development or the need to improve the
involvement of regional organizations and civil society
in the Security Council's strategy, within the
framework of resolution 1612 (2005).

We believe that there is nothing to stop the
Working Group from considering other related issues,
as long as their consideration might result in the
improvement of the situation of affected children.

Sixthly, it is necessary to reinforce disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes so that
the Victims can have real opportunities to reintegrate
into society. In that sense, we are grateful for the
participation in this debate of some development
agencies whose work that complement the efforts of
the Security Council, as far as their mandates allow.

The final goal of all of those initiatives is the
adoption of efficient measures to ensure that the
conflicting parties who are responsible for committing
the most flagrant violations against children comply
with the resolutions of this Council in order to achieve
a real improvement of the situation of children in the
field.

Argentina approaches this issue from the general
perspective of the promotion and protection of human
rights, and can only express its concern about the
increasing impact of conflict on children. That can
clearly be seen in the current situation in the Middle
East.

The violation of the rights of children in conflict
not only affects peace and security, but also has grave
consequences for the current and future development
of affected countries.

The reasons for which children themselves
become the targets of violence by some armed groups
are many and depend on the specific circumstances of
each conflict. In most cases, however, the special
vulnerability of children makes them an easier target
than others when it comes to increasing the number of
combatants, doing forced labour or being sexually
exploited. All such reasons are unacceptable. The
gravity of those acts requires concerted action on the
part of the international community to put an end to
such abuses and to try to reintegrate the victims into
their societies.

Argentina reiterates its commitment to that issue
and its readiness to work for the adoption of concrete
measures that will constitute an improvement in the
lives of children who suffer the consequences of
conflict everyday.

