The Cuban Government remains strongly committed to preventing and confronting terrorism, as well as to combating various manifestations of transnational organized crime that may contribute to its financing, which has prevented these phenomena from proliferating in Cuba. Although transnational organized crime can be a source of funding or logistical support for terrorism, the linkage between them established by the Security Council is not automatic and varies in different contexts. We reiterate our strong condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whatsoever the motivation. Cuba is a State party to 18 of the 19 international conventions on terrorism and is finalizing the domestic legal requirements to ratify the last one. In accordance with the agreements signed, legislative, institutional, administrative and other measures seeking to effectively fight against this scourge have been implemented. We have a specific legislation on this matter. For instance, decree-laws 316 and 317 were passed in 2013. The first, "Amending the Penal Code and the Counter-Terrorism Act", adjusted criminal offences relating to acts of terrorism with the use of nuclear, radioactive material and ionizing substances, and expanded the range of predicate offences of money- laundering, in accordance with the United Nations Conventions against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and against Transnational Organized Crime. The second, "Prevention and Detection of Transactions in the Fight against Money-Laundering, Financing of Terrorism, Proliferation of Weapons and Illicit Capital Flows", raised the normative hierarchy regarding the identification and freezing of assets linked to terrorist individuals or organizations, pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Cuba's commitment to the fight against terrorism was elevated to constitutional status in the national Constitution, adopted by referendum on 24 February 2019 following a process of constitutional reform and broad-based popular consultations. The new Constitution of the Republic, in Chapter II, on international relations, reaffirms in Article 16, paragraph (1), the long-standing position defended by Cuba and repudiates and condemns terrorism in any of its forms and manifestations, in particular State terrorism, as one of the principles of its foreign policy. That commitment and Cuba's institutional capacity to prevent money- laundering and the financing of terrorism have been recognized on several occasions by the Financial Action Task Force of Latin America, a regional structure of the Financial Action Task Force. Our country complies strictly with its obligations under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. In 2020 it submitted its response to the survey on effective measures adopted by Member States to end the financing of terrorism, conducted by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015). It provided inputs to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism for the preparation of the report on terrorism and organized crime pursuant to resolution 2482 (2019). Likewise, it has submitted contributions on the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and General Assembly resolution 74/194, on "Measures to eliminate international terrorism". Transnational organized crime has no significant impact on Cuba, which is due mainly to the actions aimed at preventing and combating it that have been implemented in the country, the zero-tolerance policy against that phenomenon and the absence of organized-crime networks on the national territory. In order to combat transnational organized crime, Cuba has implemented a total of 11 extradition treaties and 25 legal assistance agreements, 16 of which also include extradition. The Cuban State is committed to the fight against transnational organized crime, drug trafficking, terrorism, the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in persons and other crimes, pursuant to its obligations as a State party to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols. We reject in the most absolute terms the arbitrary and unilateral qualification made by the Government of the United States by including Cuba in the worst category of the 2019 Trafficking in Persons Report by the Department of State, which disregards our country's international efforts to combat that phenomenon. Cuba, which has been the victim of terrorist acts that have claimed 3,478 lives and disabled 2,099 persons, reiterates its profound rejection and condemnation of all terrorist acts, methods and practices, in all their forms and manifestations, whatever their motivations. Our country has never permitted, nor will it ever permit, its territory to be used to plan terrorist acts against any State. Arbitrarily and unilaterally, Cuba has been included in the United States Department of State's list of countries that supposedly do not fully cooperate in the fight against terrorism, issued on 13 May 2020. Subsequently and without any basis, our country was included in a Department of State annual report on international terrorism in which Cuba is depicted as a safe haven for terrorists. We reject such unilateral lists and certifications, which are politically motivated and contrary to international law. They serve only defamatory purposes and represent coercion against countries that refuse, in their sovereign decisions, to abide by the will of the United States Government. It is the United States Government itself that has chosen not to publicly condemn or reject the serious terrorist attack committed using a firearm against the Embassy of the Republic of Cuba in that country on 30 April, which endangered the safety of the staff of the diplomatic mission and their families. The conspiratorial silence of the United States Government might encourage similar actions against diplomatic missions in both Washington, D.C., and New York. The record of violent and hostile acts is well known, including terrorist acts committed against Cuban diplomatic officials appointed to the United States, at the Embassy in Washington, D.C., as well as the Permanent Representation of Cuba to the United Nations in New York. It should be recalled, for instance, that the Cuban diplomat Felix Garcia Rodriguez was assassinated in New York on 11 September 1980 and that direct attacks with explosive devices were carried out against the Permanent Mission of Cuba in that city. The groups and individuals that have committed terrorist acts against Cuba in the past have operated for years, and continue to operate, with impunity on United States soil; the law-enforcement agencies of the United States Government are fully aware of all this. It is unacceptable that some terrorist acts are condemned while others are silenced, tolerated, encouraged, justified or manipulated for political and economic interests. Facts confirm that terrorism continues to be a serious challenge facing the international community. We reiterate that the United Nations must assume the central role in international efforts to combat it. International cooperation is essential in the fight against terrorism. We reject the application of unilateral coercive measures that limit the capacity of States to eradicate this scourge, in violation of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. We strongly reject the use of the pretext of an alleged fight against terrorism and organized crime to commit acts of aggression, undermine national sovereignty, interfere in the internal affairs of other States and violate the human rights of their peoples.
