Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto for his
briefing and the courageous dedication of the entire
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) team to supporting governance, development
and reconciliation in Afghanistan.

I would like to begin by offering our deepest
condolences to the victims of the recent violence in
Kabul and their families. Such events are a sad reminder
of the unacceptable toll that the conflict in Afghanistan
continues to take on its people. The 31 May bombing
sought to divide the Afghan Government and people, as
well as Afghanistan's international partners. As armed
groups inflict suffering on innocent civilians, our
resolve to stand with the people and the Government
of Afghanistan in pursuing a peaceful resolution of the
conflict and stability in the country will not waver.

The United States is reviewing its engagement and
security posture in Afghanistan. It is appropriate to take
the time to make sure that we are carrying forward our
commitment to Afghanistan in the most effective way
possible. While the review continues, there can be no
question that the United States remains wholly engaged
in supporting the Afghan Government, diplomatically
and militarily; supporting the development of the
Afghan security forces, including through the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission; continuing its
generous provision of civilian assistance; doing its
part diplomatically to strengthen the international and
regional consensus; and working to advance an Afghan
peace process.

That leads me to a point I want to make about
the political process in Afghanistan. The first
meeting of the Kabul process for peace and security
cooperation, convened by the Afghan Government on
6 June, reaffirmed the commitment of Afghanistan,
its neighbours in the region and the international
community to supporting an Afghan-led and -owned
political process for achieving peace in Afghanistan.
The United States joined the 27 countries and
organizations represented at the meeting to call on
armed and extremist groups to announce an immediate
end to their attacks and their entry into peace talks with
the Afghan Government. In that context, we commend
the Government for its continued commitment to
an inclusive, Afghan-led peace process, despite the
ongoing attacks.
Progress in implementing the peace agreement with
Hizb-i Islami gives us hope for similar progress towards
a peaceful resolution of the conflict with the Taliban.
Such talks are essential. There is no military solution
that will bring a durable peace. The path to a negotiated
settlement is available, and the Taliban must choose to
take it. In fact, a durable peace and genuine stability
in Afghanistan can come only with the commitment of
Afghanistan's neighbours and near-neighbours to those
goals. We welcome the commitments made during
the Kabul process meetings and call on Afghanistan's
neighbours to unconditionally cease their support
for armed and violent-extremist groups. Those
commitments are important right now. The Taliban,
along with the Haqqani Network and affiliates of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other armed
groups, is increasing its attacks, killing and injuring
thousands of Afghans and delaying the progress
that Afghanistan so desperately needs. And while
development assistance remains robust, a precipitous
drop in domestic and foreign direct investment has
stalled the private-sector-led growth that Afghanistan
needs in order to employ its youth, reduce poverty and
give communities hope.

In the context of those and other challenges
Afghanistan continues to face, we strongly support
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
as an essential partner of Afghanistan and the
international community. UNAMA plays a critical role
in supporting peace and reconciliation, empowering
women, defending the human rights of all Afghans
and coordinating humanitarian assistance. We look
forward to the completion next month of the Secretary-
General's strategic review and to discussing ways to
strengthen the Mission's efficiency, cost-effectiveness
and core competencies.

