Ms. Solberg (Norway): The unprecedented
brutality of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and its terrible territorial ambitions pose a threat
to all around this table. We must work together to
eradicate the roots that allow such extremist groups to
exist. It is crucial to mobilize local communities, civil
society and Governments in the fight against terrorism.

I see three main tasks ahead. First, terrorism must
be fought in Iraq and in the wider region. Secondly,
we need even closer international cooperation in the
fight against terror, and thirdly, radicalization must be
fought at home in our own countries.

I thank President Obama for his leadership and
initiative.

The dramatic events unfolding in the Middle
East and North Africa show the dangers of not giving
people a stake in the governing of their country. When
conflicts are left unchecked, civil wars may spill across
borders. The influx of foreign fighters is worsening an
already fragile situation in the countries concerned. We
strongly condemn the criminal terrorist acts committed
by citizens of Europe and of other countries. We will

take strong measures to prevent them from travelling
to conflict zones.

The Norwegian Government has drawn up a
strategy for the deradicalization, rehabilitation and
reintegration of foreign fighters returning home.
We have an whole-of-government approach within a
national action plan that involves all levels of society.
Terrorism and related acts are already criminalized
under Norwegian law. In July, we submitted a bill on
measures to stem the flow of foreign fighters to areas
in conflict. We must also stop the financial flows to
such groups. Relevant legislation needs to be in place.
Information must be shared effectively. We must also
address the underlying problems that breed extremism
and terrorism. Let us work patiently to increase
understanding and tolerance among the groups.

We must all take a firm stand against hate speech.
I was very encouraged to see large crowds of all
backgrounds on the streets of Oslo recently. They were
following the call to march against extremism. Their
concrete message was formulated by one of the young
Muslim organizers saying: "ISIL is not my Islam."

Norway takes part in international cooperation
and capacity-building efforts to prevent radicalization
and violent extremism. We support the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the Global
Counterterrorism Forum. Grave violations of human
rights can foster terrorism. Measures against terrorism
and the protection and promotion of human rights and
the rule of law are mutually reinforcing.

Norway co-sponsored resolution 2178 (2014),
adopted by the Council today. The broad representation
is a manifestation of the unity and urgency expressed
here. Today, we are sending a clear signal from this
Chamber that we must all do our part.

