Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Peace, stability and intercultural harmony are closely
interrelated and key to achieving an environment
conducive to promoting universal values and full
respect for human dignity.

While we in our region have undertaken the difficult
task of bridging the gap between wealth and poverty and
are seeking to build a brighter common future among
different traditions, cultures and nations, the Middle
East is fighting an even more pressing struggle that
poses a challenge to civilizations and faiths. Humankind
must preserve the multicultural, multi-ethnic and
multi-religious character of that region. Multiple crises
show how the stresses associated with cultural and
religious identity can generate destabilizing cycles that
affect international peace and security.

Chile thanks Jordan for organizing this debate,
which gives us the opportunity to share our views
and experiences and to define how the international
community can help to overcome the conditions that
promote violent extremism. The attraction of young
people to radical extremism has become a threat to
the democratic societies, respectful and tolerant of
diversity, that we all want to build. The emergence
of certain groups, including jihadist ones, can be
directly linked with the identity crisis that affects both
generations that have remained in their countries of
origin as well as those that have been woven into a new
social fabric.

Leaders and societies from all regions of the
world have been struck by the number of young people
drawn to extremism, and are being called upon not
only to punish such behavior but, rather, to address
the root causes of the phenomenon. Media outlets
have publicized the crimes of young people recruited
by terrorist organizations, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab, Ansar
Al-Sharia and the Al-Nusra Front. Faced with those
acts, the international community cannot remain
indifferent, and the Council has both an ethical and
political responsibility to counter acts that deny
fundamental human values.

In some West African countries, youth as young as
15-years of age have been recruited through powerful
persuasion, mainly Via social networks, which have
helped to attract a significant number of followers.
The new communication and information technologies
should not serve such purposes.

We believe it is necessary to identify the underlying
causes attracting youth to follow Violent terrorism and
related doctrines. Inevitably, there must be a focus on
young people's motivation to erroneously seek that
sense of identity and belonging. It is due to a number
of factors, including feelings of alienation, exclusion
and marginalization and insecurity and vulnerability,
which can stimulate violent extremism. Several reports
have been drafted in the context of United Nations
missions in the Middle East and Africa, explaining the
importance of implementing appropriate measures to
counteract the frustration of those who rebel against
social and cultural structures that do not satisfy their
hopes and aspirations.

As noted by President Michelle Bachelet Jeria in
the debate on inclusive development of 19 January,

"We believe that closing gaps in income and
position in the social structure is as important
as promoting equal opportunities. It is not only
a moral imperative, but also a requirement for
medium-term and long-term development, for
political stability and for peace." (S/PV. 7361, p. 7)
Our country has promoted the concept of inclusive
development, with the key participation of young
people, as a transformative mechanism underlying
causes of conflict. Identifying the youth involved in
such behaviour and punishing them is insufficient.
We must seek effective solutions through inclusive
development strategies that will pave the way for
opportunities for youth.

In the same vein, those strategies must address
gender issues and, in particular, the situation of women
who are recruited by armed groups and subjected to
violence, including sexual violence as a war tactic.
Women are Victims of actions by non-State armed
groups that are used to spread terror and suffer not only
the scourge of gender aggression, but also, and worse,
stigmatization by religious extremism.

Tackling the factors that lead to radical violence by
youth requires strategies to prevent the socioeconomic
exclusion of young people. We urge the international
community to continue promoting the effective
implementation of resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2178
(2014), which send clear messages on the prevention of
incitement to terrorism and confronting the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist combatants.

The question must be asked about ways in which the
United Nations and the Council can help to prevent and
reduce young people's membership in violent groups.
In Jordan's letter to the Secretary-General (S/2015/231)
and the annexed concept paper, a set of actions has
been identified constituting a holistic response to the
situation which seriously affects the system's values.
Young people must become protagonists in developing
responses based on profound respect for and knowledge
of human rights, tolerance and democracy.

We consider it essential to empower youth and
enhance their skills, through participation that would
ensure their capacity to influence practices and
policies affecting them, including those aimed at
countering Violent extremism. That is how we View the
social, political, economic and cultural participation
of youth. Young people can provide sustainable ways
of combating the phenomenon, using information
technology and questioning the narratives, either online
of offline. That is part of the right to have rights under
democracy.

The Alliance of Civilizations 2013-2018 action plan
provides a road map with specific recommendations
to promote understanding, in line with strengthening
a cosmopolitan View of democracy based on human
rights and international law, as suggested by Jiirgen
Habermas, and thereby prevent false perceptions that
threaten stability and fuel conflict.

We support the initiative of Spain to convene a
high-level regional conference of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism, in Madrid,
next July. We believe it would serve as a political
opportunity to contribute to halting the recruitment
and flow of foreign combatants, with the goal of having
States adopt measures on domestic and international
cooperation.

We join those calling for building public-private
partnerships designed to counter the messages of
radical organizations for recruiting new youth.

Chile has undertaken significant reforms to
eradicate exclusion and discrimination of youth, one
of which resulted in the enactment of a law against
discrimination. Our young people have gone into the
streets and prompted massive demonstrations to demand
a transformation of the education system, which then
led to a reform process that is currently under way.

We wish to conclude by thanking the presidency
of Jordan for convening this meeting to consider
a topic that involves those who will shoulder the
future responsibility of guiding our societies. Our
response must be commensurate with the values we
defend - those that respect identity and diversity.

