Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
I would like to welcome you again to the Security
Council; we thank you for being with us today. I would
also like to welcome the Colombian Foreign Minister,
who has visited us before, and whom we thank for being
with us again.

We also offer a big welcome to the Special
Representative in his first appearance before the
Council. I think he and his team have made a very
good start in just two weeks, and his briefing was very
helpful. We thank him very much for it.

May I begin by reiterating our condolences to all
those affected by the bomb attack in Bogota last week.
There is no justification for such violence, and we
condemn terrorist acts in all their forms. It is good that
the Council was able to issue a statement (SC/13671).
I think the attack underlines the significance of the
end of the armed conflict with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Eje'rcito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). It reminds us ofthe importance ofpressing
ahead with work to implement the Peace Agreement in
order to consolidate peace and build stability. I think
the focus we heard today on the implementation of the
Peace Agreement has been very important.

I wanted to start where the Special Representative
finished by saying that I think the Council has been
pleased to support Colombia in this important process,
and the Council has been united in doing so. As the
Special Representative said, Council support is a vital
pillar in helping Colombia achieve success in the peace
process. As the penholder, I can promise Colombia's
representatives here today that we will do our utmost to
ensure that this effort continues.

I wanted also to welcome the steps that the new
Colombian Government has taken over the last three
months, particularly towards the effective reintegration
of former FARC-EP members and comprehensive
rural development, and this is particularly through the
development programmes with a territorial approach. I
was very interested in what the Special Representative
had to say about the economics, particularly with
respect to education and food and what is happening
in the 24 territories. It is very good to have that level
of detail.

I think we share the hopes set out in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/1159) that Colombia's
"Peace with legality" plan can bring both security
and economic development to former conflict areas,
and we see the upcoming year as an opportunity for
the Government to cement and build on achievements
over the past two years since the Peace Agreement was
signed. But as the Secretary-General also said, there
are considerable challenges, and in particular, I would
like to use today's meeting to highlight two issues
that we believe deserve the Colombian Government's
urgent attention.

The first is that we share the Secretary-General's
alarm with regard to the increasing killings of human
rights defenders and social leaders by organized
criminal groups competing for rural territory. The
Special Representative gave us some additional detail
on that issue. The lack of State presence and the
persistence of Violence in these areas risk undermining
the peace process if people lose faith in the State's
ability to provide safety and economic opportunity.

Secondly, we concur with the Secretary-General's
call for increased coordination across State institutions.
A coherent and holistic approach to tackling security
and development issues in former conflict areas is
vital. The "Peace with legality" plan recognizes the
need to coordinate implementation with other policies
on security, drugs and protection of leaders. Bringing
these plans together - and most importantly delivering
on them - will be crucial to preventing renewed cycles
of violence.

I would like to conclude by also thanking Jean
Arnault, the previous Special Representative, for
his significant contribution to Colombia's peace
process and once again to reiterate our full support
for the new Special Representative and for Colombian
Foreign Minister Trujillo Garcia. We are fully
committed to working with him - as is the rest of the
Council - as his country works towards securing a
lasting and sustained peace.

