The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Cyprus, Indonesia, Iraq, Mauritania,
Morocco and Nepal, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zackheos
(Cyprus), Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr. Aldouri
(Iraq), Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania),
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) and Mr. Sharma
(Nepal) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
23 September 2002 from the Permanent Representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2002/1060 and
which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, be allowed to participate, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Charter and rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, in the discussion of the item presently
on its agenda."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
Permanent Observer of the League of the Arab States
to the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the rules of procedure and the
previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 23 September 2002 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which
reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice
regarding this matter, I propose that the Council extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, Mr. Papa Louis Fall, to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 23 September 2002 from the
Chairman of the African Group to the United Nations,
which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the African
Group for the month of September, I have the
honour to request authorization for Ambassador
Amadou Kebe, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, to intervene
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, at the Security
Council."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/1059.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Amadou Kebe.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Kebe to take the seat reserved for him
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Bahrain. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.


