Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I begin
by paying tribute to Ambassador Butagira for his
much-valued work to the United Nations over the past
five years and to wish him good luck in whatever lies
ahead.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's debate. It is an important first step in this
Franco-British initiative that you and I have launched
on the instructions of our Foreign Ministers to improve
the way in which the United Nations system, and in
particular the Security Council, handles peacekeeping
issues. The speakers we have heard in the last hour
have set out the importance of the issues we are
addressing. I thank them all for their contributions,
especially Mr. Annabi for coming from Haiti to give us
the benefit of his experience on the ground.

Peacekeeping is at the very heart of what the
United Nations stands for. If one asks people on the
streets of one of our capitals what the United Nations
means to them, they will probably reply with an image
of a blue-helmeted soldier watching over an uneasy
peace. It is a powerful image, but it needs updating.
Today, as Under-Secretary-General Le Roy implied, it
could be notjust a of soldier but of a police officer or a
humanitarian worker or a human rights expert. Often
they will have little in the way of a peace to watch
over. The challenges have become more demanding as
many of the conflicts we address involve non-State
actors, and United Nations peacekeeping has to change
to meet the new demands.

United Nations peacekeeping is not in crisis, but,
as Under-Secretary-General Malcorra said, it is
struggling to cope with the scale and complexity of
these new challenges. United Nations peacekeeping is
to some extent a victim of its own success, but it is too
precious a commodity to be put at risk.

The issues are not new. Lakhdar Brahimi
addressed many of them in what remains a landmark
report (S/2000/809), whose conclusions are as relevant
today as they were in 2000. We have been reminded of
their importance during our recent discussions of
Darfur, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Somalia. The point now is to revisit the Brahimi
report - build on it, adapt it where necessary and,
most importantly, make sure that we implement a more
rigorous and strategic approach to peacekeeping across
the board in the Security Council.

The United Kingdom and France set out our
initial thinking in the non-paper we issued earlier this
week. The first part outlined the challenges, which we
grouped into three areas. First is effective strategic
oversight, especially the need for better preparation,
planning, oversight and evaluation of operations.
Second is addressing the resource constraints,
including the importance of finding new ways to deal
with the pressure on funding and the availability of
troops and other resources as the demand for United
Nations peacekeeping continues to rise. The third area
is lessons from implementation, including how the
increasingly complex mandates that we give to United
Nations peacekeepers can be delivered.

That is a daunting agenda, but its scale cannot be
an excuse for inaction. We have suggested that we
focus first on the issues around effective strategic
oversight, many of which fall to the Security Council
to address. Let us put our own house in order first.

We made a good start at the informal seminar
held yesterday at the French Mission. I was struck by
the following themes of our discussion: the need for a
clear sense of the challenges we are addressing here in
New York and in the field, and the importance of
building capacity, not just in the missions themselves
but also in the Secretariat, which is constrained by
rules that were not designed for the new realities of
peacekeeping.

The Council itself needs better information and,
most importantly, better military advice. The Council
must improve its own practices, including more
realistic mandates, clear completion strategies and
measurable benchmarks to enable us to assess progress.
The Council must also ensure that peacekeepers have a
peace to keep, and not put poorly equipped
peacekeepers into a war zone in the hope that they will
have an effect.

While the Security Council should rightly play its
leading role, this must be an inclusive process, drawing
on the expertise and resources of all Member States
and all parts of the United Nations system. We
welcome the work under way in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Services, and we very much welcome the initiatives
under way, not least from our Canadian colleagues,
which we see as complementary to work within the
Council.

Following yesterday's seminar, we will work with
our French colleagues to revise the joint paper to
reflect both the discussion yesterday and today's
debate.

I look forward to hearing from Council
colleagues and other speakers today on how we can
move this agenda forward in practical ways. We have
discussed it many times, but we now need to turn our
attention to a practical programme of action. We will
all have noted the emphasis that our new American
colleague, Ambassador Rice, put on these issues during
her confirmation hearing. Following her confirmation
last night by the United States Senate, we look forward
to welcoming her to the Security Council next week
and to working closely with her on what will be one of
the great challenges facing the Council during 2009.

