Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

The Cuban delegation deplores the fact that since
the last open debate (see S/PV.8375) on this theme, no
progress has been made in advancing the just cause of
the Palestinian people. On the contrary, the situation
on the ground continues to deteriorate, with unilateral
actions such as the withdrawal ofUnited States financial
support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. It is
truly regrettable that, due to the repeated obstruction
of the United States, the Security Council has not even
denounced the escalation of violence and the tragic
developments in the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018.

The delegation of Cuba emphatically rejects the
use of disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
by Israel against Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem and particularly
in the Gaza Strip, in flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and international humanitarian
law. We once again condemn the illegal construction
and expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as the demolition or
seizure of Palestinian properties. All such measures,
compounded by the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
contravene the Fourth Geneva Convention and erode
the viability of a two-State solution.

We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council must demand that Israel
put an immediate end to the occupation of Palestinian
territories, aggressive policies and settlement practices,
and that it implement all Council resolutions on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).

We reaffirm our full support for a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, based on a two-State solution that allows
the Palestinian people to exercise its right to self-
determination, its right to an independent sovereign
State with pre-1967 borders and East Jerusalem as its
capital, and the right of return for refugees.

We reject the unilateral action of the United States
Government to establish its diplomatic presence in
Jerusalem, which further exacerbates tensions in
the region.

We also reiterate our call for support for the
proposal of President Mahmoud Abbas to convene an
international peace conference based on the agreed
parameters and terms of reference. We express our
unswerving solidarity with the Palestinian Government
and people, and support the accession of Palestine as a
full-fledged Member ofthe United Nations. We welcome
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 73/89,
entitled "Comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East", which endorses the two-State solution.

The delegation of Cuba once again demands the
total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from
the Syrian Golan and from all other occupied Arab
territories. We note that any measure or action to
modify the legal, physical and demographic status or
the institutional structure of the occupied Syrian Golan,
or any Israeli measure to exercise its jurisdiction over
and administration of that territory, runs counter to
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

We demand respect for multilateralism. Foreign
intervention in domestic affairs, foreign aggression and
sponsorship of terrorist groups to promote instability
and conflict in the Middle East, and the fabrication of
excuses and justifications in the Council to legitimize
the unilateral use of force and aggression against
sovereign States, must stop.

