Mr. Alemen (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Ecuador
is shocked and alarmed by the distressing events taking
place in East Timor. As a member of the international
community, we cannot remain silent or fail to react to
these indescribable acts of violence and wanton cruelty
perpetrated by paramilitary groups against the defenceless
people of East Timor, who have peacefully exercised their
inalienable right to self-determination.

Those dark acts of savagery and barbarity are an
outrage to the civilized conscience of humanity and a
flagrant violation of human rights as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, and such acts must be
halted without further delay. Ethics and morality cannot
be selective, but must remain true to themselves and react
in the same way to assassination, genocide, the forced
displacement of people and the methodical destruction of
property wherever such occurrences take place in the
world. There can be no loftier or more noble interest than
defending the dignity and freedom of the human being.

The valuable participation of the United Nations in
the issue of East Timor, and the significant progress made
in the dialogue and negotiations held in the past between
Portugal and Indonesia, have always enjoyed the support
of Ecuador, basically because our international policy is
founded on a strict defence of the principles of
international law, particularly those relating to the
peaceful settlement of disputes, respect for agreements
arrived at in good faith and without pressure and the
self-determination of peoples.
My country considered the holding of the popular
consultation under the auspices of the United Nations a
few days ago in East Timor as a negotiated, just and
democratic way out of the crisis. However, the acts of
violence that followed that consultation have now
jeopardized the integrity of the territory as well as the
peace and security of the region.

To sum up, Ecuador believes, first, that the
international community has an absolute duty to put an
immediate stop to terror and violence in East Timor. It is
necessary to protect the civilian population, facilitate the
return of refugees and disarm the paramilitary groups
responsible for so many heinous crimes.

As the Government of Indonesia has not yet
discharged its paramount responsibility, the deployment
of a peacekeeping force now seems to be the most urgent
step for the United Nations to take in order to put an end

 

to the tragedy. Otherwise the credibility of the United
Nations system will, justifiably, be put in serious doubt.

Secondly, the will of the people of East Timor,
expressed in the popular consultation of 30 August 1999,
cannot be flouted. That people's legitimate right to live as
an independent and sovereign country must be respected.

Ecuador values highly its friendly relations with
Indonesia and therefore expects that, as a loyal Member of
the United Nations, Indonesia will make the expected and
necessary contribution to restoring internal peace, order and
security in East Timor; to ensuring the safety of the
personnel of the United Nations Mission in East Timor; to
guaranteeing the unhindered return of the displaced to their
homes; and to ending the long-standing and unfair suffering
that has been inflicted on the people of East Timor.

