Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Mr. President, thank you
for convening this open debate of the Security Council
on an issue that has become a preoccupation of the
entire international community. We would also like to
take this opportunity to associate ourselves with the
statement that will be delivered later by Malaysia on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

It is a fact that the threat of nuclear weapons
proliferation is on the rise. There are signs that non-
State actors remain interested in the illicit acquisition
of weapons of mass destruction (WMD). Illegal
networks exist that can deliver nuclear materials and
technology that can be used to produce weapons. In
dealing with these potentially dangerous situations, we
are hampered by the lack of any legal framework that
would effectively thwart the efforts of non-State actors,
in particular terrorists, to acquire and illegally transfer
nuclear and other WMD materials. Although there are
rules and regulations promulgated by several arms
control regimes, they are by no means uniform, being
susceptible to varying interpretations, and, due to their
restrictive nature, not enjoying universal support. Most
importantly, there are no internationally acceptable
provisions to penalize illegal proliferation activities by
individuals or non-State actors. Thus the draft
resolution now before the Council deals with one of the
most important aspects of non-proliferation. There is
clearly an urgent need to prevent nuclear proliferation
involving non-State actors as demonstrated by recent
revelations.

However, the draft resolution is unbalanced and
has consequently raised serious concerns, as it
impinges on the sovereign rights of Member States.
Because of its wide-ranging ramifications, the issues
contained in it need to be further deliberated and
clarified prior to its adoption. Indeed, we are of the
opinion that legal obligations can only be created and
assumed on a voluntary basis. Any far-reaching
assumption of authority by the Security Council to
enact global legislation is not consistent with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter. It is therefore
imperative to involve all States in the negotiating
process towards the establishment of international
norms on the issue.

The draft resolution is one-sided and adopts a
unidimensional approach: it deals with prevention
based on punitive measures for States but not the
elimination of WMD. Nuclear non-proliferation is the
obverse side of nuclear disarmament. Nuclear non-
proliferation cannot be successfully promoted in the
absence of corresponding progress towards nuclear
disarmament. Also conspicuous is the draft resolution's
lack of reference to horizontal and vertical proliferation
and nuclear disarmament.
The expanded scope contemplated in the draft
resolution goes far beyond the stated objective of
preventing the acquisition of WMD by non-State actors
and seeks jurisdiction even over treaty-implementing
mechanisms such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). It is, therefore, not only what is
contained in the draft resolution that is important, but
also what is also implied. This aspect needs to be seen
from its proper legal and political perspective. Further
compounding the situation are definitional problems
relating to the terms "non-State actors", "responsibility
of States" and other terms that are contained in the
body of the draft resolution and in its footnotes.

We are concerned about the invocation of Chapter
VII of the Charter. The preferred course of action
should be cooperative rather than coercive. The
coercive option should be a last resort, undertaken
within the framework of a consensus decision.

The establishment of a committee under the
auspices of the Security Council would constitute a
separate regime for non-proliferation and could well
undermine the functions and the proven role of existing
treaty regimes such as safeguards regime of the IAEA.
By excluding an overwhelming majority of Member
States, such a body would be unrepresentative and
would serve no useful function. Its role as defined in
the draft resolution could be performed by the United
Nations Secretariat.

Finally, in view of the importance and the
complexities attendant upon the issues involved, the
five permanent members of the Security Council have
taken several months to examine and decide upon
various aspects of the draft resolution. Likewise, the
general membership needs adequate time to assess its
implications, both here in New York and in our
capitals. The Council can effectively deal with this
aspect of non-proliferation by doing full justice to the
preponderant views of an overwhelming majority of
Member States.

