Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): We welcome the presence of the two
Presidents of the International Criminal Tribunals,
Judges Patrick Robinson and Dennis Byron, and the
two Prosecutors, Mr. Serge Brammertz and Mr. Hassan
Jallow. We thank them not only for their
comprehensive briefings but also for the exceptionally
excellent work they have carried out with the
assistance of their staff.

The two reports of the Tribunals and today's
briefings, in addition to the report on the completion
strategy, are rich in detail concerning the activities of
the two Tribunals. These activities have shown
considerable progress in the implementation of the
completion strategy within the prescribed deadlines, in
accordance with the instructions of the Security
Council, and with due attention to fair trial proceedings
and respect for the rights of the accused.

Undoubtedly, the failure to arrest some accused
persons and the continued impunity of those who
committed genocide and grave violations of
international humanitarian law are a cause for
legitimate international concern. However, this
regrettable reality should not prevent us from
implementing the completion strategy within the set
deadlines.

The Security Council has urged States to
cooperate with the two Tribunals. The two reports
reflect noticeable progress in the cooperation of the
concerned States in tracking the fugitives, extraditing
those who have been indicted and resettling those who
have served their sentences or been exonerated.

We welcome the reference in the two reports to
the cooperation and assistance of the concerned States
with the two Tribunals, particularly the Republic of
Rwanda and the States of the former Yugoslavia. The
issue requires ongoing international cooperation and
the provision of material and human resources in order
to enable the two Tribunals to discharge their mandate.

The Council has also stressed the importance of
enhancing national jurisdictions in Rwanda and the
States of the former Yugoslavia. We call for further
efforts to strengthen national jurisdictions in order to
enable them to pursue the work of the two Tribunals.
We believe that such strengthening is in line with
efforts to refer as many remaining cases as possible to
national jurisdictions and with the principles of fair
trial proceedings, equality and strengthened rule of law
in the concerned States. It also ensures that problems
relating to national jurisdiction can be overcome to
allow States to take possession of archives that are
important to their history and national reconciliation.

The circumstances have changed since the two
Tribunals were established at the end of the last
century. Laws and institutions in the States where the
crimes were committed have also changed. There is
now a great deal of evidence and many available
witnesses, which makes it possible for national
jurisdictions to address remaining cases with
professionalism and with the assistance and support of
the international community.

The desire to see progress in the Tribunals'
efforts to carry out their respective completion
strategies makes it incumbent upon us to decide upon
their legacies as soon as possible. In that connection,
we would like to express our particular appreciation for
the efforts made by the Informal Working Group
chaired by Belgium. We look forward to the outcome
of that work and to the establishment of an
international mechanism to effectively and efficiently
ensure their legacies after the Tribunals conclude their
work.

