Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): I wish to apologize
for the absence of the Foreign Minister of Sierra
Leone. He was looking forward to attending this
meeting. Unfortunately, developments in his schedule
did not make it possible for him to be here. I am
therefore delivering this short statement on his behalf.

Let me join previous speakers in congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. In so doing, I am
fully conscious of the fact that you are occupying the
chair during one of the most disturbing - and indeed
one of the most critical - periods that the world has
faced in the last three decades. My delegation would
therefore like to commend you for the admirable
manner in which you have been performing your
difficult task under extremely tense circumstances.

My delegation welcomes the initiative by Guinea,
our good neighbour, to have the Security Council
consider two interrelated issues that pose a serious
threat to peace, human security and stability in the
West African subregion. That initiative is timely
because it reminds us of the efficacy of the Security
Council, an organ whose primary responsibility is, and
remains, the maintenance of international peace and
security. Like every other man-made institution, the
Council may have weaknesses. That notwithstanding,
Sierra Leone continues to have faith in the United
Nations as a centre for harmonizing the actions of
nations. We also have faith in the Council's ability to
contribute to our collective effort to prevent, combat
and eradicate the menace of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.

The current situation in the West African
subregion compels us to reiterate to the Council and
the international community at large that the illicit
trade in and proliferation of those weapons, especially
among roving bands of rebels that practice their deadly
activities within and across national frontiers, is not
merely a West African subregional problem. It is a
problem that is inherently international. That will be
the focus of my short contribution to today's
discussions.
We of course realize that it is the responsibility of
States of the subregion to take all necessary measures
at the national and subregional levels to prevent,
combat and eradicate these weapons. However, we
cannot, and should not, underestimate the international
or global dimension of the problem and its implications
for international peace and security. The characteristics
of proliferation clearly indicate that national and
regional measures are not enough to deal with the
problem. Such measures and initiatives must be
strengthened through sustained and effective
international cooperation.

Members of the Security Council may wish to
comment on this and, if time permits, perhaps suggest
how best the Council can further contribute to the
implementation of the global measures already
identified in the Programme of Action of the 2001
United Nations Conference held to promote the
prevention, reduction and eradication of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.

We acknowledge the critical role that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes play in that regard. In Sierra Leone the
success of our disarmament and demobilization of ex-
combatants, followed by the equally successful
community arms collection and destruction campaign,
was due primarily to the level of international
assistance and cooperation extended to the Government
and people of Sierra Leone. However, I should add that
unless such cooperation is accelerated with regard to
the reintegration component of the DDR programme,
many ex-combatants could easily be recruited to fight
in new and ongoing conflicts in the subregion. We
recall that the Programme of Action of the 2001
Conference on small arms called for international
assistance and cooperation in support of DDR
programmes, as well as arms for development projects
in post-conflict areas.

Much ground has already been covered with
regard to the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa, which has been extended for a
further three-year period. It is obviously in the interest
of the member States of ECOWAS to scrupulously
implement the Moratorium. The idea of extending it
indefinitely or making it a legally binding regional
instrument could also be in the interest of the
Community. However, the fact is that virtually all the
estimated 8 million illicit small arms in circulation in
West Africa, including those that are in the hands of
rebels, bandits and other non-State entities, were
manufactured outside the West African subregion.

Therefore, the implementation of the ECOWAS
Moratorium and similar regional initiatives should be
seen in the context of continued collaboration between
ECOWAS and arms-manufacturing States. The
implementation of the Moratorium should also be
considered in the context of efforts aimed at securing
legally binding international agreements on the
marking and tracing of small arms and light weapons.
In the view of my delegation, those are core issues that
must be actively pursued if we are to make any
significant progress in curbing the illicit transfer and
trade in these weapons. As part of the global approach,
due consideration should continue to be given to the
question of the adequacy of existing machinery to deal
with the related problem of brokering.

Recognizing the importance of these issues, the
Security Council had requested the Secretary-General
to include in last year's report on small arms, among
other things, an analytical assessment of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in such areas as
availability, lines of supply, brokering, transportation
arrangements and financial networks for these
weapons. Again, this underscores the fact that the
responsibility for dealing with controlling the illicit
circulation of these weapons in the West African
subregion is not ours alone.

Finally, several speakers have referred to the role
of Security Council arms embargoes and similar
measures in controlling the proliferation of these
weapons. This is one area that falls directly within the
responsibility of the Council.

By resolution 1171 (1998) the Government of
Sierra Leone was required to mark, register and notify
a Security Council monitoring committee of all arms or
related material imported by the Government through
named points of entry registered with that committee.
The Government complied with those requirements. At
the same time, the Council prohibited States and their
nationals from supplying or selling arms to non-
governmental forces in Sierra Leone. However, the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebel movement
was able to acquire a considerable amount of arms and
ammunition to maintain its vicious campaign of death
and terror, with the direct and indirect support of a
network of international and regional arms dealers. In
short, the embargo was deliberately and successfully
violated.
All my delegation can say at this stage is that in
reviewing any existing arms embargo the Security
Council should take into consideration the prevailing
situation and any continued serious threat to peace and
security in the West African subregion as a whole.

