Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that I am speaking under your
presidency, Sir, I wish to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and to thank
you for the invaluable support that your country, the
People's Republic of China, continues to provide
to African countries in general and to my country,
Burundi, in particular, especially in terms of respect
for the sacred principles and values of our common
Organization. We are very grateful for that.

Allow me also to thank the other members of
the Council for their ongoing support for Burundi's
sovereignty and political independence since the
outbreak of the insurrectional movement in 2015 and
the attempted coup d'etat on 13 May 2015.

My thanks also go to Ambassador Jurg Lauber,
Chair ofthe Burundi configuration ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) - who, as he noted, has just
returned from a field visit to Burundi from 10 to
13 July - for his ever-increasing role in mobilizing
resources in support ofBurundi's socioeconomic sector.

I hasten to welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Michel Kafando, who has just provided his first
briefing to the Council since his appointment as
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and his first
visit to Burundi, from the end of June to the beginning
of this month.

In my statement, I shall stress the political,
security and human rights situation. I shall also say
a word about freedom of expression, refugees and
reconciliation, as well as the efforts of the Government
of Burundi to rebuild the frayed confidence of some of
its development partners.

With regard to the political situation, I am pleased
to inform the Council that the inter-Burundian political
dialogue process is ongoing, with some progress
made. The dialogue has not stalled, as some people
would have us believe; it is following an evolutionary
path. The internal process, which was led by the
Government-established National Commission for
the Inter-Burundian Dialogue has ended and a final
report has been sent to the national authorities. The
recommendations of the report are the result of a
dialogue involving more than 26,000 Burundians,
and they will be combined with the conclusions of the
dialogue process at the subregional level to eventually
produce a solid road map for peaceful elections in 2020.

Meanwhile, another promising dynamic of
internal dialogue among all stakeholders is ongoing
under the facilitation of the Burundian Ombudsman.
It is following a positive trajectory and has already
organized several inclusive dialogue workshops with
our partners in Bujumbura. All of those processes
complement each other without competition, thereby
strengthening the culture of dialogue in our country.

We remain convinced that by strengthening
democracy in a country like ours, which is still working
to build peace, justice and security, there is no solid
pillar on which the rule of law can rely other than the
holding of free, peaceful and transparent elections.
Any alternative attempts to take power through
unconstitutional shortcuts are unacceptable and will
go nowhere.

The coups d'etat that Burundians have experienced
in the past represent the nightmare that they are trying
to wake up from today. Since the democratic elections
of 2005, that dark chapter of our history has closed, a
hopeful one has opened and we are gradually building
a culture of democracy, despite a number of new
challenges that we still have to tackle. That is why
our President has asked Burundi's political parties,
which today number around 30, to regroup, conduct
an in-depth review of their internal policies on unity
and discipline and raise awareness among their militant
adherents about the importance of remaining united
and respecting democratic principles. He has advised
them to totally reject divisiveness, refrain from any
provocations or manoeuvres that could goad them into
murdering one another on the pretext that they have
different political or social affiliations and, as far as
possible, avoid polluting Burundi's ever-changing
political space.

In that regard, the President has asked civil-society
groups to refrain from involvement in political affairs
and from deeds or words that could sow division and
dissension of any kind or become an incitement to
killing such as we saw during the insurrection in 2015.
Rather, he urged them to concern themselves with the
welfare of the population, including by giving support
to his efforts to restore society and community. He
also appealed to religious leaders to continue with the
mission that God has entrusted to them by preaching
the gospel throughout the country and refraining from
political acts that could turn them away from the path
of righteousness, and encouraged them to continue to
get involved in the country's development efforts and
in the promotion of human rights and the values of
ubuntu in Burundi.

With regard to constitutional matters, we should
recall that this issue is exclusively in the domain of
national sovereignty and should be discussed only
within a national framework. As the Council is aware,
no one has the right to deprive the Burundian people
of their sovereign right to define a political future
that suits them and is tailored to their needs, and that
applies to all the peoples we represent here.

Turning to the issue of security, we all know that
it is central to every issue, since no development is
possible without peace and security, and vice versa.
Burundians are devoted to peace and equality and
are absolutely determined in their commitment to
safeguarding peace night and day. Our country is
now calm, as all those who spoke here this morning
have acknowledged. Peace and security reign, thanks
to excellent cooperation between the forces of law
and order, the Administration and the people. Where
anything else is concerned, we all know that ordinary
criminality is as old as humankind, and like everyone
else, Burundi has to deal with it every day.

On the human rights front, it is generally agreed that
no country in the world is so perfect in this area that it
is in a position to lecture others about it. Just like other
countries, and in what we should remind the Council is
an especially difficult post-crisis environment, Burundi
is continuing its efforts to promote human rights and
ensure that they are protected. We firmly believe,
and will continue to insist, that only international
cooperation and a mutually beneficial partnership that
respects the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations can make an effective contribution to
the genuine protection of human rights in Burundi or
anywhere else. Excessive or selective political pressure
should give way to cooperation and dialogue. My
country has promised to continue working to make
progress and improve its cooperation with all good-
faith actors in this area.

We cannot speak of the state of human rights
without mentioning the prison situation. We have
taken steps to reduce crowding in the prisons and,
more recently, to promote national reconciliation. The
President has ordered the release of more than 2,500
prisoners, in addition to the 3,416 released in 2015, the
6,136 in 2016 and, very recently, the 2,247 in 2017 from
among the 2,500 who, as the Council is aware, received
a presidential pardon at the end of 2016, a commendable
measure that deserves the Council's support and to be
recognized as a gesture of peace for Burundians.

With regard to the freedom of the press - and
contrary to the pronouncements of various politicians
and journalists who, as the Council is aware, describe
Burundi as they wish it to be rather than as it is - the
Government of Burundi has never shut down any private
media outlets. Ofthe three or four private media outlets
that were partially destroyed in the wake of the foiled
coup d'etat of 13 May 2015, two have already reopened
and the others are functioning normally. Today more
than 20 national and international private radio stations
are broadcasting freely in Burundi, and we will continue
working to improve things in an area that is so essential
to the promotion of democracy in our country. We are
trying as best we can to find a good balance between
the protection of human rights and the consolidation of
the rule of law. We are also pleased about the fact that
no journalists are imprisoned in our country, contrary
to what we see elsewhere.

With regard to refugees, our Head of State has
asked the Burundi Ombudsman to continue with
efforts to raise awareness among refugees and
non-violent political actors about returning home in
order to prepare for the 2020 election deadlines. We
know that the repatriation of refugees is a marker of
subregional stability, and it has now been admitted that
some of those who fled the country, including minors,
were recruited, trained, supervised and enrolled in
anti-Burundi rebel movements, all of it in flagrant
violation of the Charter, the 1951 Convention Relating
to the Status of Refugees, the 1989 Convention on
the Rights of the Child and the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region of 24 February 2013.
During his visit to Tanzania last week, the President
and his counterpart in the United Republic of Tanzania
made a heartfelt appeal to refugees to return to their
homeland. I should emphasize that they also appealed
to organizations dealing with refugees to avoid any
deliberate exaggeration of their numbers and to
acknowledge that more than 150,000 refugees have
already returned to Burundi. In that regard, we call
on countries that are hosting refugees - and which
I would like to thank, incidentally - and the United
Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees
to cooperate fully in order to facilitate their voluntary
return home, since some of them have been held
hostage for purely political and business purposes or
to maintain or fuel a crisis situation that is increasingly
more artificial than real.
In addition to the return of refugees, the two Heads
of State exchanged views on strengthening bilateral
relations, intensifying trade among the two peoples,
security on shared borders and the situation in the region
overall. They welcomed the Tanzanian railway project
linking Tanzania, Burundi and other countries in the
region. The visit also was a testament to the interest that
the Heads of State of the region attach to the regional
dimension, which is crucial because we have observed
in some areas that there is an increasingly wide gap
between the positions of some regional actors and the
positions of actors in New York. Regional actors need
to be listened to. They are the ones who know us and
know about our history and culture. They need to have
their views heard when decisions are taken, regardless
of the context.

With regard to national reconciliation, the
Government of Burundi, under the enlightened
leadership of President Nkurunziza, set up the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission, which, as the Council
is aware, marks the final stage in the establishment
of the institutions provided for in the 2000 Arusha
Agreement. The members of the Commission were
called upon to promptly inform the Burundian people
of the successes and failures of the past with a view
to definitively turning the page on the politico-ethnic
antagonisms that have punctuated the dark history
of our country, and thereby build a bright future for
present and future generations.

As a complement, last week the National Assembly
of Burundi adopted a draft law on the functioning of the
National Council for National Unity and Reconciliation,
which is a very important body. That Council will be
composed of seven individuals of integrity and will
reconcile the Burundian people - with the aim of unity
and equity - and will be at the forefront in upholding
the Burundian values of ubuntu, ubushingantahe,
hbugabo and hbupfasoni: all positive values inherent in
the Burundian people.

At the macroeconomic level, the balance of
payments was to an extent impacted by the unilateral
suspension of external direct support by some partners.
In order for the country to gradually achieve balance, as
the Chair of the Burundi configuration mentioned, the
retreat held in Bujumbura on 12 July, which included
the Government and its multilateral partners and United
Nations agencies present in Burundi, recommended the
provision of direct budgetary support. The Government
and development partners have been invited to engage
in a sincere and frank dialogue on this topic with a
view to surmounting the obstacles that persist in terms
of cooperation between Burundi and some countries.

As far as cooperation with our partners is
concerned - and several peakers mentioned
this today - we greatly value our partners. Any
improvement in our relations with them is most
welcome. Representatives are certainly aware that
recently the Burundian Government has been working
for a resumption of peaceful relations with its partners,
and with the United Nations in particular. In order to
mend our relations with the United Nations, Burundi
expeditiously consented to the visit of the visit of the
Special Envoy ofthe Secretary-General in late June and
early July. During his visit, the Special Envoy, and he
can attest to this, enjoyedthe legendary hospitality ofthe
Burundian people and the full cooperation of national
authorities, which enabled him to carry out his mission
in Burundi. We expect that, given his experience in
diplomacy, that his reports will uphold the principles,
practices and values of the United Nations and, above
all, the aspirations of the Burundian people for a
political future that suits them and is tailored to their
needs. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Central Africa and the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, who
visited Burundi at the same time, benefited from the
same degree of cooperation, attention and hospitality,
both in Bujumbura and the countryside.

Negotiations on a new, mutually agreed host
country agreement will enable cooperation to be
resumed between the Government of Burundi and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, which many speakers alsoreferred to
this at this meeting. That dialogue is under way. We
anticipate that we wil meet in the next few weeks to
finalize the text to guide our cooperation, which we
hope will proceed normally. As I said at the previous
meeting (see S/PV.7978), keeping the Office's presence
in Burundi is no longer a concern. I assure the Council
that that has already been determined, and the Council
can count of Burundi's commitment in that regard. The
only thing left to do is to finalize the text. We call for
flexibility on the part of all parties in order to reach a
successful outcome to the discussions. I would point
out that these are discussions between two parties.

Similarly, military and human rights observers
of the African Union are already deployed on the
ground in Burundi and are working freely without

any hindrance. They enjoy the full cooperation of the very open and the observers currently on the ground
Burundian Government and all its services, including are working normally. We will continue to work
those ofnational sovereignty, which certain countries, together to overcome any obstacles in their path in an
as representatives are aware, would not extend to amicable way.
foreign observers. With regard to the deployment
of additional observers, the obstacles pertain to
the African Union and are budgetary in nature. We
therefore call on partners to support the African Union
to enable it to deploy additional observers. Burundi is

