Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
accession to the presidency for the month of September
and looks forward to working closely with you during
your tenure. We would also like to take this opportunity
to welcome Ambassador Kelly Craft. Although she
is not in the Chamber, I know that our words will be
reported to her. We hope to have a more positive and
productive working relationship with her and her staff
in the months to come.

Moreover, Mr. President, with your permission
I should like, through you, to thank the Ambassador
of South Africa for his kind words of welcome to me
and for highlighting the correct role of the women
of South Sudan in the process. I am always truly
dismayed when some members of the Council do not
do their homework in reading up on the role of the
women of South Sudan. The team of opposition leader
Riek Machar in Juba - and I think Ambassador
David Shearer will attest to what I will say later to
Council members in their closed session - is led by
Ms. Angelina Teny. She is a tough negotiator. The new
Foreign Minister, Ms. Awut Deng Achuil, has always
participated in the peace negotiations and is also a very
tough negotiator. Thus, when some Council members
claim that it is only men who are doing the talking, that
is misleading information.

I therefore thank Ambassador Matjila for doing
his homework. This is not just men talking. The
requirement of 35 per cent female representation is set
down in the Constitution of the Republic of South Sudan
and is being implemented. I should like to repeat myself
again - 35 per cent is better and far more progressive
than what many countries represented in this Chamber
are doing for their women.

The Government of the Republic of South
Sudan acknowledges and welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2019/722) for the
period 29 May to 27 August. In this regard, we would
like to acknowledge the presence of Ambassador David
Shearer, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for South Sudan. We appreciate his updated
briefing on recent developments in South Sudan that
are not included in the Secretary-General's report.

While we welcome this quarterly report, we would
like to highlight two recent developments in South
Sudan: the visits of Mr. Riek Machar and Mr. Abdalla
Hamdok to Juba. The meeting between President Salva
Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar, as all members
know, was long time in coming, especially after a gap
of four months in the extended period. Mr. Machar's
visit to Juba on 8 September was therefore welcomed
with high expectations, as there are only two months
left in the six-month extended period. President Salva
Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar held a series of
discussions for two days concerning a wide range
of ideas on how best to implement the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. The most important outcome
of the two-day discussion is that both sides agreed to
form a transitional Government by 12 November.

In the Sudan, we are happy that the efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union, in which President Salva Kiir Mayardit
played an important and positive role, succeeded in
stabilizing the revolution in that country. The regional
mediations in the Sudan, as we all know, resulted in
the establishment of the Sovereign Council headed
by Lieutenant General Abdel-Fattah Al-Burhan, and
a hybrid civilian/military Executive Cabinet led by
Mr. Abdalla Hamdok as Prime Minister of the Republic
ofthe Sudan. On 12 and 13 September, South Sudan was
honoured by the first visit ofthe new Prime Minister of
the Sudan to Juba. During that visit, President Kiir and
Prime Minister Hamdok discussed matters of security,
border issues and economic cooperation that would
ensure peace and prosperity in and between the two
sisterly countries.

We have thought to highlight these two visits to
Juba over the past few days because they both impact
the peace implementation, new constructive relations
and economic engagement between the Sudan and
South Sudan. In the margins of the high-level General
Assembly next week, our Head of Delegation and our
new Foreign Minister will brief many Council members
in further detail concerning these visits.
We would like to conclude by thanking those
countries that have responded to our call for help with
technical and material to meet the challenges of peace
implementation in South Sudan. We would like to thank
Japan, South Africa, China and Egypt for supplying
material for cantonment. We also thank the countries
that have decided to help with our humanitarian needs.

Their actions are all highly appreciated by the people
of South Sudan.

