The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Egypt in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdelaziz
(Egypt) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist bombings that took
place in Dahab, Egypt, on 24 April 2006.

"The Security Council expresses its deepest
sympathy and condolences to the victims of these
attacks and their families, and to the people and

the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt,
as well as to all other countries whose citizens
have been killed or injured in these bombings.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers
and sponsors of these intolerable acts to justice,
and urges all States, in accordance with their
obligations under international law and
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), to
cooperate with and provide support and
assistance, as appropriate, to the Government of
the Arab Republic of Egypt in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the Untied Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/ 18.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

