Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Nicaragua wishes to congratulate the
presidency of the People's Republic of China for its
outstanding work during this month and for having
convened this debate on this very important topic, which
deals with a threat to international peace and security.

Our delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Nicaragua reiterates in the strongest terms its
condemnation of terrorism in all of its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism, of which
Nicaragua, its people and Government have been
victims. Terrorism cannot and must not be associated
with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group, and those attributions should not be used to
justify terrorism.

Similarly, Nicaragua condemns the double
standards practiced by some countries that claim
to promote the eradication of terrorism but shelter
terrorists within their territories, send terrorists to
other States and finance their actions with the aim
of changing regimes and subjugating their people.
Clearly, many who claim to promote human rights and
the rule of law are the same ones who most egregiously
violate human rights and international law, which
they seek to justify in the name of fighting against
terrorism. The same parties have financed, organized
and created existing terrorist groups, in particular in
the Middle East. Nicaragua expresses its condemnation
of the ongoing hostilities that have been waged under
the banner of the war on terror. Entire nations, which
were once enjoying development and prosperity, are
today mired in ruins and destruction, with millions of
victims. Entire families and millions of human beings
are now looking for refuge, fleeing a situation that we
claim to be combating, using the same old methods.
The fight against the scourge of terrorism must
be an open and coordinated fight, waged within the
framework of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, ensuring that all Member States
are participating on an equal footing with regard to
their rights and the respect for their sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Much remains to be done on
the issue of terrorism, and we strongly support the
development of a convention on terrorism and call on
all Member States to show flexibility in that regard.
Nicaragua reaffirms its desire to contribute in the best
way possible to ensure that that convention is finalized.
At the same time, we are committed to continuing to
work to promote and support the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

In the words of the President of Nicaragua, Daniel
Ortega Saavedra,

"The increasing greed of global capitalism,
particularly in the Middle East and Africa, has
caused wars and created, fostered, cultivated and
exploited fanaticism and terrorism, which have,
in turn, spread insecurity and destruction, and
caused all kinds of crises - crises of infinite
proportions and ramifications with war, food, the
environmental, labour and humanitarian matters at
their heart" (A/70/PV23, p.1]).

Terrorism has become a threat to international
peace and security. Once again, I return to the words of
