Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Today's
briefings, in addition to that held in May under the
Egyptian presidency (see S/PV.7699), based on the
Spanish initiative regarding the challenges facing
the Sahel region and Africa, have demonstrated the
multifaceted and multidimensional nature of the crisis
in the Lake Chad Basin and the Sahel. Indeed, the Sahel
and the Lake Chad Basin face various interconnected
and complex challenges related to insecurity in
northern Mali and Libya; the growth of organized
crime, particularly trafficking of drugs, weapons and
human beings; and the increase of terrorism in the
region, notably as perpetrated by Boko Haram.

In addition, new, non-traditional challenges have
arisen. Climate change has had an impact on the way
of life and the socioeconomic situation of the region,
as have humanitarian challenges in the form of
displacement of some 4.2 million people from the Sahel
and the Lake Chad basin and the need of 2.9 million
people for emergency humanitarian assistance, as
Mr. O'Brien mentioned.

Egypt supports all efforts undertaken by the
countries of the Lake Chad basin and Benin, members
of the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), to
combat Boko Haram. Egypt commends the leadership
shown by the countries of the region to counter this
threat. On this point, the latest military operations of
the MNJTF have weakened Boko Haram and made it
possible to arrest many of its members. We welcome the
fact that the Force has fulfilled its role and carried out its
mission in accordance with international humanitarian
law and international law and in full compliance with
human rights. However, in spite of the achievements of
the Force in fighting Boko Haram, it still requires the
support of the international community, as noted by the
representative of the United Kingdom, so that the Force
can restore security in the Lake Chad basin.

Egypt encourages all regional and international
partners to provide increased support to the
Multinational Joint Task Force, especially in the areas
of training and capacity-building and in terms of
equipment and logistics. Egypt also urges all partners to
fulfil the pledges they made at the donor conference for
the Multinational Joint Task Force, held in Addis Ababa
in February, towards the establishment of a trust fund
for the support of African Union forces. With regard to
support for the MNJTF, Egypt will work to ensure that
the Centre for Conflict Resolution and Peacekeeping in
Africa, created in Cairo, will work at the regional level
to provide African solutions for African problems.

We are profoundly worried about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin and in
the Sahel. We stress the importance of undertaking
greater efforts to find a response to this humanitarian
crisis and focus on both the humanitarian and political
aspects of the crisis. We also reiterate our appeal
for a holistic approach, including focus on political,
military, humanitarian and development dimensions,
in addressing the problems facing the countries of the
Lake Chad Basin. Egypt has consistently supported a
comprehensive approach to dealing with and overcoming
the phenomenon of terrorism and restoring peace by
investing in the institutional and human resources of
the region. This is the topic that the Security Council
will consider tomorrow during the ministerial debate
on peacebuilding in Africa.

Dealing with the humanitarian crisis in the region
requires putting the crisis at the top of the list of
priorities of the international community and shedding
light on its scope and impact and on the suffering it
has caused to people in the region. It is also important
to call upon all international and regional partners to
supply the resources needed to lessen the suffering of
millions of women, children and displaced persons. We
call on tomorrow's meeting to focus on development
and humanitarian aspects with a view to ensuring
security for areas liberated from Boko Haram.

Finally, the crisis in the Lake Chad basin requires
the solidarity of the international community and
coordination of efforts by the United Nations agencies,
regional and subregional organizations as well as
Governments of the region, based on the various
cooperation and coordination mechanisms. Egypt
stands ready to step up its cooperation with the
Governments of the Lake Chad basin countries through
the Egyptian Agency of Partnership for Development in
order to put an end to the interconnected crises that the
region is experiencing.

