Mr. Tekaya (Tunisia) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Tunisian delegation, I would like to start
by thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important meeting and for giving us an opportunity
to hear the presentation by Ms. Carolyn McAskie on
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I should also like to thank Ms. McAskie
for her very useful presentation, which reflects both the
scope of the humanitarian tragedy in the country and
the untiring efforts deployed by the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners to provide assistance to the
people affected.

Indeed, the war that is ravaging the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has shattered the life of the
Congolese and has had disastrous consequences for a
large part of the population. Its effects have struck
harshly the economy of the country and have taken a
heavy social toll. We can see the effects of the crisis in
the daily life of the Congolese people. The Security
Council mission that went to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo last May was able to assess the breadth of
the crisis, which has worsened since then, and forecasts
of what will happen next are of great concern. All of
the regions of the country are suffering the
consequences of the war, but the situation in the
eastern part of the country remains particularly
volatile.

The humanitarian crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is marked by an increasing
number of displaced persons, approaching 2 million,
and they are increasingly vulnerable. Moreover,
the movement of Congolese refugees towards
neighbouring countries has created worrying
humanitarian, health and security situations. In
addition, tens of thousands of refugees from
neighbouring countries have flowed into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is also facing a serious health
crisis because of the spread of various diseases to
which the refugees and displaced persons are
particularly vulnerable, and also because of the
weakness of the health infrastructure of the country.
Food shortages have become serious. Education is also
harshly affected by war.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo thus poses many challenges for
the international community and humanitarian
organizations. The United Nations and humanitarian
organizations play an essential role in saving the lives
of those affected by war in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in meeting the humanitarian needs of
vulnerable populations. However, there are many
obstacles in their way, making it difficult to accomplish
their mission.

Today's meeting, which once again confirms the
extent of the humanitarian crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, coincides with the launching by
the United Nations, working with its humanitarian
partners, of the joint humanitarian action plan for 2001
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This should
mobilize the international community to increase its
assistance to the Congolese people and its support for
the efforts to establish peace and reconciliation in the
country and in the region.

It is necessary to increase humanitarian aid in
order to provide relief to the affected populations. We
agree, however, that the effect on the general situation
in the country will be limited if no progress is made in
the peace process.

Last January, the parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement reaffirmed here before the Security Council
their support for the Agreement, and they undertook to
respect its terms. Since then we have seen successive
developments that have jeopardized the peace process,
and the Security Council has stated its views on these
developments. In addition, the long-awaited complete
deployment of phase two of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), which gave rise to much hope,
has not yet taken place, and the foreign forces have not
yet withdrawn from Congolese territory as demanded
by the Security Council in its resolutions. In the
meantime, the humanitarian, economic and social
situation of the Congolese people has been constantly
deteriorating.

We have followed with interest the numerous
commendable political and diplomatic efforts and
initiatives that have been undertaken in recent weeks to
save the peace process. The declarations of goodwill
must now lead to action on the ground. Today, again,
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement is going through a
difficult phase and requires new impetus. The
discussion in the Security Council of the next report of
the Secretary-General on MONUC will provide us with
an opportunity to take stock of the situation, to confirm
the commitment of the United Nations and to envisage
the decisions to be taken.

Moreover, in the light of the close relationship
between the problems shaking the Great Lakes region
and the peace process under way, the adoption of a
comprehensive approach to address these problems in a
regional context is becoming increasingly necessary.

