Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to welcome back to the Council Prime Minister
Spirie, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and to thank him for his comments
today. I would also like to welcome High
Representative Inzko and congratulate him on the
assumption of his position. Let me take this
opportunity to thank the High Representative and his
staff for their hard work and dedication.

The United States is a friend of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and supports the aspirations of the
Bosnian people to enter Euro-Atlantic institutions. Our
support was demonstrated by the joint visit this month
of Vice President Biden and European Union High
Representative Solana. When he addressed the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
19 May, Vice President Biden expressed our
commitment to assist the Bosnian people to achieve
their dream. He also expressed our strong support for
the Office of the High Representative. We reiterate
those pledges today.

A good deal of progress has been made in Bosnia
and Herzegovina since the conflicts of the 1990s.
Prime Minister Spirie cited several examples today.
But we do remain deeply concerned about the situation
there. As the High Representative's report (see S/2009/246) makes clear, some leaders and political
parties still pursue narrow ethnic interests and still
espouse zero-sum nationalism. By doing so, they
continue to impede progress on urgently needed
reforms that would help all of the country's citizens.

Regrettably, we also continue to hear divisive
rhetoric. Those who purvey it seek to challenge the
High Representative's authorities, which have been
confirmed by the Security Council, and even to
threaten Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty and
territorial integrity, which is enshrined in the Dayton
Peace Agreement. We are also witnessing efforts to
undermine the very State institutions that must be
strengthened if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to meet the
challenges of modern statehood and advance towards
membership in NATO and the European Union.

Let me cite one particularly egregious
example - the 14 May conclusions of the Republika
Srpska National Assembly, which falsely asserted that
many of the authorities of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including those explicitly granted by the
Dayton Constitution, were somehow illegally obtained.
As my Government noted when the Council met last
December to discuss this issue, and as Vice President
Biden said in his recent address to the Bosnian
Parliamentary Assembly, the United States will stand
behind the Office of the High Representative so long as
it remains in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We will support
the transition of the High Representative's Office to a
European Union special representative once the five
objectives and the two conditions of the agreed upon
reform agenda have been completed. The Peace
Implementation Council will consider statements and
actions that serve to undermine the Bosnian State when
it gauges whether the criteria for closing the Office of
the High Representative have been met.

Ambassador Inzko's report rightly highlights a
bright spot that has been seen since our last meeting -
the enactment in March of the first amendment to the
Dayton Constitution to protect the multi-ethnic nature
of the Brcko District. The efforts that led to that
amendment, which grew out of the Prud process, offer
some cause for optimism, but while moving ahead with
additional reforms. We hope that this initiative will
translate as quickly as possible into actions that meet
the outstanding 5+2 requirements set by the Peace
Implementation Council.

The United States remains fully committed to
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina, based
on Dayton. We are also entirely committed to
supporting reforms that will allow that country to
achieve its aspirations for greater integration into the
structures of Europe and the Atlantic alliance. We urge
all Bosnian leaders to abandon the divisive nationalist
politics that have brought such suffering and sorrow in
the recent past, and we urge them to work across ethnic
lines towards the reforms required to advance the goals
that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina share.

