Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): I
would like to express my delegation's appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
debate and for having circulated a concept paper on the
subject under discussion.

I would like also to express my delegation's
condolences on the loss of eight Guatemalan
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on Monday.

The Great Lakes region has for decades been the
scene of many violent conflicts, reaching an
unprecedented crisis in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
Over the past year, however, peace processes in the
region have made significant progress. In Burundi, a
new Government was established through peaceful and
democratic elections, concluding that country's
transitional period. Meanwhile, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a referendum on the draft
constitution was held successfully, creating a solid
foundation for the elections to be held this year.

Despite those positive political developments, the
region is still faced with daunting challenges. Burundi
needs to further consolidate peace and reconciliation.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is critical
that free and democratic elections be held before the
end of the transitional period in June. In addition,
foreign armed groups operating in that country must be
disarmed and repatriated to their home countries.

In our View, there are three issues that are most
relevant to the achievement of durable peace, security
and sustainable development in the Great Lakes region:
taking a regional approach; focusing on the
peacebuilding process; and addressing the root causes
of the conflicts.

First, conflicts in the Great Lakes region need to
be seen from more of a regional perspective. The
people of the Great Lakes region are ethnically,
culturally and linguistically interlinked, which means
that an insecure situation in one country directly affects
other countries in the region. For example, foreign
armed groups operating in one country threaten the
security not just of that country but of neighbouring
countries as well, because they operate across borders.
Accordingly, ensuring peace and security in one
country necessitates close cooperation with its
neighbours.

We believe that regional problems can be best
resolved through regional organizations, which have
comparative advantages in leading peace processes at
the community level. In that regard, we welcome the
increasing assumption of responsibility and leadership
by the African Union (AU) in maintaining peace and
security in Africa, playing a role that is complementary
to United Nations efforts. We urge that the cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU be further
developed and institutionalized.

Secondly, peace and security in the Great Lakes
region requires a focus not just on peacemaking and
peacekeeping, but also on peacebuilding efforts. Even
after a new Government is established through
democratic elections, a country emerging from conflict
is likely to remain fragile for some time because of the
many challenges it faces, such as strengthening
national institutions and eradicating poverty. The
abrupt disengagement of the international community
at that stage can trigger the re-emergence of conflicts.
Burundi, for example, is currently at that stage, which
means that peacebuilding efforts must be pursued
vigorously in the coming years. In that regard, we look
forward to the early operationalization of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Thirdly, alongside those short- and medium-term
approaches, it is critical to address the root causes of
conflicts in order to prevent their recurrence and
maintain durable peace over the long term. These root
causes include chronic extreme poverty, a fragile
private sector, a lack of strong national institutions
based on the rule of law and good governance, and the
prevailing impunity. Although peaceful resolution of
conflict is crucial, it is far better to prevent conflicts in
advance. In that regard, it is necessary that the
countries in the region implement long-term economic
and social development strategies, with the assistance
of the international community.

The Republic of Korea has actively joined in
international efforts to assist the implementation of
development strategies by African countries. We plan
to double our official development assistance by 2009.
With that increased aid, we will step up our efforts to
support African countries - including those of the
Great Lakes region - in addressing the root causes of
conflict and achieving sustainable development, with a
focus on the fields of medical services, human resource
development and information technology. For this year,
we will provide $3.4 million for development projects
in the Great Lakes region. In addition, we welcome
opportunities to share with African countries our
experiences in implementing successful development
strategies and in strengthening good governance.
