Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First,
allow me to express our sincere gratitude to you
personally, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Indonesia for having convened this important debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Similarly, we would like to express our gratitude for
the detailed report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/643) and the briefing by the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, which highlighted
the urgency with which we must respond to this issue.

The Security Council, in its resolution 1674
(2006), reaffirmed its condemnation of attacks that are
deliberately aimed at civilians as a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights
standards. Under this resolution and the standards set
out in the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols, the Council must ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights in
regions where peacekeeping missions are deployed.

The mere discussion of this matter necessarily
brings to mind paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document, through which we
adopted the responsibility to protect as a standard of
this Organization. That concept, above and beyond the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal official States, clearly
establishes that when a Government will not or cannot
protect the rights of its citizens, the international
community, and therefore the United Nations, assumes
the responsibility of doing so. Sexual violence against
women as a tool of war or as simple political pressure
presents a clear example in which the international
community has the obligation to act. Within that
context, we must assess and analyse our achievements
and we must confess that we have failed in that respect.
This Organization, and in particular the Security
Council, must review the way in which we tackle this
issue.

For the Republic of Panama, the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict establishes a basis for the discussion on
how to proceed in this matter, with specific
recommendations on responding to those challenges
more effectively. The measures set out include specific
activities, such as the systematic inclusion of
information on, inter alia, sexual violence and access to
humanitarian assistance in the reports that we receive.
This represents clear guidance, which is missing in our
current practice.

However, there are a few proposals that require
even more consideration and discussion, especially
regarding the establishment of a working group on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which we
support in principle. However, on that item, we believe
it would be more pertinent to reflect on our working
methods before developing new structures. Otherwise,
we run the risk of not achieving our main objective,
which is to be effective in protecting civilians in
situations of armed conflict.

Lastly, I would like to underscore that a central
part of our effort to protect civilian populations is to
bring to justice those who have committed crimes
against humanity and/or violations of international
humanitarian law. That is why we reiterate our support
for the International Criminal Court to comply with its
mission to put an end to impunity for those responsible
for these crimes.

