Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank the Chairpersons of the
three Committees for their briefings, and I commend
you, Mr. President, for having convened, for the first
time, a meeting at which we can take stock of the work
of the three Council Committees involved in combating
terrorism. Although their mandates differ, it is
important to have a comprehensive overview of the
Council's work in this area.

Furthermore, our entire Organization must act
within the framework of a comprehensive strategy,
which the Secretary-General outlined at Madrid. We
support his approach and agree with the importance he
attaches to respect for human rights, which is not only
an obligation on the part of States but also an
instrument for the prevention of terrorism.

We share the Secretary-General's view that the
international community must urgently agree on a
definition of terrorism. We very much hope that an
agreement will be reached during the September
summit that will pave the way for the rapid adoption of
a comprehensive convention. The General Assembly
would thereby add a new element to the normative
framework in that area, as it has just done through the
adoption of the Convention on the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism.

The Council has shown the importance of its
contribution to combating one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. Its Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) has recently taken some
important steps under the leadership of Ambassador
Denisov and now Ambassador Loj. France is
particularly pleased that the first visit on the ground
fully met our expectations, thanks to outstanding
preparations and full cooperation on the part of the
Moroccan authorities.

The CTC has also been developing some best
practices to combat the financing of terrorism. It is our
hope that it will soon endorse the recommendations of
the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering
on this subject.

In order for the CTC fully to meet the
expectations of Member States, it is more than ever
critical that its Executive Directorate, created almost a
year ago, be provided with all of the experts it requires.
We endorse that statement made this morning by the
Chairperson of the CTC in that respect.

With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we see two major
areas where improvements might be made. The first
has to do with the Committee's list. All Member States
should undertake to provide to the Committee
additional names and entities, giving the necessary
information to identify them and establishing their link
with Al-Qaida or the Taliban. The Committee's
methods must also be improved in order to give rise,
after a case-by-case analysis, to a more effective de-
listing procedure.

The second area is that of fine-tuning the
sanctions themselves. In a few weeks the Committee
will begin to consider a draft resolution on this
question. The Committee will be working on the
interesting proposals made by the follow-up team
experts. It could also suggest to the Council that it
begin to focus on new issues in order to strengthen the
combat against terrorism - for example, better
oversight of MANPADs or of the Internet, or increased
cooperation with Interpol.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) has filled a gap in the existing multilateral
machinery by addressing the risk of access by terrorists
to weapons of mass destruction. The Committee does
not intend to substitute for the responsibilities of
States, but it does create an obligation for States to
adopt the necessary legislative measures in many areas,
such as border control, export control and the
criminalization of proliferation.

The Committee is up and running, and experts
have begun to consider States' reports. We will
therefore soon obtain information that will allow us to
progress in this crucial area.

Finally, I should like to emphasize that we
believe that the three Committees and their experts
must strengthen their coordination in areas of common
interest and do a better job of exchanging information
and experience. They are confronted with common
questions: how to ensure that States meet their
obligations; how to build States' capacities; and how to
cooperate effectively with other international and
regional organizations.

Joint reflection on this issue can only enhance the
effectiveness of our actions. My delegation will
continue to work within these three Committees with
the following objectives: increased effectiveness in the
combat against terrorism, with full respect for human
rights; compliance with those obligations that are
incumbent on every Member State; and full
cooperation on the part of all in the combat against a
scourge to which no one can remain indifferent.

