Mr. Miyet (spoke in French): Before dealing with
the many questions relating to the Joint Military
Commission (JMC), I shall respond to two general
questions. I shall try not to be evasive in responding to
the representative of Bahrain. He asked why progress in
the Lusaka process was so slow, particularly at the
political level. Was that question addressed to the
Secretariat or to the parties? That is the question that I
wish to throw back at him. He also asked why the United
Nations was so reticent. Was that question addressed to
the Secretariat or to the Council itself? Those questions
can be asked in relation to our discussion today.

With regard to the Secretariat, I shall respond by
making three points. First, the Secretary-General, who
was here yesterday, repeated that he was firmly
committed to the whole of the African continent and to
ensuring that the United Nations is present there and
plays its part. That is a full and complete commitment. A
plan has been proposed for a three-phase operation
following the signing of the Lusaka Agreement, and we
are trying to implement that three-phase plan. A number
of elements are the responsibility of the Secretariat itself,
while others are dependent on the situation on the ground
or on the means provided by the Security Council.
However, sometimes we have the feeling of being ahead,
and sometimes we are criticized for moving too fast, as
happened when we dispatched the military liaison
officers.

We hope that during the course of phase two, we
will have additional information on the 500 military
observers. How will they be deployed and in what
conditions on the ground? What kind of logistical means
and protection will they have? Will the technical team on
the ground be able to provide us with information? We
cannot get the information by reading a crystal ball. This
is one important element that we are working on
constantly. As the Council knows, the technical
assessment team has been in Kinshasa for several months
now. We are making every effort in the hope that it will
soon be deployed and, fortunately, we are now working
with the Joint Military Commission so as to be able to
complete that work.

 

The second aspect of our commitment and resolve
relates to the support provided to the Joint Military
Commission. Here, I am responding to Ambassador
Dejammet. I would remind him that we already have four
officers in Lusaka providing support to the Joint Military
Commission. From the beginning, we hoped that the Joint
Military Commission would have a permanent secretariat
by 20 December. Here again, the United Nations is doing
its utmost to support and facilitate its establishment.

And here, France made a welcome financial
contribution, for which I am grateful; thanks to a United
Nations aeroplane, we were able to help in the deployment
of the OAU military liaison officers to a number of sites in
eastern Congo. So we have been active, and, with a sense
of serious-mindedness, will continue to be active.

The second part of my response relates to our need for
all necessary resources. We are constantly aware of the
need for the greatest seriousness, responsibility and clear-
mindedness, something that a number of delegations have
mentioned. Some have spoken of past tragedies the United
Nations has faced; two recent reports are reminders of
these. As members know, the Secretary-General and his
team in my Department are fully aware of the need to
operate with maximal security, but without setting
preconditions that would make any operation completely
impossible.

Our aim is to implement the phases of the plan as
quickly as possible so that we can play a positive part and
can have the needed influence on the parties, with a view
to giving the peace process every chance of success. We
want to do this credibly; some have referred to "robustness"
and to the force's deterrent power. We have these matters
in mind.
I believe that Ambassador Holbrooke used the word
"confusion"; let me respond by saying that there is no
confusion. There are three phases, and each phase must be
envisaged in terms of the resources it needs. Phase two
involves 500 observers, and it goes without saying that
protecting them, deploying them and ensuring
communication and freedom of movement for them - all
with the necessary resources - are important to us. That is
what we are working on at present.

Let me return to Ambassador Lavrov's comment,
which I think is absolutely fundamental. These observers
must be deployed in a context in which they have the
resources they need. Here, one test is that we must know
whether or not the Security Council will provide full
financial support and whether or not the troops, logistics,
communications and engineering will be made available
to the Secretary-General so that the mission can be
deployed on the ground. It is not a question solely of
taking a decision; it is a question of having the necessary
resources, including the troops and equipment needed for
an operation of this kind.

In that connection, we welcome the recent Security
Council resolution that enables us to begin the
procurement of equipment. A draft budget of $31 million,
plus $500,000 for humanitarian assistance, has been
submitted to the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions to enable us to move ahead.

Returning to the Joint Military Commission, this is
one of the keys to the success of the operation. We must
know with certainty the nature of the determination, will
and purpose of the parties, and the JMC can be a
mechanism for addressing any difficulties that might
arise. It is therefore absolutely essential to establish a
permanent structure that would cooperate closely with the
United Nations so that we can understand the intentions
of the parties and so that the parties can in turn
understand the intentions of the United Nations and its
capabilities and modalities for action. This was mentioned
by the representative of the Netherlands, and it is of
importance to us. That is why the links between the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the United
Nations are so important.

Ambassador Dejammet asked whether the Joint
Military Commission could make its reports available.
The JMC does not answer to MONUC; it answers to the
OAU. We shall approach the OAU for permission to
make the reports available, and for our part we feel that
this would be a welcome development.

A third element of my response relates to the
Secretariat's unambiguous determination to move forward
quickly. As far as we are concerned, being serious-
minded does not mean being slow. We are proceeding at
a certain pace; as I have said, we have on occasion been
criticized for moving too fast. At one point, this gave rise
to some uncertainty, some questions and some doubts in
the minds of the parties themselves. We want to maintain
our present pace, bering in mind the constant need for
complete transparency and for the full cooperation of the
parties, inter alia within the Joint Military Commission.

As to the proposals to be submitted to the Council
early in January 2000, this is clearly a process that is still

 

under way. If we already had all the final elements of the
concept of operations, members of the Council would
obviously have these before them. This is related to the
decisions of the Joint Military Commission; these decisions,
especially the most recent, have been useful from this
standpoint. We also must have a very clear idea of the
needs on the ground; here, the conclusions of the technical
survey team will be most useful. Further, the three phases
of the operation must be integrated into an evolving
process. In our view, phase two cannot be regarded as an
end in itself; it is a phase that should give rise to the
development of phase three, which will be a broader
peacekeeping operation taking us to the very conclusion of
the process that began at Lusaka: the withdrawal of forces.

Here in New York and in consultation with our
representatives on the ground, our thinking has evolved
over the past few weeks, and it could continue to evolve.
We want in any event to cooperate with the parties and
discuss all these matters with them, and also with members
of the Security Council and with troop contributors, which
will all have something to say. But for our part, the result
of this process will be what we regard as reasonable for
carrying out the mission, for ensuring the safety of our
troops and for trying to provide security. It will not be a
compromise - of necessity a feeble compromise - that
would seek to satisfy other demands.

