Mr. Lucas (Angola): We congratulate Malaysia
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. We express our gratitude
for the convening of this open debate and commend
the Malaysian delegation for its excellent work and
dedication in chairing the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. We assure you, Mr. President, of
Angola's full cooperation towards the success of the
Security Council's proceedings during your presidency.

We thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
remarks. A special word of praise goes to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
as we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
establishment ofher Office. We pledge to Ms. Zerrougui
our full political backing for the outstanding mission
entrusted to her Office.

We also thank the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Mr. Anthony Lake, for his remarks and for the work of
UNICEF to better the fate of children all over the world.

Current conflicts disproportionately impact
children. Civilians are the main victims of
indiscriminate attacks, with disturbing repercussions
on children. The report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2016/360) highlights
serious challenges to the protection of children and
the increasing violations inflicted upon them. The
situations in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, Somalia,
South Sudan, Yemen, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Nigeria and Palestine are some of the instances
reported by the United Nations of children being
brutally killed, injured, maimed, abducted, forcibly
recruited into armed groups and exposed to sexual
abuse and exploitation.

The gruesome reality shows an increasing number
of children affected by violent extremism. They are
used as executioners or suicide bombers; targeted
by acts intended to destroy, humiliate and terrorize
communities in order to force them into compliance;
and subject to massive displacement and all sorts of
trafficking, including the slave trade. The Secretary-
General's report highlights cases of the deprivation
of the liberty of children formerly associated with
extremists or armed groups, without due process. In
our view, these cases should be carefully reviewed,
since many of those children are victims and should be
treated as such. Member States must ensure that trial
procedures are consistent with international standards
ofjuvenile justice and the principles of the best interests
of the child and their specific needs and vulnerabilities.
The reintegration, not punishment, of children formerly
associated with armed groups should be the priority.
One very disturbing trend is that of increasing
attacks on densely populated areas - including
schools, hospitals and medical facilities - by military
forces and armed and terrorist groups. These criminal
actions must end and, in due time, the perpetrators must
be held accountable. The recently adopted resolution
2286 (2016) recalls the specific obligation under
international humanitarian law to respect and protect
medical and humanitarian personnel, their means
of transport and equipment, and hospitals and other
medical facilities in situations of armed conflict, and
to ensure that the wounded and sick receive the medical
care and assistance required.

Member States and the international community
must do all in their power to help protect schools,
students and teachers in situations of armed conflict
and ensure that schools remain a safe place, while
strictly respecting their civil character. Angola recently
adhered to the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted at the
Oslo conference in May 2015, endorsing the guidelines
for protecting schools and universities from military
use duringt conflict. This process has been driven
by Member States, civil society and child protection
actors.

Another area of concern is the continued
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations peacekeepers and non-United Nations
international forces. In that regard, we are of the
view that peacekeeping operations should establish a
mandatory predeployment requirement for all troop-
contributing countries in training on child protection,
aimed at radically changing the current state of affairs.
The systematic inclusion of child protection advisers
in the mandates of special political and peacekeeping
missions is important in making troop-contributing
countries and individual members of peacekeeping
missions further aware of this critical issue.

On a positive note, we would like to underline
the progress made by the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign. The commitments of Governments involved
in the campaign bring them into compliance with
international standards bearing on the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict. Governments listed
in the annexes of the Secretary-General's reports are
now implementing action plans with the United Nations
aimed at eliminating the recruitment and use of children
in national security forces. Most parties listed in the
reports are non-State armed groups. We call on the
United Nations to continue striving to identify concrete
commitments by engaging with armed groups in order
to attain new action plans while implementing existing
ones with a view to ending the recruitment and use of
children as soldiers.

The engagement with non-State armed groups has
had remarkable results, in particular in the Central
African Republic. The signing of an agreement to end
the recruitment and use of and other violations against
children led to the release, during the Bangui Forum
in 2015, of over 3,000 children from the ranks of
signatory armed groups. Similar events in Colombia,
Mali, Myanmar, Philippines, the Sudan and South
Sudan are other examples ofprogress in that sense. The
inclusion in peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes
of specific commitments related to child protection,
and the provision of requirements for the rapid release
of children from armed forces and non-State armed
groups are, in our view, important measures in post-
conflicts situations.

In conclusion, ongoing armed conflicts have
resulted in the forced displacement of ever-growing
numbers of people. In 2015, children - many of them
unaccompanied or separated from their families and in
high-risk situations - constituted half of the refugee
population. Preventing the outbreak of conflicts is still
the best way to protect children. Unfortunately, the
international community still lacks appropriate tools for
effective preventive action. Meanwhile, the protection
of children in armed conflict must continue to be at the
centre of the international community's priorities and
of a true, comprehensive strategy of active protection
and humanitarian response.

