Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank the United States delegation for convening
this open debate to further consider the role of the
Security Council in the issue of children and armed
conflict. I would also like to express our appreciation
to all of today's briefers.

As one of the first countries to have signed and
ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child (CRC) on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
particularly aware of this issue. In that regard, we call
on all Member States that have not yet done so to sign
and ratify the CRC and its Optional Protocol. Despite
all the steps we have taken at various levels, including
through international law and human rights law,
children are still suffering from the horrors of war. As
the most vulnerable group of all, they are often subject
to rape, sexual violence and abduction. They continue
to be recruited, killed, maimed and deprived of their
right to education and health care. Their involvement in
armed conflict, including when violence is perpetrated
against them, constitutes a serious violation of human
rights.

We are deeply concerned about the grave violations
outlined in the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/339)
and reaffirm that it is the State's primary responsibility
to provide protection and relief to all children affected
by armed conflict. All parties to conflicts should
comply fully with international law in order to protect
the civilian population. Moreover, the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict should be seen
as a priority that is above politics. We reiterate that both
gradual and more vigorous measures should be directed
against groups and individuals who persistently
commit serious violations against children. In order to
end impunity for violations against children, Member
States must uphold existing international standards
and put into practice their obligations through national
legislative systems. Perpetrators must be brought to
justice.

Protecting children in armed conflict is one of the
duties of the United Nations. The series of relevant
Security Council resolutions demand protection for
children in armed conflict. There have been significant
improvements by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations aimed at better ensuring the protection
of children in conflict zones. We therefore call upon
the Council to continue to support the children and
armed conflict agenda by strengthening provisions
for the protection of children in all relevant mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping, special political and
peacebuilding missions, including the deployment of
child protection advisers. We also need to ensure that
peacekeepers are of the highest quality and that they
uphold the highest standards.

Preventing crimes against children is an important
component of the set of measures developed to promote
post-conflict settlement and recovery. In accordance
with the relevant provisions of Security Council
resolutions, all parties concerned need to ensure that
child protection provisions are integrated into all peace
negotiations and peace agreements. Children affected
by armed conflict must be a priority in the post-conflict
recovery and reconstruction process. They are our
future. Reintegrating such children into communities
is often a difficult task, especially for domestic and
international stakeholders dealing in multifaceted
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.

To resolve such complex issues, there is a need for
efficient coordination among the different actors on the
ground. Particular attention should be given to refugee
and displaced children, children with disabilities and
those who have been subjected to sexual violence.
In addition, education is an essential tool for the
advancement of societies. Therefore, in times of conflict
as well as in post-conflict periods, all steps should be
taken to safeguard the right of the child to education.

We believe that cooperation and exchanges of
information between the Council's Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and relevant sanctions committees
should be improved. We reiterate the importance of
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign in preventing and
putting an end to the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces in conflict. Accordingly, we
also recognize the important contribution of regional
and subregional organizations to conflict prevention,
mediation and peace support operations.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that conflict
prevention is a starting point or prerequisite for
sustainable peace, development and respect for all
human rights. We firmly believe that the Security
Council should remain committed in its determination
to ensure the full implementation of and respect for its
resolutions on this issue. The protection of children
needs to be on the top of any future review agenda for
the sake of our own future.

