Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): It is increasingly alarming
that the crisis and the turn of events in Ukraine poses a
threat to the security of the entire region and continues
to affect the daily lives ofinnocent people. While there
are a number of diplomatic engagements under way
in approaching the crisis, we believe it is important
to take into account substantive issues that gave rise
to the conflict in the first place thus addressing the
grievances of all concerned parties.

We reiterate our support for the solidarity of all
Ukrainian communities and maintain our call for
an inclusive political Ukrainian-led dialogue that
recognizes the diversity of the Ukrainian people
and emphasizes the protection of minorities and the
Russian community. As the Security Council and
the international community, we have a duty to find
an end to the confrontation and allow the Ukrainian
people to determine their own destiny and their own
future in a genuine and impartial manner. We thank the
United Nations leadership for its active role and steps
taken thus far in an effort to de-escalate the situation
as described to us by the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, whom I wish to thank personally.
We remain concerned that intensified rhetoric
on all fronts is undermining efforts to find common
ground. We reiterate our call on all parties to exercise
extreme restraint during this volatile time and to resolve
the issue through existing bilateral and multilateral
arguments. We the international community must
uphold our commitment to the principles of peace
and security and do our part to ensure that there is no
further deterioration of the crisis, which includes a call
for all parties involved to commit to finding a peaceful
solution.

Rwanda stands for respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States as
stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations. In
our View, it is time to focus our priority on achieving
sustainable peace through genuine talks geared towards
de-escalation of the situation and to encourage all
concerned parties to deploy sustained efforts to defuse
fear, hatred and other negative emotions that will
worsen the situation.

