Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending you, Madam President, for convening this
important debate.

The delegation of Sri Lanka associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The peace process in the Middle East is a matter
of intrinsic interest to us all. The Secretary-General
travelled to the region recently to see the situation on
the ground for himself, and strongly encouraged the
resumption of bilateral negotiations. We support and
value his efforts. The Quartet envoys have continued to
push on with their task, as has Jordan. Even though a
just and durable solution to the situation in the Middle
East continues to evade us, it is important to remain
engaged. We hope that, even in the midst of doubts and
frustrations, the parties will remain focused on the
need to achieve an enduring peace and to explore all
proposals on the main goals. We owe that to all the
people of the region.

The settlement activities by Israel continue to be
one of the main factors in the recurrence of violence in
the region. The Quartet and the wider international
community have repeatedly called for a freeze of
settlement activity and an end to the demolition of
Palestinian homes. As the Under-Secretary-General
said in his briefing on 28 February (see S/PV.6725),
incidents of settler violence against Palestinians
continue in the West Bank. We hope that the settlement
activity, which is a key source of human suffering and
continuing friction in the occupied territories, and the
resentment fuelling the conflict will be brought to an
12-30747
end, consistent with obligations under international law
and in line with the wishes of the wider international
community and, of course, this body. The law on that
matter is very clear: settlements in the occupied
territories are not legal.

Tolerance and understanding must be the key to
peaceful coexistence in the Middle East, which is
dotted with many religious sites that are holy to
Muslims, Jews and Christians. We encourage all parties
to exercise the utmost restraint for the sake of the
civilians and for the greater goal of a lasting peace.

We have often stated that the political unity and
economic advancement of the Palestinian people will
contribute to the viability of the two-State solution. In
that regard, it is notable that the President of the
Palestinian Authority and the leader of Hamas recently
agreed to form a transitional Government of
technocrats. We also look forward to the Palestinian
legislative and presidential elections.

We appreciate the ongoing efforts by
international donors, regional organizations and United
Nations agencies, such as the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, to alleviate the suffering of Palestinian civilians,
especially children. We also strongly urge the
occupying authorities to lift the restrictions on access
and egress to Gaza for persons and goods. That will
significantly contribute to the economic stability of
Gaza.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Sri Lanka's
support for a peaceful and negotiated settlement of the
Palestinian issue, and call for the implementation of
the General Assembly resolutions on the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to statehood and the
attainment of a two-State solution.

Sri Lanka supports Palestine's application for
admission to full membership of the United Nations. It
is our hope that it will also receive this body's
favourable consideration. We also call for the
restoration of the Golan to Syria and the occupied
Lebanese lands to Lebanon.

