Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (Spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over our work
today. I would like to commend your country for having
organized this open debate and for conducted with
great balance and transparency the negotiations on the
important resolution 2341 (2017), which we adopted
today and which, together with resolution 2309 (2016)
on the terrorist threat to civil aviation, reflects the
importance that the Security Council attaches to the
issue. I would also like to thank the Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, for her participation and all the other
briefers at today's debate for their informative briefings.

There is growing concern on the part of the
international community with regard to the threat of
terrorist attacks against critical infrastructure. That
concern is highlyjustified when we consider the serious
consequences that such acts may entail in terms of the
loss of life and the elimination of or the decreased
ability of States to provide essential services to their
population and economic losses. The actions carried
out by those terrorist groups through the use of new
technologies and increased capabilities extend beyond
borders and regions, which forces us to adopt measures
to confront those new challenges. It is therefore no
surprise that at the State, regional and international
levels, initiatives aimed at protecting infrastructure,
taking into account both physical and cybernetic
aspects, are gaining ground.

It is also necessary to generate greater public
awareness concerning cyberthreats and their potential
consequences through involving all public and
private stakeholders and promoting cooperation and
coordination among them. Furthermore, we undeniably
find ourselves in an are that requires greater legislative
development both at the domestic and international
levels. As we have already seen in other areas in the
fight against terrorism, inter-State, regional and
international cooperation is essential for the success
of preventive policies on attacks of that nature as well
as for the containment of their potential consequences.
That is becoming increasingly necessary as many
States face difficulties and constraints with regard to
applying and implementing effective policies owing to
insufficient material resources and the lack of trained
personnel and practical experience in assessing threats,
risks, vulnerabilities and consequences. Accordingly,
a greater exchange of information and experiences,
knowledge of best practices, technical assistance and,
in some cases, financial support are also necessary.

It is important to create areas of discussion and
seek effective prevention measures, thereby supporting
the work already being done by the United Nations
through its competent bodies. We also believe it is
relevant to underscore that critical infrastructure
must be protected wherever it may be. Uruguay was
a sponsor resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of
hospitals and humanitarian personnel in situations of
armed conflict, and attaches particular importance to
that issue.

In Latin America, several countries already have
a strategy and legal framework for cybersecurity and
cyberdefence, and others have begun to develop national
and comprehensive policies and strategies concerning
cybersecurity. In 2004, the members ofthe Organization
of American States (OAS) unanimously adopted the
Comprehensive Inter-American Cybersecurity Strategy,
and in 2012 they signed the Declaration Strengthening
Cybersecurity in the Americas. Similarly, in 2015
the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of
the OAS adopted the declaration on the Protection of
Critical Infrastructure from Emerging Threats.

Uruguay has its own response centre to respond
to cybersecurity threats that coordinates and
implements the response to that type of incident and
develops and disseminates policy standards and
best practices in order to increase security levels. In
tandem with the Government's electronic agency for
the country, it collaborates with other countries and
has joined international bodies with a view to bolster
communication and cooperation among response
centres. That is the case of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism and the specialized
United Nations Regional Inter-agency Working Group
on Information and Communications Technologies.
At the level of the Ministry of the Interior, there is
a department of technological crimes, and in April
2015 we established a response defence centre for
cybersecurity incidents in the Ministry of Defence. In
the first quarter of 2016 in Uruguay, there was total
of 419 incidents of cybersecurity incidents, which
accounted for an 11 per cent increase compared to the
same period for the previous year. Among other factors,
that increase is attributed to the global trends relating
to cyberattacks and cyberfraud.

It is undeniable that the capacity of Member
States to respond to terrorist attacks against critical
infrastructure remains uneven owing in large part to
its varying degrees of development and the availability
of resources. We must therefore must be aware of the
collective duty to provide protection as well as the
respect for the sovereignty of States while ensuring
the right balance between security measures and the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.

