Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Once again, Bolivia expresses its
strongest condemnation of the nuclear and ballistic-
missile tests carried out by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We once again call on that country
to abandon its nuclear and ballistic-missile programme
in a comprehensive, verifiable and irreversible manner
and to comply with the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. As part of the world's
first declared nuclear-weapon-free zone - in line with
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean, better known as
the Treaty of Tlatelolco - Bolivia voted in favour of
resolution 2375 (2017). In doing so, we were motivated
by our calling as a pacifist State and by our rejection of
the development and manufacture of nuclear weapons
as constituting a grave violation of the relevant
international treaties on the subject, of human rights
and of the right to life itself.

We believe that sanctions must not be an end in
and of themselves. They must be used to draw the
parties to the negotiating table, while always taking
into account, in this case, the humanitarian situation
of the population of North Korea. Sanctions alone will
not resolve the problem. Were there to be a lack of
political and diplomatic solutions, we would be facing
a collective failure on the part of the Security Council.

In that regard, in accordance with the provisions
of paragraph 27 of resolution 2371 (2017), Bolivia
proposes that the Security Council begin working
as soon as possible to bring the parties back to the
negotiation table and resume the Six-Party Talks. We
urge avoiding any provocative or unilateral acts or any
other act beyond the framework of international law
or the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We reiterate once again our support for
the Chinese dual suspension initiative, which seeks to
enable a simultaneous freeze on actions on the Korean
peninsula, as well as for the Russian-Chinese initiative
and road map, which currently is the only concrete
proposal to resolve the situation.

Lastly, Boliva urgently calls on all the parties
concerned to rule out any type of military solution or
threat of the use of force and to return to negotiations
to reach a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution
that will result in the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.

