Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to thank the United States for having taken
the initiative of convening this unprecedented meeting
of the Security Council on the fight against corruption
in conflict situations. We also warmly thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and Mr. Prendergast for their
illuminating briefings.

Corruption is both a consequence of instability
and conflict and an important factor in exacerbating
them. The Council is therefore the appropriate forum
to address this issue, but we must do so in a pragmatic,
operational and non-ideological manner.

In addition to significantly weakening institutions
that safeguard the rule of law, corruption leads to drastic
economic disparity and promotes organized crime
and the financing of terrorism. It thereby undermines
the security and the political, economic and social
development of affected States. In that regard, it can
be an obstacle to international peace and security,
particularly in countries in conflict or post-conflict
situations, which often suffer a lack of institutions or
weak institutions. Those countries, already vulnerable,
are often the first victims of the ravages of corruption,
which affects the stability of the State, the security of
its citizens and the future of the country.

Beyond the threat it poses to peace, corruption is
a major obstacle to development. Free of all ideology,
France's pragmatic approach helps us to us see
corruption as a threat to peace and development. It
is an insidious evil that rots them both. Conversely,

good governance - that is, a legal and institutional
environment that promotes transparency and
accountability - is a necessary condition for

peacebuilding and development.

In that context, it is absolutely essential that the
international community remain fully engaged in
the fight against corruption at all levels - national,
regional and international. Fifteen years after its
adoption, the United Nations Convention against
Corruption remains the only universal instrument and
a pillar of the international fight against corruption.
France reiterates its call for the strict implementation
of the Convention by all States, in particular through its
review mechanism, which helps to ensure the effective
monitoring of the application of the Convention.

In that framework, each State has a responsibility
and duty to act to put an end to corruption. Since we are
here to share best practices, let me briefly share France's
experience. We have considerably strengthened our
anti-corruption powers by mobilizing public authorities,
economic actors and civil society, who are closer to the
field and promote innovative initiatives. To prevent
and effectively fight corruption, non-State actors, who
have essential expertise and links on the ground, play
a major role. It is therefore important to implement
joint strategies that bring together States, civil society
and the private sector. That is the key to success.Those
avenues are part and parcel of the assessment to which
France was subjected this year as part of the second
review cycle of the Convention against Corruption.

In order to effectively fight corruption, economic
transparency is also essential. That is why in 2016
France adopted a law on transparency, the fight against
corruption and the modernization of the economy. That
law also created the French anti-corruption agency that
is responsible for drawing up recommendations on the
prevention of and assistance in detecting corruption
for public and economic actors, as well as a national
plan for the prevention of corruption. We encourage
all States to establish robust national mechanisms to
prevent and combat corruption.

Beyond the national level, regional and international
organizations also have a central role to play in
contributing to anti-corruption efforts and in
supporting States that express a need for them. In
Europe, for example, the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development and the Council of
Europe have developed particularly relevant regional
legal instruments. The Group of 20 also has an
anti-corruption working group, which France is
co-chairing with Argentina until the end of this year.

Finally, I would like to highlight the key role of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) as
the guarantor of the Convention against Corruption. The
UNODC undertakes many anti-corruption activities,
including the facilitation of the review mechanism and
technical assistance activities - for example, training
workshops for judges and prosecutors or assistance in
the drafting of legislative documents - in order to help
States implement their international obligations in that
area. We encourage all Member States to support the
important work of the UNODC in that regard.

Let me conclude by stressing the importance
of international cooperation in the fight against
corruption, in particular in order to learn from the best
practices already in place. France thus fully supports the
Open Government Partnership, which we co-chaired
in 2016. That initiative, which seeks to increase the
openness of public data and civic participation in public
decision-making and is now comprised of more than
70 countries from all continents, is a formidable tool
for preventing corruption risks. We hope that as many
States as possible will join those efforts, and on behalf
of France, I would like to once again make an appeal to
that end.

