Mr. Sidorov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation attaches great importance
to the adoption by the Security Council of the draft
resolution on extending the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT). The
Mission's activities are an important factor stabilizing the
situation in Tajikistan and on the Tajik-Afghan border, and
are facilitating the successful implementation of the inter-
Tajik agreements.

The Russian Federation believes that there is a need to
further reinforce the Mission's capabilities, as this would
enable it to carry out its allotted tasks more effectively. We
in particular intend to return to the question of an increase
in the number of UNMOT personnel.

The Russian Federation actively supports the
Secretary-General's proposal to deploy, with the
agreement of the Afghan authorities, a special UNMOT
unit in northern Afghanistan to allow for more direct
liaison with the T ajik opposition and to establish a base
for investigating, on both sides of the Tajik-Afghan
border, violations of the agreement on a temporary cease-
fire and the cessation of other hostile acts of
17 September 1994.

I should like once again to draw members' attention
to the repeated appeals the leadership of Tajikistan and by
the States contributing troops to the Peace-keeping Force
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) for a
fully-fledged United Nations operation to be deployed in
Tajikistan. As is well known, this idea is supported by the
Tajik opposition too.

We note that the draft resolution expresses
satisfaction at the close liaison between UNMOT, the CIS
Peace-keeping Forces and the border troops in Tajikistan.
In the View of the Russian Federation, this close
cooperation between the United Nations Mission and the
CIS Peace-keeping force is an important factor for
stabilizing the situation.

We are satisfied with the draft resolution submitted
today for adoption by the Council, primarily because it
directs the parties to search energetically for ways to
achieve national reconciliation with a view to the fastest
possible achievement of agreements on fundamental
issues relating to Tajikistan's future political and
constitutional order.

The Russian Federation, as one of the observer
States at the inter-Tajik talks held under United Nations
auspices, is making its contribution to moving the peace
process forward. It is clear, however, that only
unswerving and full implementation by the parties of all
the obligations they have undertaken can create a climate
conducive to dialogue on the fundamental constitutional
and political issues. The continuing acts of provocation in
some areas along the Tajik-Afghan border by militant
opposition die-hards by no means helps establish such a
climate.

The Russian Federation expects that the Security-
Council's urgent appeals will be heeded by the Tajik
parties and will provide a significant boost to their efforts
to seek ways to achieve national reconciliation.

 

