Mr. Sahovie (Serbia and Montenegro): Since this
is the first time thatI am taking the floor in the Council
this month, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
June. I also wish to thank you for convening this
meeting today. I thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing.

Exactly four years ago, the Security Council
passed resolution 1244 (1999) to chart the way to
durable peace in Kosovo and Metohija. At the time, a
future without the fear of persecution was envisaged
through the establishment of a multi-ethnic, democratic
and lawful society, in which the civil, political and
human rights of all would be ensured. While
confirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia - whose name has
been changed to Serbia and Montenegro - the
resolution aimed at preventing new conflicts, creating a
secure environment for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, demilitarizing the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) and establishing substantial
autonomy and self-government. What has been
achieved?

There is peace in Kosovo and Metohija, if peace
can be defined solely as the absence of war. However,
security exists selectively, that is to say, for the
majority but not for minorities. Again, freedom of
movement is the privilege of the majority alone. The
fate of more than 1,000 missing Serbs has not yet been
resolved. There is little stability to speak of. Almost a
quarter of a million internally displaced persons from
minority communities - primarily Serbs who fled the
province at the time ofthe arrival ofthe United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR - cannot return home.
Although a senior official from the Provisional
Institutions of Kosovo and Metohija recently attempted
to explain that failure by citing high unemployment
rates, facts point in a different direction. A gruesome
example of the real cause for the absence of returns
was the bludgeoning to death of two 80-year-olds and
their son in the town of Obilic on 4 June. They were
natives of Obilic who had placed their trust in the
international administrators of the province to ensure
their safety.

My Government acknowledges the many
expressions of condemnation and outrage that this
atrocity has generated. We especially appreciate the
Security Council's quick reaction to this gruesome
crime. We also take note of the fact that, in stark
contrast with previous murders of minority members, a
special police squad to investigate the killing has been
established and a cash reward is being offered for
information leading to the perpetrators.

It has been stated within the Council and outside
it that acts such as the Stolic murder are directed
against returns, against ethnic reconciliation and
against the creation of a multi-ethnic society. That is
true. However, given the fact that all forms of violence
against minorities, including terrorist attacks, have thus
far garnered only verbal condemnation, it is unclear
what arguments could be offered to 18 Serb families in
Obilic to convince them to reconsider their decision to
leave the town forever. Whose ultimate victory will
that be?

Security, of course, cannot be achieved by words.
The fact is that the perpetrators of that atrocity have
not been identified, much less brought to justice. It is
also a fact that the investigation of the 17 May murder
in Vitina of mathematics professor Zoran Markovic has
not made any progress that we are aware of. The same
is true of the case of 90-year-old Slavko Stamenkovic,
who was brutally beaten in his home in Vitina on 21
May, and of the 6 May stoning of a bus driving Serb
children near Mitrovica.

If the perpetrators are not speedily brought to
justice now - as they have not been in previous cases
of inter-ethnic murder since 1999 - the Obilic killing
will serve to strengthen the culture of impunity
surrounding the violence against minorities. It will also
provide further evidence that minorities, and Serbs in
particular, do not enjoy the basic human right to life,
let alone any other right. We therefore call on the
Security Council to see to it that UNMIK, in
accordance with its responsibilities defined four years
ago, ensures that violence is not yet again confirmed as
a legitimate political means in Kosovo and Metohija.
Without that outcome, the latest atrocity will be a
further setback in creating sufficient confidence to
initiate the dialogue on practical issues, whose
establishment my Government has consistently
supported and called for. Pristina has thus far rejected
every initiative in that regard.

As we are all aware, UNMIK has its own list of
achievements in connection with implementing
resolution 1244 (1999). The wave of Kosovo Albanian
refugees in 1999 was reversed very quickly. Elections
were held and the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government were established, which led to the
increasing transfer of responsibilities to local
authorities. However, those Institutions have proven to
be more efficient at insisting on their right to decide on
foreign policy and defence matters and on ignoring
minority rights - as witnessed by the law on higher
education - on pressuring for independence, and - as
in the most recent Assembly resolution, which called
for regulating "the status of the fighters for the freedom
and independence of Kosovo" - at creating ethnic
division.

As part of that trend, the Kosovo Protection
Corps (KPC), which has been officially designated as a
civilian emergency organization, has retained and
enhanced its military capacities. It is engaged in
tireless efforts to preserve itself as the future army of
an independent Kosovo. The activities of Albanian
National Army (ANA) terrorists within the KPC in
connection with the 12 April railway attack in northern
Kosovo and Metohija have been confirmed beyond a
shadow of a doubt. UNMIK and KFOR demands for
data regarding the presence of the ANA within the
KPC were met by a very characteristic response from
the commander of the Corps, who said that, under his
limited powers, he could offer no more information.
We fully expect prompt and visible results from the
international special investigative civil board formed
on 2 June to investigate current and future members of
the KPC who may be involved in proscribed
organizations or activities.

In such overall conditions, UNMIK developed a
strategy based on the principle of "standards before
status", defining eight basic criteria for assessing
progress in achieving the standards. In each of those
eight areas - for example, in the area of the rule of
law - substantive achievements are almost negligible,
yet UNMIK is speedily and systematically continuing
to transfer responsibilities to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government.

We consider it absolutely necessary to make the
benchmarks operational, in line with repeated requests
made by members ofthe Security Council. If the aim is
truly to establish institutions functioning according to
basic principles of democracy, the transfer process
should be firmly conditioned on the capacities of the
Institutions to responsibly exercise the authority
entrusted to them for the benefit of all communities in
the province.

With regard to the benchmarks, UNMIK itself is
actually not contributing to their implementation in
some cases. A stated UNMIK benchmark dealing with
property rights requires that all property - including
land, enterprises and other publicly owned assets -
will have a clear and rightful owner. UNMIK
regulation 2003/13 is clearly not a step towards
fulfilling that benchmark. Rather, it creates additional
confusion. By promulgating regulation 2003/13, on
land use, UNMIK has in fact taken steps that exceed
the authority conferred upon it by the Security Council.
The regulation creates consequences of a structural and
permanent character. A 99-year land lease is brushed
away as a temporary measure that does not merit
consultation with the owners of the land. That
disregards the basic fact that the measure will by far
exceed the term of the United Nations Administration
itself. We are speaking here of a permanent transfer of
publicly owned property and, to a large extent, the
property of the Republic of Serbia. The regulation will
also jeopardize the return of property nationalized after
the Second World War to their rightful owners.

On 16 May, we requested an explanation of the
legal basis for that regulation from the Legal Counsel
of the United Nations. To date we have received no
response. My Government is looking forward to the
Counsel's response in order to decide on a further
course of action with regard to this issue. In any event,
our firm view is that the term of the lease for the land
in question cannot exceed UNMIK's term of existence.

As stated by Foreign Minister Svilanovic' in a
letter dated 20 May to the President of the Security
Council, it is the position of my Government that the
need for privatization in Kosovo and Metohija is
undisputable. The method of establishing a
privatization model without the participation of the
Republic of Serbia as the largest creditor is, however,
highly disputable. According to the Kosovo Trust
Agency model, the burden of privatization - primarily
a sovereign debt of close to $1.5 billion - first falls
squarely upon the budget of Serbia and Serbian
creditor companies or owners of soon-to-be privatized
businesses in Kosovo and Metohija, then on Serbian
guarantor banks and, finally, on workers who are
currently displaced. Among other obvious
consequences, that model is certain to adversely affect
the return of internally displaced persons. However,
nothing but the loss of life is irreversible. We expect
that those legitimate concerns will be addressed prior
to the full implementation of the process of
privatization. We stand ready to further discuss these
issues with UNMIK.

My country has fully complied with resolution
1244 (1999). In the last two and a half years we have
consistently demonstrated the political will to
constructively participate in its implementation, as
evidenced by our support for the electoral processes in
2001 and 2002 and our active participation in
formulating the November 2001 common document on
cooperation with UNMIK. However, to a great extent,
efforts to cooperate with UNMIK have been a one-way
process. We expect channels of cooperation to be re-
established in the near future. A constructive policy of
transparency by UNMIK - including in the
privatization process - will be a necessary new
element in future communications between our
Government and UNMIK.

There seems to be common agreement that the
work in Kosovo and Metohija is far from done.
Stability and prosperity are our shared goals. However,
as the Secretary-General stated on the occasion of the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999), what counts is not
only the commitment to peace, but also the will to
implement it. I can assure the Security Council of my
country's willingness to participate constructively in
this process.

