Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the report of Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman and for the convening
of this meeting.

My delegation closely followed the elections that
took place on Sunday, 25 May, in which Mr. Poroshenko
was declared the winner. We value the cooperation
extended to the provisional Government of Ukraine,
especially the support provided by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) by sending
more than 1,000 electoral observers and logistical
support, which was fundamental to the success of the
elections.

We believe that the elections are a crucial step in
the political process, which should restore the stability
of the country on the basis of inclusive dialogue with
full respect for minorities, human rights and the rule
of law. Nevertheless, we deplore the fact that the
electoral process did not cover the entire territory of
Ukraine. We call on those groups that sought to prevent
the elections from taking place normally to join the
building of a new future in their country in which
all groups and minorities will feel involved. We also
recognize the major responsibility of the Ukrainian
authorities, both the current and the elected ones, to
undertake the political process in an orderly fashion.
In that context, we deplore the violent events that took
place in Donetsk in the days after the election, and we
express our concern at the consequences of a potential
escalation of the crisis.

Nevertheless, the political process has not
come to an end with the elections. The fundamental
responsibilty falls to the Ukrainian authorities, but
equally important is the contribution of countries
of the region and regional organizations to continue
cooperating in the finalization of the process. We also
underscore the various initiatives of the Secretary-
General and, definitely, those of the entire United
Nations system, which has sought a political solution
from the very beginning of the crisis.

We call on both the Government and separatist
groups to establish common ground on the basis of
which a dialogue can take place, thereby putting an end
to all current areas of violence. We reiterate our support
for the calls of the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights, Mr. Ivan Simonovie, for accountability
for all human rights violations and abuses and for the
perpetrators, whoever they may be, to br brought to
justice.

Finally, Chile once again reaffirms the need to
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. A new phase is beginning in
Ukraine. Accordingly, a new era of cooperation should
begin in the Council in order to enable it to help establish
the conditions for the Ukrainian people to pursue their
sovereign future in peace and democracy.

