Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
debate. I also thank, the briefers, my good friends
Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik. I have had the
pleasure of working with both of them here at the
United Nations, where they both did excellent work.
I also wish to thank the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Chief of Staff of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine forjoining us in this debate.
Spain believes that the situation in eastern Ukraine
continues to be extremely concerning. The information
we have just heard from Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun and Ambassador Apakan only confirm that.
Consequently, we want to see the Security Council
continue following up accordingly on the development
of the conflict in its different aspects and use all tools
at its disposal to support the efforts of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Normandy format countries, which Spain supports.

Today's information also serves to confirm that we
are once again going through a troubling time. Not only
is the ceasefire that was called for six months ago not
being respected in a sustained and consistent manner,
but in recent weeks violations have increased and the
number of Victims rises daily. Moreover, the other
security aspects covered by the Minsk agreements that
the Council endorsed in resolution 2202 (2015) are not
being applied.

I wish to point out in particular our concern about
the lack of progress in connection with demining
activities, given the disastrous effect that that has
on the civilian population. We are also concerned by
the humanitarian situation and what we have heard
concerning the human rights situation. In that regard,
we have also very carefully read and taken note of
the most recent report of the human rights Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.

With regard to the political provisions of the
agreements, Spain also believes that the main obstacle
to moving forward, with respect to them is the lack
of stability and minimal security conditions in the
Donbas region. The status quo is unsustainable, and
maintaining it can lead only to a further worsening
of the situation on the ground and, in particular, more
suffering on the part of the of the civilian population,
which should be a priority in our deliberations when we
consider the conflict.

We all know that freezing conflicts does not bring
us closer but, on the contrary, moves us farther away
from a solution, perpetuating over time their harmful
effects. Consequently, we need to redouble our efforts
in supporting the Minsk process and the work of the
Trilateral Contact Group within the framework of the
OSCE, so that we can soon see concrete progress. The
Minsk agreements are still the only valid framework

to seeking a political solution to the conflict, which
has gone on for far too long. But it is not enough to
simply repeat that time and time again, if they are not
accompanied by a real and active commitment with
regard to the obligations that they entail.

Everyone, including members of the Council, must
focus their efforts on their full, immediate and - above
all - good-faith implemention of the agreements. By
everyone I mean not only the parties who are directly
involved, but also especially all of those who have
an ability to influence those parties. In that regard,
I call once again on Russia in particular, in its dual
capacity as member of the Normandy format and as an
actor with a great capacity to influence the separatist
leaders of the self-proclaimed republics of Donetsk and
Luhansk. We condemn the lack of political resolve and
commitment that these leaders continue to demonstrate,
and in particular the difficulties they repeatedly
raise for humanitarian actors, including those of the
United Nations. We also condemn the constraints they
continue to impose on the full mobility and privileges
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Special Monitoring Mission, with occasional
recourse to violence. These actions are unjustifiable
and unacceptable and must end.

I cannot conclude without recalling once again the
content of General Assembly resolution 68/262, which
is binding on us all. Spain is firmly convinced that
any lasting and sustainable solution must necessarily
involve respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine and for the human rights
of all its inhabitants, including those of Crimea.

