Mr. Niang (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to commend Bolivia for the efficacy with which it
is guiding the work of the Security Council this month,
and for its unwavering support to the Palestinian cause
and a two-State solution, as demonstrated throughout
its term on the Council and by its recognition of the
State of Palestine in 2010.

Today's open debate gives us an opportunity,
on behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to appeal
once more to this organ charged with the maintenance
of international peace and security to act and redress the
ever-deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. That is all the more
urgent because, 70 years after the Arab-Israeli war and
51 years into the Israeli occupation, we still do not have
a clear political horizon for achieving ajust, lasting and
peaceful solution to the conflict.

The expansion of Israeli settlements, in violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), undermines not only the
contiguity of Palestinian territorybut also the Palestinian
people's basic rights. In addition, the occupying Power
has also persisted in its attempts to forcibly displace
Palestinian civilians and seize their land. In that
regard, we deplore the plans to demolish the Bedouin
village of Khan Al-Ahmar, a violation of international
humanitarian law that has rightly been condemned by
major sections of the international community. The
Committee also deplores unilateral measures likely to
undermine the international consensus on final status
issues, including that of Jerusalem.

In a recent report, the World Bank declared the
socioeconomic situation on the Gaza Strip to be in "free
fall", and that does not take into account the ongoing
deterioration of the situation on the humanitarian
front, all of which are factors that risk provoking a new
military escalation. The Committee therefore calls on
all sides to exercise restraint and de-escalate tensions.
In that context, while supporting the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and its staff, who are often exposed to
serious threats, the Committee renews its urgent call
to all Member States to continue and step up their
support to the Agency in order to ensure that it has the
sufficient, predictable and lasting resources it needs to
guarantee the continuity of the vital services it provides
to Palestine refugees. The Committee also urges Israel
to lift its 11-year blockade of Gaza, and calls for a
reconciliation between Palestine's politicians with a
view to reunifying their people.

While the international community remains
paralysed, the current demonstrations have resulted in
many civilian casualties among Palestinians, including
children, particularly in Jerusalem and at the Gaza
fence. Because we continue to believe firmly that
violence can never resolve this conflict, the Committee
supports efforts to create an expanded multilateral
framework aimed at reviving the peace process on a
basis of the long-standing platforms in this area, with a
view to arriving at a two-State solution. The Committee
believes that as an international community, we must
reconsider the way in which we collectively assume
our responsibilities with regard to the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, the daily violations of
the 86 Security Council and 705 General Assembly
resolutions represent a threat to the credibility of the
United Nations and the rule of law.

The high-level week of the General Assembly
at its seventy-third session presented a majority of
the world's leaders with an opportunity to reaffirm
their commitment to multilateralism and to stress the
central role of the United Nations in resolving the
Palestinian question. We are pleased to note that, today,
139 Member States have officially recognized the State
ofPalestine. The Committee encourages those who have
not yet done so, in particular members of the European
Union, to follow that trend in order to demonstrate, as
they did with the State of Israel, their commitment to
international legitimacy and the two-State solution.

The Committee welcomes the adoption of
resolution 73/5 by a significant majority of the
General Assembly. The resolution provides temporary
additional prerogatives to the State of Palestine, which
will assume the annual chairmanship of the Group
of 77 and China beginning in January 2019. The
chairmanship of the Group, which includes of 134
member States, is a further noteworthy testimony to the
growing confidence that the international community
places in Palestine.

If we want to safeguard our collective action, then
we must put our money where our mouth is and put an
end to the historic injustice suffered by the Palestinian
people and promote the two-State solution, based on
the pre-June 1967 borders, in accordance with relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law.

