Mr. Serrano: The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; as well as
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align themselves
with this declaration.

Let me start by thanking the Foreign Minister of
Kenya and the Ambassador of Somalia for their
important statements. I also wish to warmly welcome
Ambassador Mahiga and to express the full support of
the European Union (EU) for his crucial mission.

The European Union strongly condemns the
Al-Shabaab deadly attacks on Mogadishu's airport on
9 September, during which several people, including
African Union peacekeepers, lost their lives.

Despite all the efforts of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the international
community, the security situation in Somalia remains
fragile. The transitional federal institutions are
continuously facing serious challenges to their efforts
to improve security, to strengthen the political process
and to intensify institution-building, as well as to
deliver minimum basic services to the Somali people.

Somalia is now entering a critical phase, with the
transitional period culminating in less than a year in
August 2011, while the Djibouti Agreement has yet to
be fully implemented. It is imperative that the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) urgently take
the necessary steps in order to address the outstanding
priority transitional tasks and intensify its outreach
efforts. The consultative process that should take place
to win broad-based popular support for a new
constitution will provide an opportunity to reach out on
substantive issues of concern for the future prospects
of Somalia.

The most recent Al-Shabaab terrorist attacks on
Mogadishu Airport, aiming at a high-level meeting of
United Nations, African Union and Somali officials
taking place there, and previous attacks in Kampala in
July and in Mogadishu in August pose a serious threat
not only to the security situation in Somalia, but also to
the wider region and all international actors. The peace
process in Somalia must continue despite all the
attempts to derail it by an increasingly well-organized
and violent minority.

Together with international partners, the
European Union has long been engaged in supporting a
peaceful and sustainable solution to the Somali crisis.
The European Union assists in stabilizing Somalia by
providing support to such priority areas as the security
sector - including support to the Somali police force -
as well as the training of military personnel,
humanitarian and development assistance to the
population and capacity-building support. In addition
the European Union is largely involved in the ongoing
naval operations against piracy through deployment of
its Operation Atalanta forces. The European Union and
its member States continue to constitute the largest
donor to Somalia. It is, however, important to
underline that the role of the European Union is only to
assist. The main responsibility for Somalia's future lies
with the Somalis themselves, and the role and
initiatives of the TFG will be decisive for Somalia's
future. Without a credible and inclusive Somali-owned
political process, gains will be short-lived.

The European Union, in line with the United
Nations and the main international partners, considers
AMISOM. to be a crucial element in supporting and
protecting the Transitional Federal Institutions and to
help them carry out their responsibilities. AMISOM
contributes to the provision of the much-needed
security to allow the TFG to undertake dialogue,
reconciliation and political outreach. Since 2007, the
European Union contribution to AMISOM. has
amounted to €95 million, to which we have recently
added a further €47 million. The European Union
reiterates its call on the broader international

10-5364]
community to follow its lead and do more to support
both the Somali security apparatus and AMISOM.

We recognize that security support is essential,
but we understand well that there can be no purely
military solution in Somalia. Whilst we support the
imperative to get AMISOM. to its mandated strength,
such a capacity needs to be matched by corresponding
and parallel political efforts by both the international
community and, above all, by the TFG itself.

The European Union fully supports the current
peace process led by the United Nations in Somalia.
However, the international coordination urgently needs
further improvement. Specifically, there is a need for
stronger United Nations leadership of the international
efforts, as well as closer cooperation with the African
Union. The European Union calls for more effective
use of the current mechanisms of coordination between
the international community and the TFG, such as the
High-Level Committee and the Joint Security
Committee.

As for the fight against piracy, we have recently
dedicated a specific session to that instance. Therefore,
let me simply take this opportunity to reiterate the need
for the international community to devote more
attention to reversing the socio-economic drivers that
feed the scourge of piracy. The European Union
commends the work done so far by the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and calls for an
increased coordination by the United Nations on the
issue of the fight against piracy on land. The European
Union will continue to support the region's own
leadership and efforts in finding solutions to counter
piracy by helping the regional countries to develop
their judicial capabilities, as envisaged in the Djibouti
Code of Conduct. We invite the States of the region to
make use of this offer.

In conclusion, the European Union reiterates its
commitment to improving the lives, dignity and
security of the Somali people, to foster reconciliation,
to support human rights and good governance, to
increase access to basic services, to initiate
reconstruction activities, and foremost to help set
Somalia firmly on the path to peace and sustainable
development. In this respect, we call on the
Transitional Federal Government to strengthen its
efforts to address these considerable political,
economic and security challenges. As the transitional
period will end in less than a year, we call on the
United Nations and the TFG to immediately start
working on a road map for the most urgently needed
measures to be taken before August 2011 in order to
avoid a prolongation of the transitional period.

Securing peace in Somalia may not be easy and
will certainly demand considerable resources, but it is
an effort worth of making, and one that we must
make - not only for Somalia, but for peace and
stability in the region, and indeed, in a very real sense,
for world security.

