Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): I would like to congratulate
the Netherlands on taking this important initiative and
to thank the presidency for convening this very timely
and relevant open debate, and in particular for its
having been presided this morning by His Excellency
the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union, as well as with the statement delivered by the
representative of Italy on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect.

Last year, we witnessed an unprecedented number
of peacekeeping fatalities. I would like take this
opportunity to pay tribute to every man and woman for
their sacrifice in the service of peace. It is imperative
that we minimize the risk ofdeliberate attacks on United
Nations missions or personnel, including through better
early warning, intelligence and detection capabilities,
and improved situational awareness and risk mitigation
mechanisms. In line with the conclusions of the report
recently issued by Lieutenant General Santos Cruz,
as well as this year's deliberations of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, we need to
revisit the ways and means of ensuring the safety and
security of our peacekeepers, making sure that the
missions are sufficiently resourced and that personnel
have all the training and equipment necessary to
fulfil their mandates. In this regard, we welcome
the report entitled Improving security of United
Nations Peacekeepers of December 2017, and urge
the Secretariat to implement its recommendations, in
close cooperation with the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs), the police-contributing countries (PCCs) and
the Security Council.

Slovakia has been an active troop- and
police-contributing country since its admission to the
United Nations 25 years ago, having deployed to a total
of 19 United Nations missions, contributing overall
more than 7,300 men and women. Slovakia has also
participated in military and civilian missions of the
European Union, which also operates under Security
Council mandates and, together with the United
Nations in many conflict situations, helps to maintain
peace and security. I would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm our continued strong commitment to and
active involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
endeavours in the future.
Currently, the highest number of our military
and police personnel is deployed in United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. I would also like to
reiterate our Government's full support for the ongoing
political process aimed at the reunification of Cyprus.
In addition, we are proud to also serve in the Golan
Heights and in Haiti.

As a TCC/PCC, Slovakia has subscribed to many
important initiatives as a practical matter, but mostly
as a matter of principle, such as the Kigali Principles,
Vancouver Principles and the more recent voluntary
compact to eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations. I would like to highlight a
few aspects that we believe to be especially relevant in
the context of today's open debate.

First, the issues associated with the supply side
of peacekeeping operations remain at the cenre of our
concerns. As a matter of priority, we must continue to
address the difficulties in getting enough troops, the
right equipment and adequate logistical support.

Secondly, efforts to improve the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations should be read in conjunction
with the other reform strands, as well as with the
peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda. The peace
and security pillar reform must lead to more substantive
delivery, and the management reform to better service
delivery, with much less fragmentation. One of the
overarching goals of the reform and restructuring of the
United Nations peace and security pillar should be to
prioritize prevention and sustaining peace.

Thirdly, a number of missions struggle to operate
amidst broken or challenging peace processes and in
asymmetric threat environments. In that respect, we
welcome the initiative of the Secretary- General to
review the limitations of traditional peacekeeping
operations, including his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which he introduced this morning.

Fourthly, as has been said many times before,
peacekeeping is a unique tool, but the pursuit of
political solutions is key and cannot be replaced by
anything, including by peacekeeping. The mandates
of peacekeeping operations must evolve consistently
with the context and needs on the ground. Reviews
of peacekeeping mandates must take into account the
existence of exit strategies that seek to help lay the
foundations for long-term and sustainable peace.

Member States increasingly view the issue of
security sector reform (SSR), embedded in resolution
2151 (2014), as an important priority for peacekeeping,
including for the timely conclusion of peacekeeping
missions. Building more inclusive security and justice
institutions also lies at the heart of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, in particular Sustainable
Development Goal 16. I wish to take this opportunity
to highlight the fact that South Africa and Slovakia,
as co-chairs of the United Nations Group of Friends
of Security Sector Reform, will convene a high-level
round table on security sector reform and sustaining
peace on 23 April, in the sidelines of the upcoming
General Assembly high-level meeting on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, to take place on 24 and 25 April.

In conclusion, peacekeeping remains one of the
most critical areas of United Nations activities and
where the Organization is most visible. Disappointment
over its action or non-action may therefore be equally
visible. My delegation looks forward to continuing to
work closely with other Member States as we determine
how best to strengthen this essential instrument for
global peace and stability. In the light of the increasing
scale and ever more sophisticated nature of conflicts,
the urgency to act is more salient than ever.

