Mr. Haspels (Netherlands): The work to build
peace is never completed. Peace is built before, during
and long after conflict. It takes effort every day.
Sustaining peace means sustained commitment here
at the United Nations and at home, in Member States.
We therefore welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/43) and thank him for his leadership
on this issue.

The high-level event of the General Assembly has
again underscored that sustaining peace represents the
common ground of the efforts of the United Nations and
of Member States. That is an important step forward.
However, we must continue to give our full support
to its implementation. That is why we pursue such
objectives at the national level. Conflict prevention
is the cornerstone of both our new Government's
integrated international security strategy and our
aid and trade policies. It is the focus of our Security
Council membership this year, and it was the focus
of our previous membership in 1999-2000. Some
years ago, the Kingdom of the Netherlands decided
to contribute to the International Security Assistance
Force and the Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan
and to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali because sustained stability
is not only in the interest of the Afghan and Malian
people but also contributes to stability in Europe. There
are no quick fixes.

Prevention requires us to understand and to address
the root causes of conflict. To do that, first, we must
respect fundamental human rights, the rule of law and
human dignity as the foundation of freedom, justice
and peace. The interrelationship between human rights,
development and security has never been so evident in
certain country situations before the Security Council.

Secondly, we must implement the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) as the best universally
agreed strategy for sustaining peace. For example,
the Netherlands has joined the pathfinders for the
SDG 16+ movement to better promote the worldwide
implementation of Goal 16 - the goal of peaceful, just
and inclusive societies and interconnected SDGs.

Thirdly, we must promote inclusive negotiations
and political processes. In March, we highlighted the
good direction undertaken by Afghanistan with the
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process. It
saddens me that path was darkened again last weekend
with the horrific attack on an election registration
office in Kabul, in which at least 57 people died.

Situations of increasing risk must be brought
to the attention of the Security Council in a timely
manner. The Council can improve its role to maintain
international peace and security by preventing violence
from escalating. The Council must also keep a long-
term focus on the impact of mandated tasks to achieve
stability and peace.

We are a consistent supporter of an integrated
approach towards peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
prevention. That is why we provide concrete support
to peacekeeping operations, the Peacebuilding Fund
and the United Nations capacities for prevention and
peacebuilding. As Prime Minister Rutte stated in
his intervention in the open debate in March (see S/PV.8218), we need to deliver on the primacy of the
political process for long-term conflict resolution. In
that regard, I welcome the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. It is an integrated approach
that also relates to solving root causes through political
solutions and to implementing peace agreements.
All too often we have learned the risks of relapse the
hard way.

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which
Romania currently chairs, is fundamental to making
cross-pillar and coherent approaches to peacebuilding
a reality. We need to strengthen our cooperation. The
Security Council and the PBC must complement each
other in preparing for the transition of peacekeeping
operations. We need to build on the convening role of the
PBC because it can provide the Security Council with the
perspectives of the varous stakeholders and advice on
socioeconomic and long-term development challenges.

As has been mentioned before, Liberia represents
a successful example. The United Nations Mission
in Liberia helped the country to build capacity for
maintaining law and order. It also used so-called
soft tools, such as public-service radio broadcasts,
to emphasize the promotion of peace and national
reconciliation. The transition is managed in close
cooperation with the PBC.

Such stories tell us that the Security Council has
all the tools necessary to prevent conflict and to sustain
peace. However, without our political will, the only
result is an irresponsible standstill. The bloody conflict
in Syria shows us the consequences of the Council's
lack of action. The United Nations system and we, the
Member States, must play the role that people expect
from us.

To conclude, achieving peace and sustaining it
always take much longer than we think. However, we
have no choice but never to give up trying, hoping and
supporting people to make the choice for peace and
against violence.

