Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Nicholas Haysom and Mr. Yury Fedotov for
their respective briefings. I also take this opportunity to
register our appreciation to Mr. Haysom and all members
and personnel of United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedication in carrying
out their duties under challenging circumstances. I
thank Ambassador Tanin for his splendid work and
wish him success in his new capacity.

Allow me to me begin by reiterating Malaysia's
firm support for the reconciliation and reintegration
efforts undertaken by the Government of Afghanistan.
We also commend the Afghan Government's continuing
commitment and efforts to address the increasing
political, economic and security challenges faced
by the country. We take these as strong testimony of
Afghanistan's aspiration to achieve national unity and
stability, which could positively contribute to regional
stability.

Malaysia is also pleased to note the encouraging
progress made on the issue of electoral reform,
particularly on the re-establishment of the Special
Commission on Electoral Reform in July, as well as the
presentation of its recommendations last month. We are
also encouraged by the various strategies announced
by the Afghan authorities, which demonstrate the
Government's determination to undertake reforms.
We urge the Government to swiftly implement the
strategies, which, in our view, will further strengthen
the capacity of national institutions.

With regard to the peace talks between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban, while it
was unfortunate that the second round of talks scheduled
for 31 July was postponed, the completion of the Taliban
transition just two days ago has once again revived
our hopes. Malaysia reiterates that a peaceful political
settlement is the only way to achieve sustainable peace
and stability in the country. We remain hopeful that
talks will resume in the near future.

Despite the many positive and noteworthy
developments, Malaysia remains concerned by the
security situation in the country. As reflected in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/684), the conflict
in Afghanistan has expanded in both intensity and
geographic scope throughout the reporting period.
Furthermore, the significant increase in violent incidents
between the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
its affiliates and the Taliban have resulted in further
hardship endured by the Afghan people, as well as the
loss of innocent civilian lives. In particular, children
continue to be severely affected by the escalation of the
conflict.

As a subscriber to the Secretary-General's
Children, Not Soldiers campaign, Afghanistan has
taken many commendable steps towards ensuring its
national security forces are child-free. In addition to
the criminalization of child recruitment for the Afghan
National Security Forces, the Government is also
drafting age-assessment guidelines that we hope will
be endorsed soon and widely disseminated. Malaysia
is, however, alarmed that during the current reporting
period the conflicts in Afghanistan recorded the highest
number of child casualties since the establishment of the
United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism in
2009. The significant increase in the number of attacks
on schools and educational personnel is also an alarming
trend, preventing access to education and a return to
normalcy. In this regard, we urge the Government to
maintain its commitment to the full implementation
of its action plan and road map to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children.

Malaysia believes that at this stage it remains
imperative for the United Nations and the international
community to continue to lend their support,
encouragement and assistance to Afghanistan through
reconstruction and redevelopment efforts to rebuild the
country. At the same time, it is vital that the political
and development activities of the United Nations and
the international community be in greater alignment
with the priorities set by the Afghan Government.

In that context, Malaysia is pleased to note that
the work of the Tripartite Review Commission was
completed successfully. The report of the Commission
provided realistic assessments and important insights
into the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
country team in Afghanistan. More importantly, the
report contains constructive recommendations that are
crucial to maximizing the potential of all the efforts and
resources of the United Nations and the international
community.

Malaysia looks forward to the deliberation and
eventual implementation of these recommendations,
which would enable us to then leverage the comparative
advantages of the United Nations and the international
community to support the reconstruction and
redevelopment of Afghanistan.

Malaysia commends the positive progress
achieved in the ongoing efforts to counter narcotics
in Afghanistan. In particular, the significant progress
made in eradicating opium cultivation and the
intensified law-enforcement efforts against illicit
drugs are a manifestation of the determination of the
Government of Afghanistan to counter narcotics. We
are also pleased to note the close cooperation between
the Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). In that context,
the establishment of the Afghanistan drug reporting
system is an important step towards streamlining
and enhancing the coordination of ongoing efforts
to counter narcotics in Afghanistan. Similarly, the
National Mobilization against Narcotics initiative
recently launched by the Afghan government and
UNODC is also a commendable effort to address the
issue of illicit drugs in a comprehensive manner by
engaging all segments of society.

Malaysia is pleased that UNAMA and the
Government of Afghanistan have continued to
maintain a close partnership, which is vital to ensuring
sustainable peace and stability in the country. We hope
that these will lead to a more productive and effective
collaboration within the host country, the United
Nations system and the international community.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Malaysia's sincere
commitment to supporting the Afghan Government in
its effort to achieve peace, security and stability.

