Ms. Citaku: As always, I am honoured to be here
with members of the Security Council today, and it is
precisely because I truly respect and value the Council
that I cannot quite comprehend why it is that we are
actually here today. Kosovo is certainly not a novel topic
for the Council. For many people around the world, it
was the war of the late 1990s that put Kosovo on the
map. However, the war itself was not just an isolated
formative experience for my people; it was predicated
on years of oppression, segregation and exploitation,
years when we were denied our most fundamental
rights. We did not have the right to read or write in our
own language in schools, or to sing songs out on our
streets. We experienced years of being silenced by the
deafening noise of Serbian guns, years of tremendous
suffering that came to an end only when Council
members' predecessors, sitting around this very table
two decades ago, gave a voice to me and my people.

As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the
liberation of Kosovo, we also celebrate the role of the
United Nations in Kosovo. When 1 million refugees
were returning back to their homes, United Nations
agencies were there, in Kosovo, waiting for them,
readily offering their support. Our country has risen
from the ashes of war, and it was the United Nations
Administration that lifted us up.

Throughout the many years of the United Nations
Administration in Kosovo, the Council has provided
guidance and facilitated a healthy debate about
Kosovo and its future. It was precisely United Nations
Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari who recommended
independence as the ultimate solution for Kosovo. And
it was upon Serbia's request that the International Court
of Justice ruled clearly and without any ambiguity
that Kosovo was within its rights when it declared
independence and that it did not break or violate any
international law. I do not have to remind the Council
that the ruling of the court was accepted by the
General Assembly, which recommended the launch of
a dialogue for the normalization of relations between
Kosovo and Serbia.

With those facts in mind, I address the Council with
the absolute candour and correctness that this forum
implies and say that I can seriously not understand why
on Earth we are here today talking about Kosovo for
the third time in four months. It is unbelievable that
the Council has convened more meetings to talk about
Kosovo than it has for Syria, Yemen or Venezuela.
There are real problems out there, real challenges that
require the Council's valuable time and attention. There
are real people who need the Council's help, as we in
Kosovo once did. It is unacceptable that this Chamber is
being turned into a theatre by our northern neighbour,
that this esteemed forum has become a stage for Serbia
to tell its fairy tales to the world, fictional stories that
they do not even believe themselves. It is shameful, yet
again, that this Chamber is being misused purely for
domestic consumption. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has no role and has
no mandate to exercise. These meetings have lost their
purpose. In fact, the Charade that is being put on in this
Chamber is yet more proof that Serbia is not genuine
in its articulated intent to engage in dialogue with
Kosovo about the normalization of relations between
our two countries.

The dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia was not,
is not and will never be about Kosovo's right to exist
as a free nation under the sun. Let us not distort the
facts. A new and young republic was born in Europe
11 years ago this month And Kosovo will not ever
negotiate its statehood or its independence - not today,
not tomorrow, never. We want, and are prepared, to talk
about building constructive relations as neighbours, as
equals. However, that is exactly where the problem lies.
Serbia is inherently opposed to the idea that Kosovo
is its equal. That is why it creates unnecessary drama
everywhere it can about anything that makes it view us
as its equal. It is pervasive. We see it everywhere. We
see it in sports and arts and politics. There is a stubborn
refusal to accept us as peers. But, frankly speaking,
that is Serbia's problem. What I cannot understand is
why we have to meet here so often and entertain its
ideas about a parallel universe that it chooses to live in.
It is up to the members of this important Council to stop
enabling this parody.

Always, every single day, Serbia continues to create
artificial drama in order to avoid accepting reality. We
have gotten rather used to it. It is hard for Serbia to
surprise us with its absurdity anymore. However, if it
thinks that it can make giving up our right to exist as a
sovereign State a condition for dialogue with us, it is in
for a fast-approaching awakening. Kosovo is not going
to freeze its existence until Serbia has an epiphany and
decides it is time to accept Kosovo as an equal.

First, less than two months ago, we were summoned
to the Chamber for an extraordinary meeting to
urgently address the most natural and ordinary decision
that our institutions undertook when we established
our army (see S/PV.8427). The decision to establish an
army was a legal, constitutional and prudent obligation
to create the requisite security mechanisms that will
enable Kosovo to contribute and be part of regional and
Euro-Atlantic security alliances. Furthermore, it was a
decision that demonstrated the maturity of Kosovo as
a State. It is a paradigm shift of no small proportion
for us to transform from consumers of to contributors
to security.
Serbia is now imposing conditions on the
continuation of the dialogue with the removal of tariffs.
The decision of our Government to impose tariffs
on Serbian goods was not a decision we took lightly.
However, the question at hand should be why that
decision was made in the first place. The tariffs were a
direct response to the aggressive and brutal campaign
of the Serbian Government against Kosovo. One cannot
use one's hand to fight for its existence, with everything
they have at their disposal, and extend the other one
with the pretence of being earnest about normalizing
relations with Kosovo. In addition, political arguments
aside, that decision was also based on economic factors.
No product whatsoever that is labelled made in Kosovo
can pass the Serbian border. Why should Kosovo extend
Serbia a courtesy that it does not reciprocate?

The tariffs are not the issue. They are merely an
excuse to refuse to come and sit with us at the table
in Brussels. At the end of the day, the real economic
effect ofthe tariffs on Serbia is minimal. Serbia exports
weapons all around the world, even to countries that are
under a European Union or a United States embargo, and
it sells biscuits to Kosovo. Only 3 per cent of Serbia's
exports are to Kosovo. There is no humanitarian
crisis of any kind in Kosovo. I ask Council members
to come and visit Kosovo, and they will witness the
unquestionable reality with their own eyes.

The bottom line is that Serbia will use any excuse
that it can find, and it will invent more if there are
no excuses, only to delay the inevitable, namely, the
recognition of Kosovo as a free and independent State.
All the excuses and delays do not alter the fact that
Kosovo is a free nation. Dialogue should therefore not

be conditional on excuses because, at the end of the day,
Kosovo has real and painful reasons to place conditions
on the process. We have 20,000 reasons, for each of the
women that were raped by the Serbian military forces.
We have 1,370 more, for each child who was killed
in Kosovo by the Serbian military forces. We have
1,600 reasons, for each and every one of the people
who are still missing today. Yet Kosovo has never
placed conditions on the dialogue process because,
for us, building a prosperous Kosovo, at peace with its
neighbours, is the best way to honour the sacrifice that
was made. Although our scars may never fully heal, we
will not be hostage to our own pain.

Even today, we heard attempts to rewrite history. We
heard no remorse for the crimes that were committed,
from Srebrenica to Racak and Izbica. The war in former
Yugoslavia happened before the eyes of the world. We
all know who the victims are and who the perpetrators
are. There is one address and that is in Belgrade. The
Kosovo Liberation Army was not a criminal or terrorist
organization. It comprised young women and men who
had the courage to stand up and fight Milosevic. We are
very proud of that.

Instead of seizing this opportunity for redemption
and peace, Serbia chooses obstruction. I urge the
Council to remember that even if the Government
of Kosovo were to suspend the tariffs today, Serbia
would find some other excuse to inhibit the process.
What is its excuse for the lack of implementation of
almost everything that we have agreed to in Brussels?
What is its excuse for the lack of implementation of the
energy agreement or the agreement on the recognition
of diplomas? What is its excuse? It has none. The truth
is that until Serbia recognizes Kosovo as its equal, our
part of the world will sadly keep producing endless and
pointless drama and conflict.

The most recent iteration was Belgrade's reaction to
the legitimate and constitutional decision on the Trepca
mines. Belgrade's reaction to that decision revealed in
the most blatant and brutal way the true neocolonial
attitude that Serbia harbours towards Kosovo. Kosovo
will not negotiate with Belgrade about Trepca or any
other of our resources. They are in Kosovo and they
belong to the people ofKosovo. The time when decisions
regarding our resources were made in Belgrade ended
a long time ago.

Serbia needs to want peace. It needs to want an
agreement. If it truly does, it needs to act on it. Our
Serbian citizens in Kosovo are the ones that suffer the
most in this situation. Let there be no mistake - there
is only one Government that exercises pressure on
them. That is the one that sits in Belgrade, not the
one that sits in Pristina. Any member of the Kosovo
Serbian community who dares to think differently to or
independently of the Government in Belgrade is subject
to systematic intimidation. From hand grenades thrown
at the homes of the Serbian members of the Kosovo
security forces to the detention of Serbian Members
of Parliament who dared to challenge the Government
in Belgrade, Serbia has left no stone unturned in its
attempts to obstruct the integration of the Serbian
community in Kosovo. Belgrade does not view them as
people who need its support. Belgrade views and uses
Serbs in Kosovo as an instrument for its destabilizing
foreign policy. We have seen similar scenarios in
Bosnia, as well.

Only recently when we gathered here, we all
demanded progress on the investigation into the
assassination of Oliver Ivanovic' (see S/PV.8399). The
Kosovo police and other law enforcement mechanisms
worked hard to bring the perpetrators of that crime
to justice. Let me mention the attack on the Kosovo
Special Police Unit to which my colleague from Serbia
referred. Arrests were made, but look at the irony - the
main suspect is in hiding in Serbia and Serbia refuses to
hand him over to the Kosovar authorities. I will refrain
from commenting any further on this matter and allow
Council members to make up their own minds as to
what that means.

As we prepare to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the liberation of Kosovo, I cannot help
but reflect on the future. Regardless of the roadblocks
and despite all the obstacles that we face, we remain
determined to do all that is in our power to achieve and
cherish a stable and lasting peace for the sake of our
children, our athletes, our artists and our scientists,
who are undaunted by the temporary constraints of our
current circumstance. They transcend the borders of
prejudice and they scale the walls of politics to raise
our flag all around the world. For the sake of our brave
women who challenge the status quo to transform social
norms and break glass ceilings and for the sake of the
fallen, who made the ultimate sacrifice, we continue to
strive for a better tomorrow. Even though we still have
a long way to go, I am just as hopeful for our young
republic today as I was on 12 June 1999, when Kosovo
was liberated from Serbia.

It is time for Serbia to liberate itself from Kosovo
now, for the sake of peace and stability in the region.
We all must show courage and end this conflict. Kosovo
is ready.

