Ms. Qwabe (South Africa): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Qazi and
Ambassador Khalilzad for their briefings, and we
welcome Foreign Minister Zebari and thank him for his
briefing as well.

My delegation remains concerned that the
security situation in Iraq continues to deteriorate. We
maintain that a new resolution to the conflict in Iraq
has to include an all-inclusive political process and
national reconciliation, as well as constructive dialogue
with all neighbouring States.

We welcome the launch of the International
Compact with Iraq, and we note the commitment of the
participants to work in partnership with the
Government of Iraq to ensure stability, security and
economic reconstruction. Initiatives such as the
expanded ministerial conference of neighbouring
countries of Iraq, held in Sharm el-Sheikh on 4 May,
and the meeting of the United States and Iran in
Baghdad on 28 May are also welcome.

A report issued this month by Global Policy
Forum indicates that as of April 2007, an estimated 1.9
million Iraqis were displaced within the country and
over 2.2 million were refugees abroad. The Iraqi
Government estimates that 50,000 people are leaving
their homes each month. The scale of the problem and
the difficulty of reaching the displaced put the crisis
practically beyond the capacity of the international
relief system.

The International Advisory and Monitoring Board
for the Development Fund for Iraq met in Amman on
2 and 3 June 2007. A key finding was that, while the
current situation in Iraq is challenging, it is worrisome
that insufficient progress has been made in addressing
the weaknesses revealed in the area of this report. The
latest audit report of the Development Fund for Iraq

submitted to the Board by Ernst and Young indicates
that while many efforts are being made, sometimes at
great personal sacrifice, the overall financial system of
control is deficient and financial management reform
needs to be pursued further. The audit also notes large
unreconciled differences regarding oil extraction,
production and reported export sales because there is
no overall comprehensive system of controls over oil
revenues. A system of metering, as recommended by
the Board, would go a long way in improving overall
control. The audit also notes that basic administrative
procedures in ministries are outdated and ineffective,
and the system of overall financial governance needs to
be strengthened.

The Security Council has the responsibility to
ensure that the natural resources of Iraq are used in a
transparent manner to meet the humanitarian needs of
the Iraqi people, for the economic reconstruction and
repair of Iraq's infrastructure and for other purposes
benefiting the people of Iraq. It is therefore essential
that the Security Council discusses and acts on the
findings of the Board without delay.

We reiterate that, notwithstanding the events that
led to the current situation, the Security Council has a
responsibility for ensuring that the powers it granted to
the Multinational Force are exercised in a manner
consistent with the Council's decision and that
international law and human rights are upheld and
respected by all parties.

We note that the Secretary-General reports that
the security situation in Iraq remains complex and
unpredictable and is a major limiting factor for the
United Nations presence and activities in Iraq. The
United Nations has a particularly important role to
play, but the full potential of the Organization to assist
the Iraqi people can be realized only when its
personnel can operate freely in a secure environment.

In conclusion, we also support the draft press
statement presented by the delegation of the United
States of America.

