Mr. Madeira: On behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini-Zuma, and of Ambassador Ismail Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security, who were unable
to come here today because of the ongoing African
Union (AU) Summit, I warmly greet you, Mr. President,
and all members of the Security Council.

Since my previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7778) there have been important and encouraging
political and security developments in Somalia. Despite
enormous and multiple challenges, Somalis have
defied the odds and completed their parliamentary
election. A new, bicameral Federal Parliament is now
in place in Somalia as a result of a highly disputed and
engaging electoral process. The presidential election is
scheduled to take place on 8 February, as announced.
The African Union and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), in close partnership with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and other international partners, stood by
Somalia and provided the Parliament, the Government,
the Federal Indirect Electoral Implementation Team, the
State-Level Indirect Electoral Implementation Team,
as well as the independent electoral dispute resolution
mechanism, all the support, assistance and advice it
could to ensure that the electoral process was conducted
in accordance with the approved terms of reference
and that its credibility was enhanced by ensuring that
allegations of malpractice and other irregularities were
objectively, properly and timely addressed, as well
as to ensure that attempts by Al-Shabaab to taint and
discredit its final outcome did not succeed.

The political environment is one of hope and
confidence, as the newly inaugurated Speaker of the
House of the People announced the priorities of the
national political agenda as being the continuation
and completion of the constitutional review, the
formation of political parties, the establishment of
local Governments, the resumption of dialogue with
Somaliland, the strengthening of revenue-collection
capacity and the building of State institutions and
the enhancement of their capacity to deliver basic
essential services to the people. As partners united
in a common struggle against violent extremism and
destabilization, we, the members of the international
community, are called to support the Parliament not
only in achieving those goals, but also in enhancing
its role as the privileged forum for dialogue, political
debate and negotiation, national reconciliation and
cohesion, as the rightful representative, the mouthpiece
and the legitimate interpreter of the will, aspirations
and apprehensions of the people of Somalia for the next
four years.

Despite being the result of an electoral process taht
fell far short ofthe cherished one-person, one-vote ideal,
the establishment of this Parliament represents progress
and displays unique characteristics. After having been
highly scrutinized by their own communities, the
members of Parliament won the trust of their people
when they emerged victorious from an electoral contest
in which the majority of 51 delegates voted for each one
of them. That feature did not exist in 2012, when only a
few elders had the right and power to determine alone
who should represent their community and the people
of Somalia. Fifteen per cent of the new parliamentarians
are youth between 25 and 35 years of age, and 24 per
cent ofthe Parliament is made up of women. Those two
social categories represent the majority of the Somali
population today. They are the face of the most vibrant
and are the most enduring feature of the Somali society.

Many have been exposed to different political, social
and cultural environments, which is an asset in itself.
If properly harnessed, this new reality has the potential
to help Somalia move more swiftly away from its
current predicament.

Another important development in the period under
consideration is the fact that, despite Al-Shabaab's
vow to thwart the process, the parliamentary election
took place in all six of the designated electoral centres
without any security incidents that could be attributed
to Al-Shabaab. That was possible because of the
professionalism and close coordination and cooperation
that exists between the Somali national security forces
and AMISOM, the effectiveness of the plan they put in
place, as well as the enhanced and sustained exchange
of real time actionable intelligence. That effort is
continuing and producing commendable results in
other areas of joint endeavour.

The gains accumulated with the successful launch
of regional states could be compromised if the current
political unease that is witnessed in a good number
of those states is not properly tackled and addressed
in a timely manner. The continued existence of such
tensions has the potential to arouse the appetites of
negative armed groups, who normally prey on such
convoluted environments, and escalate violence to
unexpected and challenging levels.

AMISOM. is working hand in hand with the Somali
national security forces. It continues to provide a secure
environment in which the Somali political process can
thrive. Although weakened, Al-Shabaab continues to
engage in targeted assassinations, direct and indirect
fire, ambushes, reinforced with improvised explosive
devices on AMISOM. convoys along supply routes,
the hurling of grenades, vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices and infiltration across all sectors,
including in Mogadishu. Despite logistical, financial
and operational challenges, AMISOM. continues to
support the Somali national security forces' operations,
administration and training in its areas of responsibility.
Moreover, AMISOM. police units are continuing to
carry out their mandated tasks in Mogadishu, Baidoa,
Kismayo, Beledweyne, Jowhar and Adado. Such
activities are taking place with immense sacrifice by
the troop- and police-contributing countries and in the
context of inadequate and very limited resources.

The reality in the theatre of operations has changed.
The enemy is resorting to new tactics that pose new
challenges. The need to adjust to those new challenges
and overcome the enemy is pressing. The terrorist group
continues to maintain control of pockets of territories
around the Jubba Valley corridor and along the north-
eastern coastline. Their stronghold in those areas has
been reinforced by the growing influence and influx
of foreign fighters, in large part through neighbouring
Yemen. Those territories must be recovered from
the enemy, as an integral part of the process for its
degradation and eventual defeat.

To that end, the African Union reiterates its call for
the deployment of additional forces and key combat and
stabilization capabilities in order to enable AMISOM
and the Somali national security forces to conduct
expanded offensive operations. There is urgency for the
United Nations and other members of the international
community to provide one-time support to additional
forces of up to 4,000 troops in the form of the provision
of rations, fuel, transport and medicine for a limited
duration, to allow for the conduct of specific military
operations as a catalyst for an imminent AMISOM
drawdown from Somalia.

It has become abundantly clear to us that, no matter
how effective AMISOM. may be, there can be no lasting
and sustainable peace and security in Somalia unless
capable and properly empowered Somali national
security forces are in place. We therefore ask that
support continue to be provided to the Somali national
security forces not only for the upcoming offensive
operations, but also in the context of the overall effort
of building a comprehensive and capable Somali
security apparatus. To that effect, we insist on the need
for a better coordinated, complementary and mutually
reinforcing partner intervention in the area of security
in Somalia. Our individual and dispersed interventions,
as much as they are accepted and appreciated, are
having limited effect on our joint security effort in
the country.

We will continue to join hands with the United
Nations in our effort to work closely with our partners
in this endeavour. Even so, a comprehensive approach
to security is indispensable. That should be anchored on
the concurrence of mutually reinforcing factors, such as
the presence and the adequate territorial expansion of
functioning State institutions, democratic governance,
the provision of humanitarian assistance and other
essential services to the people, dispute resolution
mechanisms, building capable national security forces
and preventing and addressing the conditions conducive

to Violent extremism and radicalization, which lead
to terrorism. That is the best way of guaranteeing
sustainable peace and security to Somalia. We
recognize that partners, such as the United Kingdom
and others, are doing a very commendable job in that
regard. We look forward to continue working with them
in this area.

We are happy that a suitable solution was found for
the payment of stipends to the Burundian contingent
serving in AMISOM. Nonetheless, this problem is a
reflection of the limited resources and funding that
AMISOM. is facing. A sustainable, lasting and acceptable
solution must be found to ensure that AMISOM. is
properly funded. We are fighting with our bare hands
against an enemy that has acquired expertise to produce
explosive devices that are powerful enough to bring
down this building. Taking into account the possibility
of considering an assessed contribution for the funding
of AMISOM. has now become very important.

