Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the delegation
of China for having convened this open briefing, as
the Security Council must continually follow up the
situation in South Sudan. We also express our thanks
for the information provided today by Assistant
Secretary-General El-Ghassim Wane. We welcome his
work and that of his team, work that they are carrying
out in the very difficult context that we are seeing
today in the youngest country in the world. We also
welcome in particular Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission.
Bolivia reiterates its support for and acknowledgement
of his work.

In January 2011, more than 98 per cent ofthe citizens
of South Sudan chose independence; that became a
reality on 9 July that year. Today, unfortunately, six
years after the South Sudanese achieved independence,
the unity that they showed then has evaporated.

The Republic of South Sudan is tackling an
economic, political, security and humanitarian crisis
that continues to prevent many of its citizens from
seeing the objectives of independence actually take
shape. Bolivia's desire is for the brotherly South
Sudanese people to enjoy the peace and development
that they deserve and that a country with such potential
could offer them.

We take note of the conciliatory message delivered
by President Salva Kiir on the sixth anniversary of
independence. He stated that war was not an option and
appealed to those who had not yet done so to respect
the ceasefire.

The first step towards achieving peace is the
cessation of hostilities. We must continue to work
towards that, and the international community must
support the efforts that have been made recently in that
respect. However, it is the South Sudanese themselves
who should lead the process, and the full commitment
of all players is vital. Internal divisions and rivalries,
both within the Government and in the opposition,
must be set aside, as must all differences relating to
who governs and who aspires to govern. The well-
being of the country's citizens must always be the
main objective.

Restoring momentum to the political process is
only the second step. Ensuring the implementation of
the 2015 Agreement is the way to proceed. Inclusiveness
and genuine dialogue are fundamental ingredients. As
Special Envoy Haysom - to whose efforts we reiterate
our support - mentioned in a previous briefing, there
is some agreement between the opposition groups and
the Government. The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) has a very important role to play
in that regard. We await the convening of the high-level
revitalization forum on the 2015 agreement. In that
context, we welcome the appointment of Ambassador
Ismail Wais as IGAD's Special Envoy for South Sudan
and assure him of our unconditional support for
his work.
Bolivia would like to reiterate its support for
regional efforts in the quest for a solution to the
situation. As the IGAD communique of 2 July states,
the African Union, the United Nations and the other
IGAD partners must support the efforts to revitalize
the Agreement. It is therefore important to highlight
President Mogae's efforts to revive the political process.
His recommendations will be very important for the
forum that IGAD has called for.

We also note that the famine in the country is under
control. We greatly appreciate the tremendous efforts of
humanitarian workers and the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) to that end, but there is still
much to be done. The latest figures from the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs indicate that
6 million people - 50 per cent of the population - will
need food assistance this month. It will be crucial
to ensure that there is unhindered, safe access for
humanitarian aid and for UNMISS.

With regard to the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force, we welcome the progress that the
engineering and rapid-deployment companies have
made, which we hope they will complete this month.
We encourage UNMISS and the Government to work
together to achieve that. The help that the Regional
Protection Force can give UNMISS is essential if it
is to be able to guarantee the protection of civilians.
For example, security improvements in rural areas are
linked to agricultural development, which is important
to increasing economic production, and crop production
in particular, so as to fight famine and improve the
living conditions of the South Sudanese. Lastly in that
regard, we should highlight the significant work being
done by UNMISS, which has ramped up its patrols on
the ground. We appreciate the steps it is taking in order
to improve the effectiveness of its efforts.

