Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
It gives me pleasure, Sir, to convey to you the compliments
of the French delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for May. I wish also to
convey to Ambassador Somavia and his delegation our very
sincere thanks for the manner in which they conducted the
presidency of the Council in April.

Permit me also to welcome His Excellency the Vice-
Minister without portfolio of the Republic of Angola.

The French delegation voted in favour of the
resolution just adopted unanimously by the Security
Council. As the Secretary-General has noted, there have
been some satisfactory developments in the situation in
Angola since the signature of the Lusaka Protocol. We
note that the peace agreements have led to a lasting
cease-fire throughout the country. Likewise, the former
belligerents have begun and are continuing a dialogue.
The President of Angola, Mr. Dos Santos, and the leader
of the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de
Angola (UNITA), Mr. Savimbi, met again at Libreville on
1March. Both parties are working to implement the
agreements by participating together in the Joint
Commission, which is playing an active role in ensuring
the implementation of the peace agreements. For all those
reasons, we believe that the situation in Angola is moving
in the right direction and that this deserves to be
acknowledged.

However, we are obliged to say that this movement
has not been as speedy as we might have wished. The
Lusaka agreements, the resolutions of the Security
Council and the recent commitments undertaken at
Libreville by the Angolan Government and UNITA have
not been fully implemented. The peace process still seems
to be stalled on a number of fundamental points. Yet the
people of Angola must be enabled to see that the
promises made by their leaders are being reflected in
concrete changes in their daily lives.

The beginnings of such changes have been made
possible by the arrival in Angola of 7,200 Blue Helmets,
who have begun demining many roads, and by the work
of humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations. But these changes can take root only if the
Angolan parties manifest a determination to implement all
the commitments they have undertaken. Unfortunately,
there is much evidence that this is not altogether the case.

The main sticking point arises out of the stance
taken by UNITA. This situation has been described to us
many times, and the Council has expressed its views on
it, as it has done today. We understand that, after 20
years of war, there remains a certain lack of trust between
those who fought against each other for so long. UNITA,
however, must understand that the reestablishment of a
State must include the demobilization of combatants.
Mr. Savimbi must unhesitatingly agree to the quartering
of every last one of his troops.

This quarterng is a crucial stage for the success of
the peace process in Angola. UNITA will bear a very

 

heavy responsibility if in this task, which it must carry out,
it were to fail now. We welcome recent news that UNITA
has quartered more than 32,000 men. Now it must continue
its efforts in this area to enable the speedy implementation
of the remainder of the Lusaka agreement.

For its part, the Government, whose efforts to
implement the peace agreements we salute, must continue
to do all it can to restore trust and make possible the
reconciliation of all Angolans. It is incumbent upon it, in
particular, to ensure security within the country. To this
end, it will have a new army and a new police force into
which certain UNITA elements will have been integrated.
Above all, it must ensure the demilitarization of Angolan
society, which means disarming the civilian population. We
call on it to commence this job as soon as possible,
pursuant to the accords.

We hope that Angola is now close to its goal. Many
obstacles have already been overcome. Many others could
easily be overcome if gestures of goodwill were made by
both sides. We are pleased here that the Angolan
Government has recently taken some amnesty steps to make
it possible to resolve the last problems relating to the
creation of the Angolan national forces.

We have also taken note of the timetable drawn up by
the Joint Commission, concerning actions to be taken
during May. We hope that the commitments undertaken by
the parties will be respected.

The Security Council has today renewed UNAVEM's
mandate for two months. We hope that on 11 July the
Council will not have to deal with problems raised by the
resolution that we have just adopted and that Angola will
by that date have established institutions enabling the
country to regain democracy and renew its development.

