Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
thank Ambassador Momen for his capable chairmanship
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2012 and to congratulate Ambassador
Vilovie on his assumption of the Chair for 2013. I thank
them both for their briefings today.

The United States appreciates the contributions of
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office and
recognizes the value of the PBC as a common platform
for international actors working in support of sustainable
peace and development. From mobilizing resources to
developing partnerships and building bridges among
the different United Nations entities in support of
peacebuilding objectives, the PBC continues to evolve
to reach its full potential. We share the Secretary-
General's view that strong national ownership of the
peacebuilding process, a closer relationship between
Headquarters and United Nations actors in the field and
the prioritization ofresources are essential to the PBC's
success.

In that regard, I would like to focus on three areas
where the PBC has a great opportunity for added value:
political governance, economic governance and justice
and security sector reform.

Peace and security require a basic political
agreement on the structures of Government and the rules
of politics. Effective, resilient and inclusive governance
institutions are essential to ending recurring conflict
and to enabling long-term and broad-based economic
growth and development. As President Obama said in
2009, good governance is the ingredient that can unlock
Africa's enormous potential.

Following the successful national elections in
Sierra Leone, for example, the PBC's role in developing
coherent and short- and long-term peacebuilding
objectives and in identifying national capacity gaps,
particularly related to governance, is increasingly
important.

International support however cannot substitute for
the national Government or overcome the absence of
a durable political settlement. We note that the PBC's
engagement in Guinea-Bissau has been suspended
following the April 2012 coup d'etat and that the
Central African Republic has started down a similarly
troubling path. Before the Central African Republic can
stabilize and develop, the constitutional order must be
restored and the Libreville and N'Djamena Agreements
implemented. The Commission must be prepared to
step in and facilitate international support for effective
Government institutions once conditions allow.

Unlocking the vast and untapped potential of
women as political leaders and in building governance
institutions is essential. Every effort must be made to
ensure that women are included and supported, as the
PBC helps national actors to interface with the United
Nations system, to mobilize the appropriate resources
and to generate the momentum for further support and
positive action.

Economic governance is equally important to post-
conflict peacebuilding and recovery. Partnerships with
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
regional development banks are critical since those
organizations have the tools and the expertise to build
the capacity of public finance institutions. In Burundi,
the PBC's engagement with the international financial
institutions led to the inclusion of the peacebuilding
priorities in its second-generation poverty reduction
strategy. Furthermore, thanks in no small part to
the efforts of Ambassador Seger and the country
configuration, more than $2.5 billion was pledged at
the October 2012 Burundi partners conference.

Indeed, the PBC's ability to mobilize resources and
to ensure the inclusivity of women and underrepresented
groups is crucial to countries transitioning from
conflict to development phases. However, donors must
have confidence in the country's capacity to absorb and
manage its contributions responsibly.

Beyond the need for capable political and economic
governance, ordinary citizens must feel safe and secure
in their daily lives for peacebuilding to succeed. They
need to be able to trust in the rule of law and the State
security forces. Yet, in the aftermath of conflict, there
is usually a need to build up the justice sector, while
the security sector is typically in need of reform and
downsizing. Women need to take part and to be included
in reforming the institutions of law and security so that
the needs of the entire society are met. The PBC can

and should help sustain the political momentum for
such efforts.

In Liberia, the PBC not only facilitated the
participation of key stakeholders in establishing justice
hubs to bring security and justice services to Liberians
outside the capital. It also helped to enable a structured
road map that kept the project on track and coordinated.
We understand that the first hub is already providing
essential services, including counselling to victims of
sexual and gender-based violence.

Too often our attention is focused acutely on ending
the fighting and stopping the bloodshed but, when the
guns fall silent, the wounds of war are far from healed
and the causes of conflict far from resolved. For that
reason, the PBC remains important and must continue
to improve its effectiveness in catalysing the political
momentum and in mobilizing the resources needed to
assist countries transitioning from conflict to peace.

