Mr. Ramacharan: The defence of human rights
is one of the activities that define the contemporary and
future United Nations. No other body can replace the
United Nations for universality, legitimacy, trust and its
international code of human rights. The United Nations
mirrors the world while beckoning it to the values of
the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.

Every country has ground to cover when it comes
to respect for the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. The human rights mission of the United
Nations is central to its raison d'etre and is becoming
more and more crucial to its other leading roles, as well
as to the work of this Council.

The United Nations, through the Security
Council, seeks to prevent conflicts worldwide. This is
an irreplaceable role. In a recent work on the Security
Council and the protection of human rights, I sought to
show that the Council places increasing emphasis on
the promotion and protection of human rights for the
prevention of conflicts. I will have the opportunity to
present the President with a copy of this book this
morning.

In different parts of the world, United Nations
peacemakers are endeavouring to help find solutions to
disputes and conflicts. No one else cares as much as
the United Nations, which seeks to be of assistance,
whatever the colour or stripe of the nation. The
peacemaking flag of the United Nations, more and
more, has on it the eternal flame of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. As the Council has
advised on more than one occasion, peacemaking and
human rights must go hand in hand, the primordial
nature of the right to life is recognized. The nexus
between peace and justice is the right to life.

Another role that defines the United Nations is
peacekeeping and peace observation. The Security
Council has registered that United Nations
peacekeeping operations must contribute to the
protection and promotion of human rights. The Council
has also given central place to human rights in United
Nations peace-building missions.

The humanitarian work of the United Nations
singles it out as a conscience-bearer for suffering
humanity. More and more, United Nations
humanitarian and human rights endeavours are
integrated. It can only be so, for the principle of the
protection of human rights is grounded in the principle
of humanity.

The United Nations works with countries
worldwide on practical projects of development,
governance, democracy-building and the rule of law.
Countries and people trust the United Nations
worldwide. They see it as their Organization. This
extraordinary legitimacy is shared by no other
institution or entity, and human rights are integrated
into all of its roles. Increasingly, the emphasis is on
strengthening national human rights protection systems
and institutions.

The United Nations, and the Security Council,
seek to direct the spotlight to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, the protection of women and
children and new security challenges such as
HIV/AIDS. The concept and content of security is thus
evolving. This Council has registered that the security
of nations depends on the security of people. Human
security is defined by the international human rights
norms, which give it content. The issue before us today
is how to bring human security, through human rights,
to the long-suffering people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

(spoke in French)

I thank the Council for having invited me to join
my colleague, Jean-Marie Guehenno, in order to
introduce the report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights concerning the
events that occurred on 3 April 2003 in the locality of
Drodro, in Ituri, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The presentation of the report also offers us the
opportunity to take a quick look at the persistent
violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law in that region.

The report before members is a response to the 8
April 2003 statement by the President of the Security
Council strongly condemning the massacres committed
at Drodro, in the Ituri district, and requesting the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to
investigate those events and to report on them as soon
as possible. This report is the result of an investigation
on the ground carried out on 5 April 2003 by the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in close
cooperation with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), supplemented with information gathered by
a follow-up mission comprising officials of the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, MONUC
staff and two legal experts, who visited Drodro and
surrounding areas from 18 April to 5 May 2003. The
report of that multidisciplinary team highlights the
gravity and the systematic nature of the atrocities and
human rights violations that the populations of this
province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have constantly endured in recent months. It also
contains several observations that I should like to bring
to the Council's attention.

Bordering Uganda, the Ituri district is today one
of the most unstable provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Since the eruption of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
August 1998, and particularly since a split appeared
within the Rassemblement Congolais pour la
democratie-Kisangani/Mouvement de liberation
(RCD-K/ML), which led to the creation of the Union
des patriotes congolais (UPC) approximately a year
ago, this district of Orientale province has been the
scene of devastating violence and of deadly clashes
among dissident factions, self-defence groups of an
ethnic nature and tribal militias.

The deadly violence that afflicts the populations
of this region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
proceeds from an ideology of exclusion, from hatred
and from the exacerbation of tribal and ethnic
cleavages and antagonisms. That violence and the
tension to which it gives rise have been stirred up
recently by several factors: the absence of a credible
and effective administration in Ituri; the presence of
foreign troops; the value of the enormous natural
resources, which gives rise to greed; power struggles
between local leaders seeking to position themselves
on the national political scene; and disputes over land
ownership and resources.

The impact of such a conflict affects the
enjoyment of the majority of the rights set out in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in
subsequent international instruments relating to human
rights. The human rights violations to which I shall
refer today are massive and systematic, and they
require particular attention.
(spoke in English)

On two previous occasions, the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights has briefed the
Security Council on the grievous violations of human
rights occurring in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Those briefings were focused mainly on the
Ituri area. However, as the Council is aware, numerous
cases of atrocities and of pervasive violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law have taken
place in other parts of the country and deserve to be
investigated. That has not been possible for a number
of reasons, including the security situation prevailing
in some of the areas and a lack of cooperation and of
adequate financial resources for undertaking such an
important task.

As members know, the events which took place in
Drodro and in its surrounding areas on 3 April 2003 are
part of a continuing chain of inter-ethnic violence,
confrontations between armed militias and rivalries
among dissident armed groups and rebel factions.
Eyewitness reports gathered by our investigative
mission revealed that the gross and large-scale
violations of human rights perpetrated during the
events of 3 April 2003 included assaults on lives,
torture, looting and the destruction of property. The
most shocking violations of human rights reported by
witnesses include some 408 cases of summary
executions, more than 80 cases of persons seriously
wounded or mutilated, and numerous accounts of stores
and shops looted. During those events, huts were
burned down, dozens of cattle were stolen, and
valuable items found in houses were taken by the
assailants. In the main hospital in Drodro, which the
investigative team visited, 48 bodies were identified,
most of which were those of women and children.

The team of investigators also visited mass
graves in the localities of Largu, Nyali and Jissa. In
Jissa alone, there were 20 mass graves, although the
mission could visit only eight of them. According to
witnesses' accounts, those graves contain some 140
bodies. It should be noted that the number of persons
killed in that area is certainly higher, because the team
was not able to visit eight other localities for which no
safety guarantees could be provided.

According to information communicated to the
investigating team, the majority of the victims were
women and children, some of whom had been killed
and mutilated with machetes, while others had been
burned alive. Most of that information was confirmed
by the forensic experts who participated in the
investigative mission following their examination of
some of the graves.

In view of all the relevant information
gathered- including the conclusions of the forensic
experts - the team confirmed that massacres had taken
place on 3 April 2003 between 5.45 and 8 am. The
assailants carried out their attacks in the localities of
Dhessa, Duma, Nyali, Dzatha, Kiza, Ngazba, Jissa,
Kpatiz, Koli, Lera, Buki, Ndjala and Kpaluba using
edged weapons - machetes, axes, spears and
arrows - and firearms. Allow me to interject here that
we are not speaking of ordinary killings in the course
of a conflict; we are talking about events that shock the
human conscience.

The opinion of many witnesses confirmed that the
authors of the massacres were militias of Lendu origin.
The world's conscience has been struck by the
pervasive use of child combatants in committing these
atrocities. The events at Drodro and in the 15
surrounding localities have had a terrible impact on the
vulnerable populations in that part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is estimated that 55,000
people fled towards the south when the bloody
confrontations between the Lendu and Hema militias
broke out in early May 2003. The survivors of those
massacres were forced by the lack of security to flee at
night to major urban centres or into the forest.

Following the completion of the investigative
mission, our office in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has, in collaboration with MONUC, continued
to monitor closely the events that occurred more
recently in Ituri. The information gathered to date
points to continuing fighting between the Lendu and
Hema militias, resulting in further serious human rights
abuses, massive displacements of the civilian
population and deterioration of the humanitarian
situation.

It was reported that in Tchomya, on 31 May and 1
June 2003, fighting broke out again between the Lendu
and Hema militias, allegedly with the involvement of
elements of the Congolese Armed Forces. At least 350
casualties, mainly civilians, were recorded as a result
of the incident. The victims included 253 people who
were assaulted in the commercial centre of the town,
22 victims at the residence of the head of the Party for
the Unity and Safeguard of the Integrity of the Congo,
and 37 victims that had their throats cut and were
hacked with machetes at the town hospital.

We also received reports on the attacks launched
on 7 June 2003 by militias of Lendu origin in
Tchomya, Kasenyi and the town of Bunia, which
resulted in the killing of between 300 and 500
individuals. Furthermore, on 18 June 2003, several
mass graves were discovered at the residence of the
Governor of Bunia.

In addition to summary executions, the
confrontations and resulting violence have led to
arbitrary arrests, abductions, rapes and the wanton
destruction of lives and property. The number of
displaced persons has risen to 74,000. The majority of
the displaced persons are located in the area
surrounding the Bunia airport and the premises
occupied by the MONUC military observers. That
population continues to face severe problems of health,
food and access to school, which the humanitarian
agencies are trying to address.

As members of the Council know, the portions of
the report of the Council's mission to Central Africa
from 7 to 16 June 2003 (S/2003/653) that relate to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo affirm substantially
the findings that we highlighted in the Drodro and
earlier reports. In line with the recommendations of the
Council's mission, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and MONUC
are engaged in consultations and discussions with
relevant actors, aimed at assisting the national
transitional institutions in putting an end to impunity,
reconstructing the justice system and adopting the
related transitional justice arrangements for rebuilding
the rule of law.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and MONUC have
reiterated their commitment to supporting the
establishment and effective functioning of the relevant
national institutions, particularly the National
Observatory for Human Rights and the National Truth
and Reconciliation Commission - the creation of
which is envisaged by the All-inclusive Agreement -
as well as the Ituri Pacification Commission.

This is the third time in a year that the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has been given the opportunity to brief the
Security Council regarding some of the cases of
atrocities and dreadful human rights violations
perpetrated in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The frequency of these briefings is in itself a clear
indication of the very serious and continuous nature of
human rights violations occurring in the country, and
reflects the Council's recognition of that.
Our Office has had the opportunity to share with
the Council information and reports regarding the
human rights situation, whose patterns have been
similar since the outbreak of the conflict in August
1998. Three conclusions stand out. Allow me to
reiterate those conclusions in furtherance of the
conclusions contained in paragraphs 26 and 28 of the
Security Council mission's report.

The first conclusion is that all the parties, but
particularly the rebel movements, rival factions and
other armed groups and militias operating in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
continue to resort to human rights violations as a
means of creating an atmosphere of terror and
oppression and, thus, of keeping their control over the
population and lucrative natural resources.

The second conclusion is that insecurity and
terror, as well as the lack of cooperation from the
parties, have made it impossible to initiate thorough
and comprehensive investigations aimed at shedding
light on many cases of mass killings and other gross
human rights violations that have occurred in various
parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Generally, the warring parties are not committed to
fulfilling their obligations under international law to
investigate responsibility for serious violations of
human rights and breaches of humanitarian law and to
prosecute those responsible for the atrocities
committed. Consequently, the interests ofjustice can be
served only by providing both national and
international mechanisms with opportunities to
investigate those crimes in depth in order to determine
their extent and motivation.

The third conclusion is that failure to take the
necessary concrete action towards ending the reign of
impunity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
encourage the perception of the international
community's passivity and double standards regarding
serious and grave human rights violations. That will
further nurture the existing feeling among the civilian
population that there is a denial of justice, which will
contribute to the cycle of reprisals and the culture of
impunity.

On 16 May 2003, the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Mr. Luis Moreno
Ocampo, visited our office in Geneva to discuss
possible areas of collaboration. We raised the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and discussed
it with him. We in the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights stressed that the
human rights violations that have taken place in
various parts of the country, particularly those
perpetrated in Ituri, should be investigated as quickly
as possible. Our Office stands ready to pursue close
cooperation with the International Criminal Court in
any effort that might be pursued regarding events in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With all humility, I propose that parallel to those
efforts, the Security Council may wish to consider
taking appropriate action on the serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law
perpetrated in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
taking into account the relevance of the International
Criminal Court.

We in the Office of the High Commissioner also
very much hope that the National Observatory for
Human Rights and the National Truth and
Reconciliation Commission - which we hope will
soon be established - will serve, and interact in a
constructive way with, the goal of encouraging the
transitional Government to confront the culture of
impunity. Perpetrators of gross human rights violations
must be put on notice that they will be brought to
justice.

I have been in the human rights business for a
lifetime, and I have been in the United Nations for 30
years. If there is one thing of which I am convinced, it
is that the threat ofjustice to those who commit serious
violations of human rights is one of the means that we
have at our disposal and one of the means that we must
be willing to use.

At the beginning of these remarks, I noted that
the Council's practice places increasing emphasis on
the centrality of human rights in conflict prevention, in
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peace-building and
humanitarian and development work. The Council has
also stood up for the principles of international
accountability, international supervision, reconciliation
and justice.

I should like to end by placing particular
emphasis on the principles of international
accountability and international supervision. Any
situation on which the Security Council has
pronounced itself calls for application of the principles
of international accountability and supervision. The
Council must be satisfied that peace and justice have
been served in the final analysis. This invites,
particularly in the case of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the principle of special and sustained
interest that you have indeed been applying - special
and sustained interest. I spent nearly four years in
peacemaking and peacekeeping in the former
Yugoslavia. We said the conflict there was one of the
largest since the Second World War. We know that the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
led to the loss of millions of lives. Therefore, the
principle of special and sustained interest must be
applicable in this situation.

I have one final comment, ifI may. In the reports
the Council considers today, there is incontrovertible
evidence pointing to the criminal responsibility of
particular individuals. They must know from this
Council that they will be brought to justice. They must
know from this Council that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo of the future will be built on the
foundations of human rights. For this is the essence of
the United Nations, and this is the essence of the
Security Council. In the final analysis, human rights
are the measure, and international security must be
achieved through human security.
(spoke in Spanish)

In conclusion, I would like to thank you, Mr.
President, and the Council members for having given
me the opportunity to speak before you today. I have
studied the role played by the Council in the protection
of human rights, and this morning I would like to take
the opportunity to present to you a copy of the book
that I recently wrote on this topic. As you will
understand, it is an honour for me to appear before you
today and to speak on the subject of human rights. For
me, justice is primordial.

