Mr. Alajmi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I sincerely thank Judge Agius, President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, for his briefing on the progress made in the
work of the Mechanism. It is his first briefing since
he assumed the leadership of the judicial hierarchy
of the Mechanism. We wish him every success in his
new duties.

I thank his predecessor, Mr. Theodor Meron, for
his tireless efforts throughout his term of office at the
helm of the Mechanism. I also thank Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for his valuable briefing today.
The establishment by the Security Council,
pursuant to its resolution 1966 (2010), ofan international
mechanism to continue the work of the former
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda so as to
achieve justice for the victims of war crimes, genocide
and ethnic cleansing, committed on the basis ofreligion
and race and in violation of international humanitarian
law, is a new dimension in the role of the Security
Council to anchor justice, address impunity and uphold
the rule of law in order to maintain international peace
and security. In our discussion today, I would like to
highlight the following points.

At the outset, we welcome the efforts of the
President of the Mechanism, who, since assuming his
new role, has adopted priorities that will improve its
functioning and ensure the conclusion of the remaining
legal proceedings, while taking into account the factors
of time and efficiency, the promotion of inter-branch
cooperation and the improved professionalism among
the staff. Without prejudice to the mandate of resolution
1966 (2010) and notwithstanding the challenges faced
by the Mechanism, such priorities include the following.

First, there was a surge in judicial activities
concerning requests for reviews of rulings, access to
confidential information and allegations of contempt of
court, as a result of the discontinuation of the support
provided by the two Tribunals when they closed.

Secondly, the General Assembly did not approve
the proposed budget of the Mechanism for 2018-2019.
Therefore, the Mechanism revised and reduced its
budget by laying off several staff members, which
may have an adverse effect on its functioning and the
implementation of its mandate, not to mention on the
morale of its staff. It is therefore important to adopt the
new budget without any revision or reduction so that the
Mechanism can assume its functions, in particular as it
envisages judicial milestones, such as the conclusion of
all remaining cases in 2020.

Thirdly, we commend the speedy measures
implemented by those in charge of the Mechanism,
including the Prosecutor and the Registry, in trials
reviewed by the Mechanism's judges, which would
expedite rulings against indictees. One example is the
appeals sentence in the case Prosecutor v. Radovan
Karadzie last March. We look forward to the rulings
in other cases considered by the Mechanism within the
time frame set.

Fourthly, we commend the efforts of the Mechanism
to transform itself into a small, temporary and efficient
structure whose functions and size will become leaner
over time, in accordance with its founding resolution,
by adopting measures to reduce expenditures without
affecting its functioning.

Fifthly, we commend the efforts of the
Mechanism's Prosecutor. However, we believe that the
responsibility to locate and detain the eight fugitives
does not lie with the Mechanism alone. There must be
cooperation among States and relevant international
organizations to promote the efforts of the Mechanism,
enabling access to important information regarding the
location and detention of the fugitives.

Sixthly, we reiterate the importance of taking the
measures necessary to address the concerns of Member
States reflected in resolution 2422 (2018) regarding
early release. We also stress the need for the Mechanism
to take into account the observations of Member States
on its functioning in order to achieve the desired goals.

In conclusion, I sincerely thank Peru for its work as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, as well as the Office ofLegal Affairs and the
United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services
for their efforts to implement resolution 1966 (2010).

