Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ambassador Rishchynski for their briefings. I also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra
Leone to our meeting today.

Currently, the overall security situation in Sierra
Leone is stable. Its economy has developed quite
quickly, and various social spheres have seen significant
progress.

China congratulates Sierra Leone on its positive
achievements in its peaceful reconstruction. China
appreciates the tireless efforts made by the Government
of Sierra Leone in consolidating peace, promoting
development, strengthening Government-building
and facilitating social progress with the support of
the international community. China hopes that Sierra
Leone will continue to implement, in a comprehensive
manner, its agenda for prosperity, steadily advance
in its constitutional review process, defuse political
tensions, eradicate the root causes of political tension
and conflict and consolidate the achievements of its
peacebuilding efforts so that all the people of Sierra
Leone will be able to enjoy the dividends of peace and
development.

Since its inception, in 2008, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) has maintained close engagement and
cooperation with the Government of Sierra Leone and
has played a positive role in, and made an important
contribution to, defusing tension and potential conflicts,
maintaining overall peace and stability and supporting
the reconstruction and development of Sierra Leone.

China highly appreciates the work of Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General Toyberg-
Frandzen, his predecessor and his entire team.

UNIPSIL'S mandate will come to an end by the
end of the month. This not only marks the successful
completion of the transition from conflict to peace in
Sierra Leone, but has also established a good model
for the United Nations in helping other countries
in post-conflict situations to achieve lasting peace
and development. Its successful practices should be
compiled and promoted.

The success of the United Nations experiences
in Sierra Leone indicates that, in conducting its
peacebuilding activities, the United Nations should
give top priority to the ownership and leadership of the
countries concerned, fully respect their sovereignty
and aspirations, provide assistance in priority areas
identified by the Governments concerned and help in
the development of a comprehensive peacebuilding
strategy, taking into consideration the situation on the
ground.

Secondly, the United Nations should help the
countries concerned to accelerate economic and social
development and improve their peoples' lives by
addressing the root causes of the conflict.

Thirdly, the Organization must assist the countries
concerned in capacity-building in various fields and
develop their capabilities in a sustainable manner so
as to establish a solid foundation and guarantee for
achieving lasting peace and development.

A new page has been turned in Sierra Leone's
history. The country is embarking upon the road
to lasting peace, stability and social and economic
development and prosperity. However, Sierra Leone
still faces many difficulties and challenges in terms
of eradicating poverty, strengthening governance and
promoting youth employment. It will continue to need
the support and assistance of the United Nations and
the international community.

It is our hope that the international community,
in the context of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, will provide financial support
to Sierra Leone in advancing its development in various
areas so that the country can achieve comprehensive
development. China is ready to join hands with the
international community and make its own positive
contribution for an early realization of lasting peace
and development in Sierra Leone.

