Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, allow me to congratulate
the delegation of Morocco on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I take this opportunity to
assure you of our full support and to wish you every
success in your important work.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri of India and his
delegation for their excellent leadership of the Council's
work last month. I also thank Mr. Benomar for his
briefing.

In the year that has elapsed since the signing of the
historic Transition Agreement that set Yemen on the
path to democracy, the country has made great strides
in that direction. The Government and people of Yemen
must be congratulated on the progress achieved to
date and on their determination to move their country
forward. It is clear that what has been achieved should
be consolidated and that efforts to carry out an inclusive
Yemeni-led political transition process that meets
the legitimate demands and aspirations of the people
should be continued.

The convening of an all-inclusive National Dialogue
Conference, scheduled to take place later this year, in
accordance with the second phase of the transition
process, takes on particular importance. The outcome
of the dialogue is also vital to drafting the constitution
and to conducting the general elections to take place in
2014.

The international community must render all
possible assistance to the Yemeni people in meeting
those objectives. The recent visit by the Secretary-
General to Yemen reiterated international support for
the political transition in the country.

Azerbaijan also welcomes the Friends of Yemen
ministerial meeting held in New York on 27 September,
which pledged additional funds to support the transition
process in Yemen. We appreciate the efforts of Special
Adviser Mr. Benomar to help bridge the differences
among the various groups and to bring them to the
dialogue. It must be underscored that engagement with
all political forces and groups is vital in order for them
to be able to express their expectations of the process.

In that light, we welcome the recent progress
in deciding the quotas of political parties and of
other groups participating in the National Dialogue
Conference. All political forces in Yemen must realize
that a successful transition process depends on the
involvement and cooperation of all stakeholders in
implementing the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 2014 (2011) and
2051 (2012).

The presence of the rebel groups in northern Yemen
and of Al-Qaida-related groups in the south of the
country remains a major threat to Yemen's security and
stability. The intensification of suicide attacks against
the Yemeni military by those groups, as well as the new
clashes that erupted between Yemeni military forces
and Al-Qaida-related groups in Abyan at the end of
October, gave rise to legitimate concerns. Once again,
we would like to express our support to the President
and Government of Yemen for the determined efforts
in fighting the terrorist threats.

The humanitarian situation in the country
remains harsh, although the recent financial pledges
of donors offer some alleviation of the economic and
social hardship faced by the population in need. More
must be done in that regard. The problem of internal
displacement in northern Yemen is alarming and
represents a heavy economic and social burden on
the State. It is nevertheless encouraging to witness
the growing number of returning internally displaced
persons in the south of the country. According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, that is the first significant decline in
displacement since May 2011, when fighting between
Government troops and militants erupted in the south.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate
Azerbaijan's full support for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Yemen and
to express our hope that the tenacious work of the
Yemeni authorities and the continued support of the
international community will yield the best possible
results for a successful transition in Yemen.

