Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We supported the draft resolution. We regret
that the position of Security Council member States
on the matter was divided and that the Council was
unable to adopt the proposed decision. We feel that
the African countries presented very compelling
arguments. Indeed, at such a critical time for Kenya,
when the military contingent of that country is playing
a key role in combating terrorism in Somalia, and when
Kenya itself has become a target for terrorist attacks,
the democratically elected President and Deputy
President of that country should be able to remain in
their country and resolve the pressing tasks faced by
their Government.

We would not wish to see events unfold in such a
way that insufficient attention were paid to the African
continent by some members of the Council, which in
turn could lead to the appearance of yet another hotbed
of instability in Africa.

The request of the African States does not
presuppose any sort of circumvention or Violation of
the Rome Statute or undermine its integrity. We do not
see any attempt here to pit African countries against the
International Criminal Court. This is simply a matter of
the sound application of one of the norms of the Statute,
namely, article 16, which was the very reason for that
article's establishment in the first place. In our View,
its application would ultimately enhance the authority
of the system of international justice among African
countries, and demonstrate the system's maturity and
readiness to address complex and ambiguous situations
responsively.

In our View, the root causes of the situation we
encounteredtoday reside, inter alia, in systemic problems
that derive from the interpretation and application of
the Statute, as we have repeatedly stressed. First and
foremost, we refer to the interrelationship between its
provisions and the standards for the immunity of high
Government officials.

To conclude, I would like to underscore the
commitment of my country to combating impunity with
respect to the gravest violations of international law.

