Mr. De Palacio Espafia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the Romanian
presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this public debate. I especially want to thank
the Prime Minister and you, Mr. Minister, for being
with us today. We believe the holding of this debate to
be particularly timely, as a year has passed since a
similar meeting was held during the presidency of
Mexico, in April 2003.

Spain aligns itself with the statement made by
Mr. Peter Feith on behalf of Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union. That statement clearly
expressed the European vision regarding the role
played by the Union in today's debate.

There is consensus among the international
community about the need to encourage cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the stabilization processes. That has once again been
borne out in today's debate. The presence here today of
important senior representatives of a great many of
those organizations is testimony of that. It is obvious
that the security framework planned when the Charter
of the United Nations was drafted was new and
different, but we should adapt the Organization and its
work to the new challenges.

The main threats to international peace and
security today no longer emanate solely from conflicts
between States; they are also the result of the
proliferation of internal conflicts, the existence of so-
called failed States, terrorism, international networks
of organized crime and environmental degradation.
Many of those are new challenges for the international
community, whose response must therefore be
innovative while being in compliance with
international law. It is in such a context of innovation
that we believe this debate on the role of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is taking place.

We believe that cooperation under Chapter VIII
of the Charter holds out enormous possibilities. While
some of those possibilities have already been explored
and have produced practical results, we nevertheless
believe that they should continue to be expanded. We
believe that the recommendations made jointly thus far
to continue down that road include the following
general proposals.

The first proposal is to strengthen the relationship
between the Security Council and regional
organizations, as well as the relationships between the
organizations themselves.

The second proposal is to establish a systematic
substantive dialogue between the Security Council and
regional organizations, with a view to ensuring the
complementarity of actions taken at various levels
while at the same time preserving the primacy of the
Security Council.

Thirdly, there is a need to increase and improve
the exchange of information between the Security
Council and regional organizations in order to make it
more regular and dynamic, as well as to consider other
possible modalities for such exchanges.

The fourth proposal is to think about the
contributions that the United Nations and the Member
States can make to the development of the capacities of
regional organizations to address threats in their
respective regions. As has been said, the European
Union is making a special effort in that regard, and we
would urge other Member States to do likewise.

The fifth recommendation concerns the
possibility of developing, with regional organizations,
general criteria with regard to the best way in which
they could contribute to the work of the Security
Council. We should recognize that more detailed work
still needs to be done in this area.

Finally, it has been argued that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations should engage in a structured
dialogue with regional organizations in order to
examine ways in which the Security Council's
traditional capacities may be complemented by the
resources of those organizations.

We fully agree on the merit of those
recommendations. However, we would in particular
like to stress that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations should be governed
by at least three basic considerations.

The first consideration is to reaffirm that the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security remains in the hands of
this Council. Cooperation with regional organizations
can therefore facilitate the objectives of the United
Nations.

The second premise has to do with applying the
principle of complementarity. The United Nations
should benefit from the comparative advantages that
regional organizations can no doubt provide - for
example, as regards faster intervention and better
knowledge on the ground. One could even say that
regional organizations can often act as the eyes of the
United Nations in the field, as well as having closer
proximity to affected populations, which can foster a
heightened feeling of ownership among those
populations. However, this is not about the United
Nations losing interest in a given conflict. With a view
to optimizing resources and increasing the flexibility of
the international community's response, that
involvement should instead be channelled through a
given regional organization and with the support of any
actors capable of making a contribution to the work of
stabilization.

We believe more in complementarity than in
subsidiarity. The idea is not that the United Nations
cannot or should not intervene in a given situation and
that, therefore, a regional organization should step in.
Rather, it may well come to pass that an analysis of the
circumstances surrounding any given conflict or threat
may make it desirable for a specific regional
organization to intervene in place, or in support, of the
United Nations.

There are recent examples to support this. Those
include the already mentioned European Union-led
Operation ARTEMIS in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which made it possible for the United
Nations to take advantage of the rapid-reaction and
deployment capacity of a regional organization. There
is also the case of Kosovo, where security is
guaranteed by NATO while other peace-building tasks
are in the hands of the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations - a unique example of
division of labour. There is the case of Afghanistan,
where NATO's responsibility for the maintenance of
security also complements the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in peace-
building efforts.

In several African conflicts the presence of the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States in particular has brought into play the
experience and knowledge on the ground of those who
know the field and understand better than anyone else
the demands of the local population, thus
complementing the work of the United Nations both in
exercising the necessary political leadership to keep the
negotiations process on track and as regards the
deployment of peacekeeping missions.

Lastly, we should also mention the case of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, where NATO - followed shortly
afterwards, as has been pointed out today, by the
European Union - has been implementing the
mandate adopted by the Council, in a show of effective
multilateralism with optimal cooperation between the
Security Council and regional organizations.

The third, and final, premise we would like to
emphasize is that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations should be adapted
to the specific circumstances of each situation. No two
regional organizations and no two regional conflicts are
the same. There is therefore little point in adopting a
rigid model of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. Instead, it should be
established in terms of the particular needs of the case
and taking advantage of the added value of each
organization. Sometimes, the best approach will be
through informal consultations and exchange of
information and opinions on matters of common
interest; in other cases, through diplomatic support
from the regional organizations for United Nations
peacekeeping and peace-building activities, as we have
seen again recently in the African context. On other
occasions, it will be through operational support or
joint deployment and, finally, through the
establishment of joint operations.

The models for cooperation should take into
account the fact that stabilization processes must be
broadly conceived and not target the post-conflict
situation exclusively. Stabilization should also include
conflict prevention work. Guaranteeing peace in a
given region may not only involve actions related to
security or the cessation of hostilities, but may also call
for a definite effort in terms of development policy to
address the deep-rooted causes of a given conflict. I
would mention only the most recurrent of those factors:
economic inequality, widespread poverty, and a lack of
hygiene and decent educational conditions. In that
context, given the proliferation of regional
organizations of an economic nature, their cooperation
with the United Nations could be fundamental,
increasing coordination in development and
humanitarian assistance activities to prevent extensive
overlapping and to optimize resources.

In any event, we should deepen the channels of
communication between the United Nations and the
regional organizations by establishing coordination
units or focal points to enable the daily follow-up of
matters of common interest. The joint consultative
mechanism established by the European Union and the
United Nations on 24 September 2003 is an example of
such a unit. It allows the crisis management activities
of both organizations to be coordinated. Through such
units, we would facilitate not only greater exchange of
useful information, but also the possibility of sharing
experiences and lessons learned from the past.

In conclusion, I would stress the utility of
facilitating the coordination of activities in the field
and of taking advantage of the regional organizations'
greater rapid deployment capacities in the field and
better knowledge of local realities. To that end, it
would be helpful if such contacts were to be expanded
to include training activities so that, over time, we can
move towards uniformity in training personnel
participating in various capacities on the ground and
the advantages of action coordinated between the
United Nations and regional organizations can be made
effective. In that respect, greater effort should be made
in particular cases to promote the capacity of regional
organizations that need it. Otherwise, the lack of
resources of some organizations will make it difficult
for the United Nations to rely on them in pursuit of the
primary objective of the maintenance of international
peace and security.

