Mr. Corman (Turkey): Let me begin by
welcoming His Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdzie,
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. He has come to New York right after his
visit to Istanbul, where he attended the Somalia
Conference. Let me extend once again the gratitude of
my authorities for his participation and most valuable
contributions.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
sincerely congratulate President Silajdzic' on the
election of his country to the Security Council. The
presence of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Council is a
clear sign of the confidence that the international
community has entrusted in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and Turkey feels privileged to share this historic
occasion with that country.

We are also pleased to see High Representative
Valentin Inzko among us again. I want to thank him for
his unrelenting efforts and leadership, as well as for
introducing the comprehensive report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/235) and the succinct briefing he
provided today.

As a Balkan country itself, Turkey attaches great
importance to achieving lasting peace and stability in
the region. We consider a sovereign, democratic, and
stable and functional State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in its internationally recognized borders to be an
undeniable prerequisite to this objective. That is why,
in addition to our excellent bilateral relations and as
underlined in the briefing of the High Representative,
Turkey continues to make every effort to assist Bosnia
and Herzegovina in its endeavours to promote regional
cooperation. Indeed, regional ownership and
inclusiveness should also be key elements in our quest
for peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In this context, the Turkish initiatives of holding
high-level trilateral meetings among Turkey, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Croatia, as well as among
Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, have
surely contributed to the enhancement of regional
understanding and collaboration. The Istanbul
Declaration signed on 24 April 2010 by the Presidents
of Turkey, Serbia and Mr. Siladeie himself is an
important step in this direction. It will not only
strengthen the bilateral relations between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia but will also help create an
environment conducive to regional dialogue and
cooperation. We understand that Mr. Silajdzie will now
be travelling to Belgrade, after his visit to New York.
We very much welcome that initiative and congratulate
Mr. Siladeie on his leadership in thus continuing the
positive momentum created between the two countries.

We also thank His Excellency High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his generous words
of recognition and praise concerning Turkey's sincere
efforts. We express our resolute intention to continue
them with the same determination.

We are glad to see that, since the conflicts of the
1990s, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made considerable
progress. Of course, there are still daunting challenges
ahead, and progress has not been as swift as we all
expected. But, given its turbulent past, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is certainly making important strides in
the right direction. In that regard, cognizant of the fact
that the future of the region is closely tied to that of
Europe as a whole, we firmly support the aspiration of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully integrate with the
Euro-Atlantic institutions, and we hope that those
institutions will also embrace Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In that frame of mind, we greatly welcome the
decision taken at the NATO ministerial meeting, in
Tallinn, on 22 April 2010, accepting the application of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the Membership
Action Plan. We are hopeful that the condition put
forward for that step will soon be met, so that Bosnia
and Herzegovina can start to benefit from enhanced
cooperation with NATO members. Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be further assisted in that
direction.

At the same time, we appreciate the progress
achieved in addressing the conditions for visa
liberalization with the European Union. Again, we
hope that the remaining technicalities will soon be
resolved, and that Bosnia and Herzegovina will enjoy
the same status as its regional neighbours. In that
regard, Turkey supports and appreciates the efforts of
the European Union to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina
to take its rightful place in the European family of
nations, including by providing stability with its Police
Mission and through Operation Althea. As an active
contributor to both of those missions, Turkey will
remain ready to continue and increase its contributions.

Having said that, and as I have already suggested,
we cannot help but share the concerns of Mr. Inzko
about several aspects of the domestic situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular with respect to
anti-Dayton rhetoric and actions that challenge the
sovereignty and constitutional order of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The report of the High Representative
depicts those issues in great detail, and we agree in
general with the High Representative's observations.

Let me also underscore that we firmly support the
High Representative in using the powers granted to
him, in order to lead Bosnia and Herzegovina to a
better future. Hence, we do not agree that the actions of
the High Representative are unlawful and reject the
challenges to the authority of the international
community and that of the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board. In particular, the new law on
referendum adopted by the Republika Srpska would be
in clear violation of appropriate legislation and valid
international legal mechanisms, and is therefore
unacceptable.

In the run-up to the general elections scheduled
for October, to whose free and fair conduct we attach
utmost importance, we want to see all parties embrace
a common vision and act in accordance with it, rather
than pursuing parochial ethnic interests. Thus, we
reject all secessionist intentions, support the
democratic forces in the country and remain hopeful
that the democratic ideals and aspirations of the
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina will eventually
overcome divisive tendencies.

Let me conclude by stating once again that the
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the
Euro-Atlantic structures will eliminate any feelings of
exclusion, instil confidence in the peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and ensure the country's future as a
strong, stable, secure and full-fledged European
country. Turkey is fully committed to that objective,
and we will do everything possible to assist the peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve their rightful
place in the international community.

