Mr. Prince (Bangladesh): I thank the presidency
for organizing this open debate. We take note of the
comprehensive concept note (S/2017/892, annex).
We also take note of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/821) and its recommendations.

Bangladesh shared its views and priorities earlier
this month in the Security Council. We remain
committed to the protection of children in armed
conflict. Our peacekeepers continue to work to prevent
the recruitment of children by parties to conflicts. They
remain careful not to use schools for military purposes.

Our concerns about the protection of children
have been brought close to home once again. Children
represent perhaps the largest group of Victims of the
ongoing Rohingya crisis in Myanmar's Rakhine state.
Since 25 August, 600,000 people, of whom almost
60 per cent are children, have entered Bangladesh. To
date, our social services division has established that
22,484 of them are orphans. The dire situation that
those children were facing in Myanmar is only too
telling. Some 240,000 of those children are in need
of additional support; 30,843 have been screened for
acute malnutrition; more than 135,000 have received
measles and rubella vaccines; and 72,334 have received
polio vaccines. Some 453,000 people, most of whom
are children, are in need emergency assistance, and
348,000 children are in need of psychosocial support.

Those numbers are huge, and continue to increase.
Every number adding up to those statistics represents a
child. They were all born in Myanmar and should enjoy
protection by their State. Instead, they have chosen not
to remain there. There are too many shocking stories. Let
me just share one or two of them that were documented
by the rapid-response mission of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in September. A
12-year-old girl from Rathedaung township said,

"The Myanmar security forces and Rakhine
individuals surrounded our house and started to
shoot. It was a situation of panic - they shot my
sister in front of me. She was only seven years old.
She cried and told me to run. I tried to protect her
and care for her, but we had no medical assistance
on the hillside and she was bleeding so much that
after one day she died. I buried her myself. There
were helicopters in the air, and they used launchers
to try to attack us when we were in the hills. My
mother was outside the house with my four brothers.
I do not know where they are now. My father was
jailed a month before this. We do not know why and
we do not even know whether he is dead or alive."

Another 12-year-old from Buthidaung township said,

"Everyone lost someone. Many children were
looking for their family members. It was total
chaos, and I thought we were safe the moment we
reached the border, but then the Myanmar army
came from all directions and started shooting at us.
Many people ran into the nearby jungle, but some
old people died in front of my eyes."

Should we allow this when we have so many
commitments to protecting our children from Violence
and armed conflict? Should we allow so many children
to be exposed to killing, maiming, abduction and
trafficking, violent extremism, sexual violence and
child labour? Should these children be counted as the
ones left behind? In the name of these children, we
plead with the Council to act in a bold and determined
manner. More than two months into the crisis, the
Council should adopt a resolution to send a clear
message against violence, impunity and human rights
Violations. The Council can no longer afford to lose
sight of the situation in Myanmar and treat it as an
internal or bilateral issue. It is critical that awareness of
the situation in Myanmar be kept alive on the Council's
agenda until all of these children are allowed to return
to their homes in Rakhine state in safety and dignity.
Going on the early signs, Bangladesh is convinced that
our bilateral efforts will not achieve that. Myanmar is
already dropping references to return and deportation
from key documents.

Our Prime Minister's embrace of the injured
and traumatized Rohingya children has sent a clear
message to our entire nation. Bangladesh will support
these children in temporary shelters as long as it can,
but more than anything else these children want to hear
that they can soon go back to Myanmar as its proud
citizens. The United Nations and the Council are their
last hope. Let us not fail them.

