The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as the representative of the
United Kingdom.

I have the honour of speaking also for the 25
members of the European Union and 10 other countries
that have aligned themselves with this statement:
Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Croatia, Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro, Iceland and
Ukraine.

The full text of my statement will be circulated. I
shall, to honour my own commitments, try to keep my
statement slightly briefer than the full text.

First of all, I would like to join others in thanking
Mr. Egeland for his briefing and Mr. Forster for his
participation. The subject of today's debate is of huge
importance; five years after the last Council resolution
on this issue, the situation for civilians caught up in
armed conflict remains critical.

It is time, we think, to take stock of what lessons
have been learned, what progress has been made, what
gaps need to be filled, and how best we can fill them.
The European Union therefore supports the initiative
that my delegation has taken within the Security
Council to pursue this through a new draft resolution.

The gaps are very clear - prevention, protection,
humanitarian access, impunity - and they can be
filled only by combined action: action by parties to
conflict, action by individual States concerned, action
by the international community, and action by United
Nations agencies and peacekeeping and peace support
missions. At a political level, it requires us all to be
alert and active.

We have to do better on prevention. Timely and
adequate briefings to the Security Council by the
Special Adviser, by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, by the Emergency Relief Coordinator and by
other relevant parts of the United Nations system will
help the Council act sufficiently early on in conflict
situations to effectively protect civilians at risk.

As regards protection, parties to conflict must
comply fully with the requirements of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, especially
concerning the prohibitions on physical attack, sexual
violence, the use of child soldiers and forced
displacement. They must also ensure that specific
measures for the protection of civilians are included in
peace agreements. The United Nations must give
peacekeeping missions the mandates and the resources
to protect civilians, in particular those under imminent
threat of physical attack.

Humanitarian access is a crucial part of
protection. The right to food and the right to health are
fundamental human rights, but the denial of
humanitarian access is increasingly used as a political
tool, and even as a weapon of war. All parties to
conflict - as well as neighbouring States - must, as
our draft resolution proposes, provide unimpeded
access to humanitarian assistance and take all
necessary measures to guarantee the safety, security
and freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel.
United Nations peace support operations must have the
mandates and resources to ensure the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

The investigation of crimes under international
law committed against civilians, and the bringing of
their perpetrators to justice, is vital - vital to deter
future abuses, vital to provide some form of redress to
victims, and vital to ensure that a page can be turned in
a country's history. As the investigation by the
International Criminal Court of atrocities committed in
Darfur and northern Uganda shows, we cannot stand by
while people - no matter how high their rank - get
away with the most egregious crimes.

At the world summit three months ago, our heads
of State and Government reached a historic agreement
on the responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. My Government and the European
Union regarded this outcome, embracing the concept at
the highest level, as one of the most important of the
summit. The responsibility to protect is a distinct
concept, carefully set out in the World Summit
Outcome. But it is clearly relevant to the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and it is only
appropriate that it should be recalled in the draft
resolution on which we are working.

Protection of civilians also includes the special
protection needs of displaced persons, women and
children. The draft resolution calls on parties to
conflict to take concrete measures for the safe and
sustainable return of displaced persons and calls for
peacekeeping missions to have the mandates and the
resources to guarantee this by, for example, providing
security for and around displaced-persons camps.

Given the increasing incidence of sexual
violence, child abduction and the use of child soldiers,
it is more important than ever to have a strong
message, as in the draft resolution, to all parties to a
conflict to refrain from such actions. Peace support
operations should be mandated to employ all feasible
measures to prevent such crimes and to address their
effects where they take place.

Finally, it would be wrong to address the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict without
raising the issue of illicit small arms and light
weapons. The European Union looks forward to
working with other Member States in 2006 to review
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects to ensure that it
remains relevant. We welcome the growing support, in
all parts of the world, for an international treaty to
establish common standards for the global trade in
conventional arms.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Norway, to whom I give the floor.

