Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank the Polish presidency
for holding this open debate. We thank the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland for his
presence here today. I am also grateful for the Secretary-
General's statement and his report concerning the
protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflict (S/2018/462). Furthermore, I extend my thanks
to the representatives of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and of the Iraqi Al-Amal Association.

Uruguay associates itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
and by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.

The report of the Secretary-General summarizes
the situation that affects millions of men, women and
children in armed conflicts in one sentence. It says
simply, "state of unrelenting horror and suffering".
The attacks on innocent victims, who are killed or
mutilated, and the selective and disproportionate
bombardments against civilian infrastructure that are
present in all conflicts are part of that tragic litany. In
many cases, such attacks are carried out intentionally
against education and health centres and against the
wounded and medical personnel, which makes them all
the more reprehensible.

I wish to focus on the protection of medical
assistance in conflicts and on the need to achieve the
effective implementation of resolution 2286 (2016).
That resolution is an instrument that has the potential
to improve the protection of medical missions in
areas ravaged by war. However, two years after it
was adopted, indiscriminate attacks and bombings of
hospitals and medical personnel continue to increase,
which represents deliberate aggression against the
basic foundations of international humanitarian law.
The data provided by the World Health Organization,
which recorded 322 attacks in 2017, resulting in 242
deaths and 229 injuries among medical personnel and
patients, is a sad illustration of that.

In order to move towards the necessary
implementation of the resolution, Uruguay believes
that it is essential to conduct independent, impartial
and comprehensive investigations into specific
incidents. The international system has at its disposal
various investigative mechanisms that are not fully
taken advantage of. It was mentioned more than once
in the Chamber today that one such example is the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
provided for in Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949. The Commission has resources at its disposal
and enjoys a permanent framework and group of
independent experts to investigate grave violations
of international humanitarian law. However, since
its establishment, the Commission has encountered
serious difficulties in its activation when the consent of
States concerned is required.

Once again, in that way, the argument of
sovereignty is used to hide facts and prevent the truth
from being discovered. States and parties to conflicts
must also support the work of fact-finding missions
and commissions ofinquiry established by the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council. That kind of mechanism is important with
regard to investigating and identifying those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law.

One such example was the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM), established by the
Security Council, which proved helpful in investigating
incidents in Syria. Based on its investigations, it was
positively determined that chemical weapons had been
used against the civilian population, and it was also
determined who was responsible for the use of those
chemical weapons. Unfortunately, the Security Council
was unable to reach consensus to renew the JIM
mandate, whereby we no longer have an appropriate
instrument at our disposal to investigate those facts.

Uruguay believes that it is of the utmost importance
to establish a system that collects reliable and detailed
information in specific cases involving attacks on
health care in conflicts and to investigate the facts,
while taking advantage of synergies among existing
investigative mechanisms.
Accountability is another important aspect
owing to its deterrent effect and because it makes it
possible to end the culture of impunity surrounding
the commission of such crimes. According to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
intentionally targeting hospitals and places where sick
and injured people are gathered, as well as health-care
facilities, constitutes a war crime. The gravity of such
crimes obliges States not only to investigate, but also to
take appropriate measures to prosecute and punish their
alleged perpetrators.

Uruguay was the first country in Latin America to
fully incorporate the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court into its domestic legislation, and
therefore it calls on all States that have not yet done
so to become parties to the Statute and fully cooperate
with the Court. To our mind, the Council also has to
assume its responsibility to ensure accountability when
confronting such violations. To that end, it must use the
instruments at its disposal, such as the imposition of
sanctions and its power to refer cases directly to the
International Criminal Court when appropriate.

In conclusion, I note that, in Latin America,
concern about the fate of victims of armed conflicts is
nothing new, but that it has been around since the early
days of the struggle for independence of the Spanish-
American colonies.

