Mr. Acharya (Nepal): At the outset, let me
express my delegation's sincere appreciation to you,
Madam President, for having organized this important
debate and prepared a comprehensive concept paper
(S/20ll/l6, annex). Nepal has emerged from conflict
and is making efforts to consolidate the gains made in
the areas of peace, stability and development. We are
therefore aware of the importance of deliberations such
as these.

Peacebuilding is an important new dimension of
our work, which calls for targeted but coherent and
coordinated efforts on the political, security,
humanitarian and development fronts. These efforts
cannot be made in the absence of effective networks
for institution-building. In the aftermath of conflict,
many State institutions either collapse or become
dysfunctional. Even short-term goals such as delivering
humanitarian assistance and basic services become
extremely difficult, let alone the provision of
functional, effective governance, which is the
foundation of economic revitalization and sustainable
development. It is therefore important to give due
priority to the institution-building aspect in planning
and setting mandates for United Nations field missions,
whether they come under the political, peacekeeping or
peacebuilding category.

Here it is also important to stress the critical role
of institution-building in the context of a civilian
capacity-building review process. We cannot
overemphasize the importance of capable State
institutions in restoring people's hope for a better
future. The credibility and legitimacy of a Government
emerging from conflict is critical, and very much
depends upon ensuring basic services for people.
Institutions are important bridges for restoring trust
between the State and citizens. It is critical for there to
be a minimum level of political willingness to take the
country from conflict to peace, stability and economic
development via concrete programmes.

Institution-building cannot be done in a political
vacuum. Gender mainstreaming and the participation
of civil society must be factored in during the
peacebuilding process. North-South, South-South and
triangular cooperation should be fully utilized in
building institutions in a post-conflict situation.

National leadership and ownership are key
ingredients of sustainable peacebuilding. They can be
strengthened only by capacity-building and institution-
building. National leadership will take into account
local sensitivities and the political context in a
coherent manner. We should encourage all national
stakeholders to engage in dialogue, identify the best
possible solutions to their problems and play a leading
role in the implementation process. The country must
be engaged in a meaningful way so as to ensure that it
remains in the driver's seat, confident in a sustained
and durable peacebuilding process.

The international community should lend all the
support needed to achieve such a transition. The
process following a devastating conflict is a gradual
one, but there is no alternative to it. And institution-
building plays a very important role in that.

It has already been established that sustained
attention, long-term predictable and flexible financing
and strong technical cooperation are important for
preventing countries from relapsing into conflict. If
these conditions can be achieved, it will be possible to
consolidate peace and distribute its dividends more
widely among the general population.

The Peacebuilding Fund has proven its usefulness
in terms of flexible financing. But that is not enough.
The World Bank and the other development partners
must come up with sufficient financing and technical
cooperation to invest in nationally owned development
agendas. Institution-building should be an integral part
of that. United Nations coordination will ensure the
coherence of these efforts.
It is pertinent to recall that one of the aims in
creating the Peacebuilding Commission was to focus
attention on the institution-building efforts needed to
recover from conflict. In that regard, country-specific
configurations have a specific responsibility to
encourage all stakeholders to work coherently on the
basis of an agreed peacebuilding strategy. Some
institutions may need to be revived, while others may
need to be created. But in doing that, we must ensure
that there is strong buy-in to the process among all
national stakeholders.

It is evident that a strong sense of partnership
among United Nations missions and agencies, Member
States, regional organizations, international financial
institutions and national stakeholders must be
developed. In doing so, restoring and creating
necessary State institutions and developing capacities
should be made top priorities so as to ensure that
peacebuilding functions are carried forward in a
sustainable manner. Specific benchmarks and a
coordinated strategy are critical. The ultimate goal of
international support measures is to create an effective
State that can deliver peace and prosperity to its people
on its own. That will only be possible by strengthening
institutions in the countries themselves.

