Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): At the outset, Sir,
allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. This is the first public
meeting of the Security Council this year, 2003, a year
full of challenges which I am sure this Council will be
ready to meet. I likewise commend the outgoing
presidency of the Security Council for its
uncompromising commitment and dedication to the
advancement of the cause of peace and security in the
international arena.

This constitutes the first public meeting in which
the Republic of Angola is called upon to take the floor
in its capacity as a non-permanent member of this
body. It seems fit that the issue before us is enhancing
the protection of children from the carnage of armed
conflicts, both as victims and as participants.

This Organization's relentless dedication to the
protection of children in times of conflict is reflected
in, among other things, Security Council resolutions
1261 (1999), 1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001).
Furthermore, my Government welcomes the Secretary-
General's report on children and armed conflict,
document S/2002/1299. It informs us of the progress
made in the protection of the rights of children in
conflict situations. We note with concern the list of
Governments and insurgent groups that continue to
recruit and use child soldiers in all conflicts, including
those that are not on the Council's agenda. We believe
this to be an important step forward in persuading and
encouraging Governments and other parties to observe
international rules on child protection.

I would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge and express our heartfelt gratitude for the
work of Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, as well as our gratitude to the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and Ms. Carol Bellamy for
their efforts to protect the rights of children and to
advance the cause of children in general. I also thank
Mr. Otunnu and Ms. Bellamy for their opening
remarks.

In many countries of the world, children are the
primary victims of armed conflicts. As combatants or
civilians they are exposed to atrocities that create
thousands of orphans lacking access to basic education,
food and sanitation, and subject to extreme suffering
such as torture, starvation, exposure to land mines and
other human rights abuses. In this context, girls are
often forced into combatant roles or forced into a life
of slavery. These practices are utterly condemnable,
constitute violations of basic human rights and
freedoms and are a menace to international peace and
security.

To advance the protection of the rights of children
in conflict situations we welcome the entry into force
of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. The former breaks new
ground in the protection of children by not
distinguishing between Governments and insurgencies
in the application of international law. The latter
instrument constitutes an important complement to the
former by providing a mechanism of accountability.

The aforementioned instruments address the
concerns of the international community over the
persistent violation of the rights of children in conflict
situations, and we encourage Member States to
redouble their efforts to join in the consensus.
However, the long list of Governments and
insurgencies that actively recruit and use children in
conflicts indicates the need for the Council to redouble
its efforts in the area of the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. Conflict prevention and resolution is the
best way to protect children. While crisis management
can alleviate the adverse affects of conflicts on
children, crisis prevention and resolution provide for
the opportunity to permanently address the protection
of children and the enactment of a culture of respect for
the rights of children by integrating those issues into
the political processes for conflict resolution as well as
into demobilization and reintegration programmes.

Angola is mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report as a country affected by war. Angola is aware
that respect for and the protection and promotion of
children's rights are important in conflict situations.
After more than 27 years of civil war, we have
experienced the dramatic effects of war on children. A
generation of Angolans was born and raised under
conditions of war and emergency. More than 100,000
children were separated from their families. Many of
them witnessed the death of family members and
others. More than 4 million people have been
displaced, generating approximately 60,000 orphans.

Aware of its responsibilities, the Government of
Angola has adopted and is implementing a broad
programme to help those children affected by war,
which incorporates access to basic services from birth
certificates to education, basic health care, vaccination
and access to clean water. While the Government of
Angola initiated these efforts during the war, we expect
greater progress to be achieved under peace and within
the context of national reconciliation and
reconstruction now under way.

To sustain our commitment to promoting the
revival and strengthening of local and international
norms and value systems to protect children and to
achieve our common goal of building a world fit for
children a strong commitment will be required from all
States. We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General's report and also his continuing
work in this field and his efforts to keep the Council
informed.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the
importance of conflict prevention as a tool for the
protection of children. Prevention is often better than
the cure of the illness itself.

