Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic): Mr. President, first
allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
should also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Merimee of France and his delegation for the
excellent way in which the affairs of the Council were
guided last month.

Resolution 997 (1995), which the Council has just
unanimously adopted, marks the beginning of a new stage
of United Nations involvement in Rwanda.

At this juncture, therefore, it would be fitting to
consider how successful the efforts to bring peace and
stability to that long-suffering African country have been.

The Secretary-General in his report on the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR)
indicates that a climate of relative stability has prevailed
in Rwanda and that the country, which last year was
stricken by genocide, is now largely at peace. The long
and arduous process of recovery has begun.

It is clear from the report that the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda has so far been a success.
Over the past year UNAMIR has assisted the Rwandan
people in achieving and maintaining peace, and it has also
made a significant contribution to the normalization of the
situation in Rwanda. It is also clear that the continuing
presence of UNAMIR in Rwanda is essential if the
process of stabilization and confidence-building in the
country is to continue.

Resolution 997 (1995) adjusts the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda so that it
reflects in a better way the present situation prevailing in
that country, especially the improved security
environment.

 

On the basis of this adjusted mandate, UNAMIR will
concentrate on a confidence-building role rather than on
peace-keeping. It will assist the Rwandese Government with
the process of confidence- building, with the reintegration
of the returning refugees into their home communities and
with the distribution of humanitarian aid.

Furthermore, UNAMIR will be entrusted with the task
of protecting the personnel of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda and the various non-governmental organizations
performing humanitarian activities in Rwanda. Another
important task will be the provision of assistance in the
training of the Rwandan national police force. UNAMIR,
which will be substantially reduced in strength, will carry
out its mandate with full respect for the Rwandan
Government's sovereign authority.

The improvement in the overall situation in Rwanda
is the result of great efforts exerted by the Government of
Rwanda, with the assistance of other member States of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the international
community in general.

However, despite all the positive achievements, a lot
still needs to be done before Rwanda returns to normal and
before there is true national reconciliation, which is a
crucial prerequisite for the long-term stability and
prosperity of the country.

Obviously, there can be no genuine national
reconciliation unless a climate of stability, tolerance and
trust is created which will encourage the 2 million refugees
and displaced persons to return home. To create a climate
conducive to the return of the refugees is the primary
responsibility of the Government of Rwanda. It has to do
its utmost to prevent abuse of the returning refugees, and if
such abuse does take place it must punish those responsible
according to the law.

It is clear that the success of national reconciliation is
directly linked to the process of bringing to justice the
people responsible for the genocide and other criminal acts
which were committed during last year's civil war. The
longer it takes, the longer and less successful will the
process of national reconciliation be. This is why it is
imperative to set up as soon as possible with international
assistance an effective national judicial system and to get
the International Tribunal for Rwanda fully operational.

Another important element of stability is the economic
situation of the country. Rwanda's economy and
infrastructure have been devastated by the vicious civil war.
Rwanda cannot by itself cope with this huge problem,
which, inter alia, further complicates the speedy return
and reintegration of refugees. Not enough has been done
by the international community so far to improve the
situation. It is therefore imperative to accelerate the
disbursement of international economic assistance pledged
to Rwanda, which will help it in its short-term economic
recovery.

With respect to the long-term solution of the various
problems which Rwanda is currently facing, it is clear
that a regional approach is needed here. My delegation
therefore welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General
to explore the possibilities of convening the regional
Conference on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region.

Although the security environment in Rwanda has
improved over the past year, thanks to the efforts of the
Rwandese security forces and of UNAMIR, the overall
security situation is clearly still far from ideal. There are
persistent reports of the rearming of elements of the
former Rwandan regime and of an increase in cross-
border armed incursions by these elements into Rwanda.
This is a very disturbing development, which, if
unchecked, could very seriously threaten the still fragile
stability of the country and could create a new crisis.

We therefore welcome the fact that resolution
997 (1995) calls on States neighbouring Rwanda to ensure
that arms and other military materiel which might be used
in Rwanda do not fall into the wrong hands. In this
context, we also welcome the proposal to station United
Nations military observers in the countries neighbouring
Rwanda, and we strongly urge their respective
Governments to cooperate fully with the United Nations
in this matter.

Finally, my delegation would like to pay special
tribute to the Secretary-General's Special Representative
in Rwanda, the Force Commander and the personnel of
UNAMIR for their outstanding and tireless work, which
greatly contributes to the cause of peace and stability in
Rwanda.

