Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the responsibility of guiding our work
and to wish you every success during your presidency.
My delegation stands ready to provide you with the
fullest possible cooperation. I wish also to thank and
congratulate France for its effective presidency of the
Council last month.

(spoke in Spanish)

I wish to thank Judge Patrick Robinson and Judge
Khalida Rachid Khan for their briefings and for the
important work they have done, as well as for the very
frank and serious manner in which they explained the
situation of the Tribunals over which they preside. I
would also like to thank Prosecutor Brammertz and
Prosecutor J allow for their contributions to this debate.

My delegation believes that the two Tribunals
have done commendable work in carrying out the
Council's decisions on the completion strategies for the
Tribunals" responsibilities. It is now up to us, the
members of the Council, to take the action necessary
for the process to continue in a satisfactory fashion.

I would like to highlight one aspect. In the same
way that in the past the Council has expressed the need
for the Tribunals to undertake a set of measures to
speed up their work and rationalize their resources, at
this stage the Tribunals also have a legitimate
expectation that the Council will adopt decisions that
facilitate their task. We hope sincerely that we can rise
to those expectations.

The legacy that the activities of the Tribunals for
Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia will leave for the
advancement of the development of international law is
unprecedented. The Council can be rightly proud that
its historic decisions in 1993 and 1994 establishing
these Tribunals prepared the way for developments
leading to the establishment of an effective system of
international criminal law and of the International
Criminal Court.

Practically speaking, the issue of the staff of the
Tribunals and their retention is without doubt the most
serious problem facing both judicial bodies. President
Robinson in particular made it clear that the situation
in that regard had become critical and could lead at any
time to a complete standstill in the workings of the
Tribunal and impede its compliance with the
completion strategy.

While we are aware that a definitive resolution to
this problem goes beyond the scope of the Council's
functions, we nevertheless sympathize with the
requests that both Presidents have made in that the
efforts currently being made could be strengthened if
we members were vocal in our support and sent a clear
and unequivocal message about the crucial importance
of resolving this matter. If not, it will be difficult if not
impossible to ensure the proper execution of the
completion strategies. In the final analysis, that
represents compliance with the relevant decisions of
the Council. We Member States should ourselves be
very clear about the potential negative repercussions of
all sorts that could result if the staffing problems
affecting both Tribunals are not resolved as quickly as
possible, so that the General Assembly, through the
Fifth Committee, can benefit from a similar
understanding when it comes to making an informed
decision.

We believe that the Council could reiterate even
more vehemently its past calls for the relevant parts of
the Secretariat to step up the efforts they have been
making in that regard. Those efforts are laudable and
deserve our full gratitude, but we believe that it is very
important to impress upon all the pertinent bodies the
notion that this is not an ordinary administrative
problem affecting some entity or other. This is about
two very prestigious institutions that are about to
complete their work in a systematic and orderly way,
have a high record for efficiency, were established by
the Council under very specific conditions and have
performed an invaluable service for the cause of
international justice and the maintenance of
international peace and security.

I would like to highlight a particularly interesting
aspect mentioned by President Robinson in his report,
namely, the possibility of establishing a mechanism or
system for providing assistance and support to victims,
similar to the one in place for the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, we sympathize, as a
matter of principle, with President Robinson's
argument that the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia cannot attempt to bring peace
and reconciliation to the region simply through issuing
judicial decisions and handing down sentences. There
must also be other reparation measures to complement
sentences, one of which could be the mechanism that
has been mentioned for providing assistance and
support to victims. Moreover, what the Council is
being asked to do in this regard is to provide support,
which would not imply financial obligations for States,
as it would be based on voluntary contributions. My
delegation calls on the members of the Council to
consider Judge Robinson's request positively.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the most pressing problem has to
do with the conditions for carrying out the functions of
the President and Vice-President, as described by Judge
Byron in his letter to the Secretary-General
(S/2011/317). Here, once again, a subsidiary body of
the Council is calling on us to adopt urgent measures to
facilitate its continued operations and the conduct of
existing programmes to carry out the completion
strategy. I trust that we will be able to respond to these
difficulties with the urgency they deserve.

Just a few days ago, through the President, the
members of the Council expressed our satisfaction at
the arrest of Ratko Mladic'. In doing so, we reiterated
our commitment to ensuring that there is no impunity
for perpetrators of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. The International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda are the main vehicles
through which the Council has exercised its will. Now,
as the activities of both judicial bodies are being
wound down, it is essential that we take the necessary
decisions to ensure the orderly and effective conclusion
of their mandates.

