Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General and Commissioner Chergui for
their positive and constructive briefings this morning.
It was also a pleasure to hear the interventions of the
Foreign Minister of Senegal and the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, who reminded us that
yesterday was Nelson Mandela Day. He would have
turned 99 yesterday. I therefore wanted to begin with a
quote from him from his book Long Walk to Freedom.
He wrote,

"Man's goodness is a flame that can be hidden but
never extinguished".

Man's goodness is a flame that can be hidden but
never extinguished, and that flame does remain hidden
for far too many people across the continent of Africa.
For the people of the Kasai in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the people of South Sudan, that flame
may appear almost extinguished and lost among the
shadows of instability and conflict. But although the
flame grows dim in parts ofthe continent, Mandela was
right. It cannot be extinguished. We know that from the
great strides made by countries like Cote d'Ivoire, which
is moving away from years of war and now is looking
ahead towards decades of peace. We see it in progress
towards democracy like the elections in Somalia in
February, where women won nearly a quarter of the
parliamentary seats. That was a vital step towards
one-person-one-vote elections. And we see that flame
burn brightly in the work of organizations such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States, which are helping African countries
find common cause to overcome common concerns.
The Council has a vital role to play in fostering that
flame. To do so, I would like to propose three particular

things that I think we need to do.

First, we must all work together - the United
Nations, the Council and the countries and organizations
of Africa - to address the root causes of conflict. We
spend too much time and money responding to crises,
rather than preventing them. That is why the United
Kingdom so strongly supports the Secretary-General
and his sustaining peace agena and his increased focus
on conflict prevention. For that agenda to succeed,
the United Nations needs to diversify the way that it
engages using development cooperation proactively to
build peace and supporting more diplomacy, including
mediation. As the Economic Community of West
African States mediation in The Gambia showed, that
means more cooperation with regional actors that have
the right to experience and influence to deliver results
on the ground. The Council and our colleagues in the
African Union must demonstrate unambiguously to
those who perpetuate conflict that there are severe
political and economic consequences for doing so.

Secondly, we must all be ready to respond when
conflict does occur. Effective and efficient United
Nations peacekeeping is one of our strongest assets
to do so, and it is a shared asset. African nations
provide over half of the peacekeepers deployed to
African missions. I want to pay tribute to all of them
for their service, so often in dangerous circumstances.
The United Kingdom is committed to improving the
planning of peacekeeping missions, the quality and
quantity of pledges of troops and equipment and the
performance of missions and troops on the ground.
But that will count for little if we do not have the
trust of those we seek to protect. That means, among
other things, eradicating the corrosive spectre of
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. We
must implement fully the framework for action and
resolution 2272 (2016) to uphold and enforce the highest
standards of conflict - zero tolerance must mean zero
tolerance. In parallel, we need more women working in
missions, out in the field, reassuring local populations,
gathering vital intelligence and contributing to more
effective operations.

Thirdly, we need to strengthen and deepen our
existing partnerships. The United Nations and African
Union relationship is critical for peace and security in
Africa. As we have seen in Somalia, Mali and Central
African Republic, that relationship makes such a
difference to those most in need. We therefore applaud
the work to make those joint efforts more systematic,
and we are reassured that the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security will lead to better cooperation
and coordination. There are many issues we should
address to realize fully the corporation envisaged in
resolution 2320 (2016) * agreeing on mechanisms and
processesl sharing standards and procedures, including
on human rights, accountability and transparency; and
establishing, as the Secretary-General reminded us
again today, a source of sustainable and predictable
financing for African peace support operations. We
welcome the work that the United Nations has done
with the African Union so far on that agenda, and we
now need to see that work continue. I look forward
to our visit as a Security Council to Addis Ababa
in September.

There is a lot more to do, but we cannot be deterred
in our efforts to support peace and security in Africa. I
would like to conclude by returning to the words of the
late Nelson Mandela:

"Do not look the other way. Do not hesitate.
Recognize that the world is hungry for actions, not
words. Act with courage and vision."

Let us all act in that spirit.

