Mr. Ele Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish):
I welcome the presence among us of Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and thank them for the informative,
clear and comprehensive briefings that they have just
delivered on the most recent developments and hopes
for peace in the Yemeni conflict.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea wishes to
express its satisfaction at the initial success of the
meeting held in the Swedish city of Rimbo between
6 and 13 of this month, and thanks the Government of
Sweden, through its representative, for having hosted
that important meeting. We also wish to thank the
delegation of Yemen for having attended that meeting,
as well as the United Nations and other international
stakeholders that either directly or indirectly made it
possible to convene that important meeting.

Three months after the Geneva meeting, which
failed to gather all of the relevant parties to the conflict,
and just a few weeks before the end of the year, we
have finally received information that gives hope to
the victims in Yemen and the international community
regarding the future of the country. We believe that this
has been an important step in allowing real progress
to be made towards future talks to put an end to
the conflict.

However, our experience of international politics
and this very Council urges caution and vigilance.
It is now vital that all parties directly or indirectly
involved in the conflict come together to work towards
implementing the minimum agreed terms of this initial
phase of peace talks, including a ceasefire in the entire
western province of Al-Hudaydah, a prisoner exchange
agreement and the withdrawal of troops from the said
disputed port city, among other measures. From the
outset of our meetings on the matter, we have all called
for the cessation of hostilities in Al-Hudaydah and its
surrounding area, owing to the strategic importance of
its port for humanitarian operations. Now that that has
been granted by the consensus of all national parties,
we hope that it will be meticulously respected by all
parties involved in the Yemeni conflict.

We hope that the session of consultations that
concluded yesterday in Sweden will be the beginning
of an irreversible solution to the differences that divide
the parties in Yemen today, in order to save its people of
Yemen a conflict that has denied them of their human
dignity and means of subsistence, such as water, food,
electricity, infrastructure and other services, in addition
to an already destroyed economy that has brought
the country to its knees and left it rudderless. In that
regard, it is important that this new process and any
possible actions of the Council take into account the
five proposals made by Mr. Mark Lowcock to alleviate
the desperate humanitarian situation.

Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea wishes
to express its full support for the efforts of the United
Nations in Yemen, especially the mediation of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, given that his initiative to launch
the dialogue process is crucial to our common goal of
bringing peace to "the forgotten conflict in Yemen",
to paraphrase his earlier remarks, in the hope that the
next session of consultations, scheduled for the end of
January, will see progressive progress towards reaching
the light at the end of the tunnel. We encourage the
parties to the conflict to respect this new process.

