Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on convening this important
meeting to address the issue of security sector reform
(SSR). The historic reference point of that subject has
been linked to Africa since the very beginning. The
earliest United Nations security SSR were
implemented in African countries during the
post-independence era, when a number of ad hoc
programmes were implemented in order to reform
police, prisons and security sectors, among others, in
many African and Asian countries.

At that time, SSR enjoyed broad and generous
support, including among specialized United Nations
funds, international financial institutions and bilateral
donors, as a result of full commitment to the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations that
underline national ownership and respect for the
sovereignty and independence of States.

My delegation emphasizes adherence to the
presidential statement issued by this Council in its first
deliberations on SSR in 2007 (S/PV.5632), in which
the Council underlined

"that it is the sovereign right and the primary
responsibility of the country concerned to
determine the national approach and priorities of
security sector reform". (S/PRST/2007/3, p. I)

We therefore endorse the objectives of United
Nations initiatives aimed at building SSR capacities,
especially in post-conflict countries, by providing
various forms of technical, information, training and
support to bolster security and stability following the
withdrawal of peacekeeping missions from the
concerned country or after its transition from conflict
to peacebuilding.

However, we draw attention to the need for
caution to avoid the use of that term to define paths
that run counter to the national sovereignty of a
concerned State, in particular in the context of
interference in legislative and executive activities and
with respect to the police, security, penal and military
sectors of those States. The laws concerning such
institutions are part and parcel of the legal system of
the State concerned and of its Constitution.

We note the international workshop held in Cape
Town, South Africa, in 2007 on coordinating United
Nations SSR support in African countries. The
workshop offered a good opportunity to shed light on
the African experience in that respect, particularly the
effective role of regional partners, in particular the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Southern African Development
Community.

Regional and subregional organizations, given
their direct links to the political, social and cultural
situations in African countries, are best able to
understand all of the dimensions of SSR in their
regions. They are thus most capable of appropriately
defining the needs or programmes to be implemented
by the United Nations in the concerned State, pursuant
to that country's request and within the framework of
understanding and coordination between that country
and the United Nations, based on the principle of
national ownership as an inalienable and
non-negotiable right and the fact that the police,
security and judicial sectors are sovereign departments.

We also wish to draw attention to the importance
of providing specific guidelines as a starting point
when formulating and setting up United Nations SSR
initiatives. We pay tribute to the Secretary-General for
his initiatives and efforts to invigorate the role of the
United Nations and the Security Council in SSR in
post-conflict countries. In this respect, we wish to
commend him for his comprehensive report
(S/2008/39), presented to the Council in February
2008.

We stress the importance of the integrated
security and development axes of sustainable peace.
The United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted
at the Millennium Summit (General Assembly resolution 55/2), underscored that concept as the main
guarantee of success in achieving the MDGs and in
preventing relapsing from peace back into war in post-
conflict countries.

In closing, we hope that our deliberations today
on this topic will lead to an integrated approach that
meets the goals of SSR, while respecting the
sovereignty of States.

