Mr. Richardson (United States of America): We meet
today at a moment of great promise and great challenge in
the Middle East peace process. There can be no doubt of
the extraordinary progress made by the parties in their talks
to date.

_ In January, after intense negotiations, the Government
of Israel and the Palestinian Authority reached an
agreement on Israeli withdrawal in Hebron, one of the most
contentious and divisive issues discussed by the parties to
date. That accord has now been implemented and a road
map for future progress on such issues as further
redeployment, the Gaza airport, safe passage, and economic
matters has been agreed to

In February, the Government of Israel made good on
its pledge to release dozens of Palestinian women prisoners
in a further measure to respect prior agreements and build
confidence. In the coming weeks and months, we fully
expect the parties to proceed with further steps designed to
advance the peace process, including additional Israeli
redeployments from areas of the West Bank. '

What these developments underscore is that the parties
retain the will, the commitment and the ability to move
forward, despite the considerable obstacles they face. Most
significantly, these achievements have come about because
the parties remain dedicated to the single most important
principle upon which the Madrid process was based: that
there is no substitute for direct negotiations betWeen the
parties.

Unfortunately, the announced decision of the
Government of Israel on the proposed Har Homa settlement
construction in East Jerusalem does not accord with the
progress the parties have achieved to date. The United
States is concerned by the decision announced by the Israeli
Government. As President Clinton said on Monday, the
United States would prefer that the Bar Home decision had
not been made. We believe that this decision undermines
the trust and confidence that is so badly needed if a lasting
peace is to be achieved. We know the sensitivity of the

issue of Jerusalem, and it is precisely because mutual
confidence is needed to deal with the permanent status
questions that we would have preferred this decision not
to have been taken.

The international community has a responsibility too.
We must respect the will and the commitment of the
parties to move forward together along their chosen path
of negotiations. We must offer our support and
encouragement at every turn, just as the General
Assembly has each year in its annual resolution in support
of the Middle East peace process.

All parties share the goal of finding ways to advance
peace. We must do everything possible to foster a
supportive environment for permanent status negotiations,
which will begin later this month. We must be especially
sensitive to any actual Or implied interference in these
negotiations. Such interference can only provoke mistrust
and harden the positions of both sides, which will make
further progress much more difficult. The Security
Council has a special responsibility in this regard.

I believe all of us in' this Chamber want the same
things. We'want to see continued progress in the Middle
East peace process. We want to encourage the parties to
resolve their differences directly, among themselves,
without resort to force or the threat of violence. Our goal
is a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement to the
conflict in the Middle East. Let me reiterate our view that
it is critically important that the parties and the Council
remain focused on the-need to sustain and enhance
progress towards this goal. At a time when permanent
status negotiations are scheduled to resume, we should not
take any action that would detract from this objective and
which would make the tasks of the parties that much
more difficult.

The Council should keep these long~term goals in
mind as we consider the steps before us. As members of
the international community, we seek to assist the parties
to build a peaceful, prosperous and secure future in the
Middle East.

