Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his briefing on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We greatly
appreciate his able leadership and the robust activities
of the Panel of Experts, including the submission of this
year's final report (S/2014/394, annex).
Let me begin by reiterating my Government's
support for the ongoing efforts between the P5+1
and Iran as well as the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and Iran to resolve the Iranian nuclear
issue once and for all. In that regard, we welcome the
progress on the implementation of the agreed measures
and look forward to the conclusion of a comprehensive
plan of action soon. We also underline that Iran should
faithfully cooperate with the P5+1, the IAEA and the
broader international community to resolve current
and past issues, including all aspects of the possible
military dimensions of its nuclear programme.

Nonetheless, as emphasized once again by the Chair
of the 1737 Committee, we would like to stress that
the measures and obligations on the relevant Security
Council resolutions remain in effect until the Council
adopts a new, superseding resolution on this issue.

In that regard, the final report submitted by the
Panel of Experts deserves particular attention. It
provides a clear rationale for us to remain vigilant
against continued activities prohibited under the
relevant resolutions. All Member States should heed
the recommendations of the report, such as being alert
against risks involved with the diversion of dual-use
goods and proliferation financing.

The recent interdiction in the Red Sea of a large
load of conventional arms, including rockets, and the
subsequent findings in the Panel's inspection report
on 16 June demonstrate the need for such continued
vigilance. It is crucial for the 1737 Committee to
actively follow up on the reports and take timely and
effective actions in response to the violation.

We also appreciate the 1737 Committee's ongoing
cooperation with the Financial Action Task Force and
expect further synergy between the Committee, other
relevant committees and international and regional
organizations.

Finally, I would like to join others in urging Iran
to fully cooperate with the 1737 Committee and to
respond in a satisfactory manner to the Committee's
inquiries, including on the carbon fibre case and other
pending issues. Such cooperation is indeed crucial to
move us all forward.

