Let me begin by thanking Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings. We would like to make the following four points: first, on the political situation; secondly, on the security situation; thirdly, on the humanitarian situation; and, fourthly, on the road ahead. First, with regard to the political situation in Syria, I congratulate the members of the small body of the Constitutional Committee on the successful conclusion of the fourth round of talks in Geneva. Additionally, South Africa welcomes the Committee's agreement on the date and agenda of the fifth round of discussions. Through South Africa's own experience with a constitutional process, we understand that progress requires compromise, and compromise is often achieved by discussing differences to find commonalities within positions and views. Confidence- and trust-building are also integral to that process, including through the release of detainees and political prisoners, especially women, children and the elderly, as a token of good faith and in support of the political process. We know that is not an easy process, and it should not be when the lives of millions are at stake. As we have said before, only through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue that is reflective of the will of the Syrian people can a long-term peaceful solution be achieved in Syria. That is the role of the Constitutional Committee: to ensure that the varied and diverse views of all Syrians be considered and discussed in efforts towards drafting a new Syrian constitution. We call on all parties to continue to build on that momentum and engage in a constructive manner towards a lasting political solution. Allow me to come to my second point, on the security situation. South Africa remains concerned at the continuing levels of hostilities in the northern regions of Syria. The continued presence of foreign armed forces contributes to an increase in tensions and hostilities and must come to an end, including the external interference and particularly in terms of the support provided to those armed groups. However, we are encouraged, as highlighted by Mr. Pedersen, that there is relative calm across Syria, with no shifting in the front line. While States have the sovereign right to address the threat of terrorism in their countries, any counter-terrorism activities must be undertaken in line with international human rights law and international humanitarian law obligations. True progress in the political process cannot be made if civilians remain in jeopardy and violence continues. On my third point, relating to the humanitarian situation, I wish to express that South Africa also remains deeply concerned at the humanitarian situation in Syria. Almost a decade of war has thrown Syrians into a spiral of despair and destitution that keeps worsening, and they are now facing unprecedented levels of hunger, leaving millions of people acutely vulnerable. That has been further exacerbated by the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic. The virus continues to spread, with limited testing capacity and a high degree of community transmission, indicating that the actual number of cases may far exceed the official count. Coupled with that, the economic situation continues to deteriorate, requiring the United Nations, its agencies and partners to provide increased humanitarian assistance to respond to the increasing numbers of those in need. Reports of rising food insecurity and inadequate food consumption in Syrian households are of grave concern, especially given the approaching winter, which brings on additional challenges in responding to the humanitarian situation. In that regard, the imposition of unilateral economic sanctions has further exacerbated the dire economic and humanitarian situation in Syria. South Africa reiterates its request to the Secretary-General and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to include the direct and indirect impact of unilateral sanctions on the humanitarian situation in Syria. We therefore call for the lifting or easing of sanctions during this challenging time for the Syrian people, who are the ultimate victims of those measures. For that reason, the cross-border humanitarian assistance mechanism is of vital importance. In that regard, it remains imperative that the United Nations and its humanitarian partners make every effort to ensure that such assistance is provided. In addition, South Africa reiterates the call for the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance to all who require it, in line with the provisions of international humanitarian law, while using all available methods of aid delivery, including cross-border and cross-line assistance. We commend the United Nations, its agencies and the Syrian Government for their cooperation in providing humanitarian assistance. That cooperation should be increased to ensure that the levels of cross-line humanitarian aid is intensified in the provision of humanitarian assistance. For my fourth and final point, I will highlight South Africa's view on the road ahead. As South Africa concludes its last meeting on the situation in Syria as a non- permanent member of the Council, we reiterate that the conflict can be resolved only through negotiation, dialogue and the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, we call on all parties to put the people of Syria first, cease all violence and hostilities, fully commit to the political process and start building towards long- term peace, stability and prosperity for all Syrians. In conclusion, South Africa agrees with, and reinforces the views of, Mr. Pedersen that the Security Council and the international community should agree on a way forward in Syria as we begin in 2021 the second decade of the Syrian crisis, by building on the relative calm across Syria and the work, agreed agenda and scheduled meetings of the Constitutional Committee. The journey towards a hopeful Syria has begun. Syrians are talking. Syrians are listening. Syrians are debating their future. Let us hope we will soon see, more often than not, Syrians sitting around the same table in the same room. Let us play our role and support them in realizing their long-term peace and prosperity in 2021 and beyond.
