The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.

First of all, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing.

Once again, the Security Council is confronted
with an irresponsible and legal provocation by the
regime of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
As stated today by Prime Minister Gentiloni Silveri
and Foreign Minister Alfano, Italy firmly condemns
Pyongyang's launch of another ballistic missile, with
intercontinental range, which constitutes a grave threat
of a truly global nature, as well as an immediate danger
to neighbouring countries, to which we express our
full solidarity. North Korea's persistent defiance of
the non-proliferation regime, in Violation of multiple
Security Council resolutions, represents a threat to
regional stability as well as to international peace and
security. We encourage the international community to
stand together in order to defend our collective security.

Maintaining a high level ofeconomic and diplomatic
pressure on the regime constitutes the appropriate
response to the reckless behaviour of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. We will continue to work
on this matter as a member of the Security Council for
the remainder of the year, as well as within the European
Union. In that context, allow me also to reiterate the
primary importance that Italy attaches to the continued
unity of the Security Council on this matter.

Italy has adopted additional measures at the national
level consistent with the relevant Council resolutions,
such as suspending the accreditation procedure for the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea Ambassador in
Rome. Through that decision, we intended to convey
and unequivocal message regarding the need for the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to abandon it
defiant and self-isolating policies.

I have already spoken about sanctions
implementation in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006). However, I would like to add that we
are committed to ensuring - as reaffirmed in the
Council's latest resolutions - that the sanctions regime
does not have unintended negative consequences on the
humanitarian situation in the country. We will address
that topic at the next meeting of the Committee. I
therefore renew our full solidarity with the people of
North Korea, who continue to suffer as the regime
ignores their basic needs in its pursuit of nuclear
weapons and the means to deliver them.

We call on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to reverse course immediately and
verifiably, including putting an end to all nuclear and
missile-related activities, thereby making credible
progress on its obligation to denuclearize. That is the
only course of action by which North Korea can begin
to regain the trust of the international community
and open up the way to a peaceful solution through
meaningful negotiations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.

