At the outset, I would like to thank Deputy Special Envoy Khawla Matar and Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for their informative briefings on the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. I would like to welcome the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran to the meeting today. First and foremost, on the political front, my delegation welcomes the agreement of the parties concerned on the agendas and timeline for the upcoming meetings within the framework of the Constitutional Committee. We encourage the members of the Committee to actively engage in constructive dialogue. Like other delegations, we look forward to productive sessions to come in order to facilitate the broader political process in Syria. The only way to achieve sustained peace and stability is through a political process that is led and owned by the Syrians themselves, facilitated by the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and fully adheres to international law and the Charter of the United Nations, including full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and non-interference in its internal affairs. Viet Nam commends the efforts of the Special Envoy's team in bringing the parties together. We also welcome the current series of meetings between the Special Envoy and international and regional interlocutors to discuss the advancement of a political solution in Syria. We continue to fully support the facilitating role of the United Nations, as well as all viable diplomatic engagements in that regard. While searching for a viable political solution, it is regrettable that the security and humanitarian situations on the ground remain a source of great concern, causing millions of Syrians to suffer. We are troubled by the fact that instability continues to give rise to protection concerns in certain parts of Syria, including in the north-west, even though the ceasefire agreement is generally holding. It is very worrisome to see the recent resurgence of terrorist activities in various parts of Syria. My delegation condemns the targeted attacks against civilians, humanitarian workers and civilian objects. We urge all parties to exercise restraint, refrain from escalatory actions and continue counter-terrorism efforts in line with their obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law. As reported by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the markedly worsening developments related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the impacts of the socioeconomic downturn make the humanitarian situation in Syria extremely precarious. We note that according to OCHA, the area that has the most COVID-19 cases also has the highest infection rate among health workers. Conditions will become more and more critical in the months to come without adequate winterization. We urge all parties in Syria to create the most favourable conditions possible so as to ensure timely, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access and to facilitate effective humanitarian operations in all parts of Syria. We reiterate our call on the international community to continue its support during this difficult time, with a particular focus on tackling COVID-19 and its impacts by providing adequate assistance in terms of equipment, capacity and the safety of health-care workers. Food security and winterization support are an immediate necessity. More than 2 million people do not have adequate shelter, and millions of vulnerable people are living in camps for internally displaced persons. The food insecurity affecting more than half of the population as well as the increasing shortages of fuel and other basic goods are far from having been resolved. In the light of the impacts of COVID-19, it is vital to ensure that sanctions do not undermine the Syrian people's capacity to respond to the pandemic. To conclude, we would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the humanitarian and health-care workers on the ground, who are risking their lives to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches the people in need of it.
