Mr. Fisher: I will be brief. I would like to thank
members and the other speakers for their comments and
questions and for their support, especially with regard
to the consolidated plan.

I will first take a few highlights on elections. As
many representatives stated and I myself said, they have
become a symbol or a touchstone for moving forward
on a number of fronts on Haiti. We need the electoral
council. We look forward to its early formation. But
that, of course, is the first step in the development of a
plan for the elections, which many said should be free,
fair and credible and held this year. I will certainly take
that message back to my counterparts.

Many speakers raised the current political fragility
in Haiti and many looked at the importance of moving
ahead across the board on redoubling efforts to promote
constructive dialogue in a spirit of compromise. Many
representatives talked about inclusive political dialogue,
which is the way forward to enabling Haiti's leaders
to focus increasingly on other necessary institutional
reforms, especially in the area of the rule of law, and to
facing the significant challenges of expanding not only
the numbers of police but also their professionalism and
presence across the country.

I think that the emphasis that many speakers placed
on development and humanitarian considerations is
also a very good reminder that whatever happens at the
political and institutional levels, security and rule-of-
law issues are there to create the necessary conditions
not only for investment but also for ordinary Haitians
to see changes in their lives, improved security, respect
for their human rights and the ability to earn a living.

I therefore thank many speakers for emphasizing
the continuing humanitarian challenges facing Haiti, as
well as the difficulty in particular of exclusion based on
gender and issues of gender-based violence.

Beyond the political fragility, on the issue of the
police, there is no doubt that we are seeing increasing
professionalism. Indeed, recruitment was slow last
year: it fell below the 2011 levels. But I would like to
affirm that, with the new training that we will begin
in April, we foresee that 150 cadets will be ready for
training. We are thus seeing the recruitment process
begin to pick up.

We still face challenges in ensuring the rapid
vetting of police cadets and the medical review
process, but that is moving forward. We are looking to
our own internal structure to ensure that we have the
right mix of professionals able to focus on training and
accompaniment of the police, and that includes not only
initial training, but follow-up training as they move
out of Port-au-Prince. Most police officers - some
70 to 75 per cent - are present in Port-au-Prince. We
do need to see an increased distribution and presence
around the country.

Many representatives have also commented on the
mandate and the consolidation plan, and one reminded
us all that the mandate should drive the budget. I just
want to inform the Council that MINUSTAH will be
undertaking a consultative review on the ground to test
out the assumptions and projections of the consolidation
plan. This will happen, of course, with the Government,
with which we have agreed to set up an ongoing working
group, as well as with Member States and others who
are contributing to MINUSTAH and have a role and
interest in our future. Several representatives said
that this is an ambitious plan, but as I said it has been
agreed with the Government, and it will be reviewed
on a regular basis with the Government and of course
brought back to the Council. I look forward to reporting
back to the Security Council on the progress achieved
in the future on the consolidation plan, which is really,
essentially, our road map for accompanying Haiti on
its journey to full national ownership and full national
management of its own affairs.

