Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): First
and foremost, I would like to thank Venezuela for its
initiative in organizing this debate and presenting the
concept paper (S/2016/102, annex), which we found
extremely useful. I thank the Ambassadors of Sweden
and Chile for sharing their insightful inputs. My
delegation is grateful for the opportunity to be able to
participate in this debate.

As a general comment, we believe that any
Security Council-imposed sanction should fall within
the purview of the Charter of the United Nations at
all times. This means that, first, sanctions should not
be imposed unless there exists a genuine threat to
international peace and security - not a perceived or
fabricated one - or in the case of an act of aggression.
Secondly, sanctions are not meant to punish the general
population or aimed at achieving political objectives.
Thirdly, sanctions should be considered as the last and
not the first resort, and imposed only after all means
of peaceful settlement of disputes under Chapter VI
of the Charter have been exhausted. Fourthly, the
imposition of sanctions should be decided only after
a thorough consideration of their short-term and long-
term effects on rights recognized under international
law. In this regard, the objectives of sanction regimes
should be clearly defined and based on tenable legal
grounds, and their imposition should be for a specified
time frame and lifted as soon as the objectives are
achieved. Transparency, strategic insight and the need
to deal with the humanitarian impacts of the sanctions
are also important elements that the Council and its
subsidiaries organs should have in mind when they
consider sanctions.

First, it is important to enhance the transparency of
the working methods of the Council and its subsidiary
bodies, especially when they consider or deal with
sanctions. Transparency, openness and consistency
are key elements that the Security Council should
observe in all its activities, approaches and procedures,
especially when they affect the lives of ordinary people
by imposing sanctions. In this regard, the working
methods of the sanction committees are one of the areas
where the Council needs to improve transparency.

Secondly, the terms and conditions that the State or
entity subject to sanctions should fulfil must be clearly
defined and subject to periodic review. We agree that we
should place emphasis on the need to support the chairs
of the sanction committees in their efforts to assess and
evaluate on a regular basis the role of sanctions and the
dire need to place Council-imposed sanctions in the
framework of an overall political strategy.

Thirdly, one of the most important and, at the same
time, most neglected aspect of a sanctions regime is
how to deal with its unintended impacts. I would like
here to concentrate on this aspect through the following
observations.

First, sanctions always have a negative impact on
the rights of nations recognized in the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as in the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in particular
the realization of the right to development. They often
interfere with the functioning of basic health and
education systems and undermine the right to work; in
general, they are serious obstacles to the development
of targeted States.

Secondly, sanctions are a blunt instrument, the
use of which raises fundamental ethical questions of
whether the suffering inflicted on vulnerable groups
in the target country is a legitimate means of exerting
pressure. The utmost care should be taken by sanctions
committees to protect against the victimization of
innocent civilians. Sanctions committees must be
vigilant of the negative humanitarian impact on the
civilian population, the economic effects on third
parties and the criminalization of basic economic
activities that may occur under sanctions regimes.

Thirdly, it is equally important that the sanctions
committees monitor and scrutinize the imposition of
unilateral coercive economic measures to determine if
they are in conflict with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the international law.

We fully agree with the recommendation in concept
note to include in the mandate of the expert groups of
sanctions committees a review of the impact of selective
or sectoral sanctions on affected countries, civilian
populations and the activities of the humanitarian
actors on the ground, as well as the proposal to request
that the Secretary-General establish a reporting line to
that end.

