Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I should like, on behalf of the Cuban
delegation, to express our satisfaction at seeing you,
Sir, preside over the work of the Security Council this
month.

Cuba fully supports the statements made earlier
by the representatives of the Non-Aligned Movement,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Group of Arab States.
Once again history is repeating itself. Once again
we are witnessing an escalation of military attacks by
Israel against the Palestinian people, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, which is terrorizing the civilian population
and causing death and destruction. It has become
commonplace for Israeli military jets to launch missiles
against Palestinian civilians and to pursue the illegal
policy of extrajudicial executions, in flagrant violation
of international law, including international
humanitarian law.

The recent hostile actions by Israel add to its
decades-long record of aggression and violations of the
most basic human rights of the Palestinian people. It is
no secret that the Israeli Government will continue its
practice of openly defying the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, as well as
the norms of international law, as long as the Security
Council's lack of action and passivity persist. The
Palestinian people will continue to suffer the
consequences of those attacks as long as the hypocrisy
and double standards of some continue to prevail in the
Security Council.

The United States has already exercised its right
of veto on issues relating to the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories 29 times in the Council,
to say nothing of the numerous threats to use the veto
or to block positions in informal consultations behind
closed doors, which have prevented the adoption of
many resolutions and presidential statements. Its
modus operandi is well known, as evidenced last
month in the case of the draft statement prepared by
the delegation of Qatar following Israel's attack against
the Jericho prison. On this occasion, too, the Security
Council has been unable to make a statement on
developments. The United States has once again
prevented it from doing so, always introducing new
amendments and new demands when any attempt is
made to accommodate it. It has thus accomplished its
objective of paralyzing the Council and preventing any
statement on the issue.

The least we can expect from this body in the
current circumstances is that it condemn the new
escalation and demand that Israel stop its attacks
immediately. By its silence, the Security Council has
become complicit in the actions of the Israeli
Government. Cuba once again demands that the
Government of Israel fulfil its legal obligations under
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,
and respect the numerous resolutions on the question
of the Middle East adopted by the Security Council and
the General Assembly.

