Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (Spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to echo
previous speakers in welcoming the new Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the Security Council. We
are grateful for the detailed and informative briefings by
Mr. Michael Keating, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Francisco Caetano
Madeira, the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the Executive Director
of UN-Women.

At the outset, I want to express my delegation's
dismay over Monday's attacks by the Islamist group
Al-Shabaab on a Government building in Mogadishu,
which resulted in six deaths and more than a dozen
wounded. We would like to convey our condolences to
the Somali Government and to the affected families.

Despite some progress on the ground as a result of
the security measures taken by the Federal Government
of Somalia and the ongoing efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia and the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the security situation in Mogadishu
continues to be worrying. We condemn Al-Shabaab and
other terrorist groups, which continue to be the primary
threat to peace and security in Somalia. They are
maintaining a presence in central and southern Somalia
despite the measures that have been taken.
Our Government believes that the peace and
security of States must be given top priority and
attention in the United Nations because if there is no
peace, there can be no development, and if there is no
development, it is difficult to ensure people's dignity,
integrity and freedom. We therefore fully support the
eradication of terrorist activities, which are the main
obstacle to Somalia's development.

However, it is also clear that the security dimension
is not the only issue we need to address. The Government
of Somalia needs the determined support of the
international community to address the root causes of
radicalization, such as poverty, lack of education and
employment opportunities, and violent extremism. In
that regard, we want to underline the importance of
the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia to the inclusive political process led by the
Government of Somalia, including the provision by the
United Nations of its good offices in support of all the
issues envisaged in resolution 2408 (2018).

We are concerned about last Saturday's decision
by the leadership of some federal member states to
temporarily sever their relations with the Federal
Government. We believe that this decision will increase
the pressure on the country's already fragile political
situation, especially within the Government. We
welcome the Federal Government's announcement of its
readiness to resolve any issues with the federated states
in accordance with the Constitution. In that regard,
we call on the parties to resume dialogue in order to
make further progress on key priorities, including
power- and resource-sharing, the constitutional review,
fiscal federalism, the preparations for elections in 2020
and 2021 according to the principle of one person,
one vote, support for regional security forces and
the completion of the federal model for justice and
correctional institutions.

Lastly, my delegation is very concerned about
the cases of sexual violence against internally
displaced women and girls, whose situation makes
them particularly vulnerable. It will be essential to
improve the country's legal framework, its systems for
the protection of human rights and the capacity and
legitimacy of its institutions to help combat impunity,
improve accountability for human rights violations and
encourage reconciliation.

