Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Let me begin by thanking
Pakistan for organizing today's debate on a matter of
great importance to peace and security, to the well-
being and protection of millions of people and, by
extension, to the promotion of democracy and good
governance in many parts of our world.

Kenya has continuously contributed to peacekeeping
with military and police personnel since 1981.

Peacekeeping operations have evolved through
time from the traditional posture of the 1960s to the
complex and multidimensional practice of the twenty-
first century. Since 1948, there have been a total of 67
peacekeeping operations, and 16 are operational today.
The complexity of conflicts today, combined with
global expectations on human rights, gender balance
and cultural sensitivity, has necessitated a thorough
review of peacekeeping mandates and practice in order
to effectively address modern operational needs. The
Secretary-General, in his report on the implementation
of the recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, published on 12 December
2012, states:

"Operations today are more varied and complex
than ever before, bringing together various
configurations of civilians, troops and police
under a unified leadership. Some missions are
multidimensional, with an evolving mix of military,
police and civilians supporting peacebuilding,
protection of civilians and other transitional tasks"
(A/67/632, para. 2).

That mix requires unique strengths, legitimacy,
burden sharing and the ability to deploy and sustain
troops in the field.
The multidimensional nature of peacekeeping
operations today requires that peacekeepers not only
maintain peace and security but also facilitate political
processes, protect civilians, assist in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,
support the organization of elections, protect and
promote human rights and assist in the restoration of
the rule of law. All of those activities combined are
hard to do, but together, if well done, they lay a good
foundation for peacebuilding and democracy.

Africa hosts the largest number of peacekeeping
missions. The peacekeepers in those missions are
faced with complex challenges, as I just mentioned,
that require a unique and specific approach in Africa
to succeed. By definition, therefore, multidimensional
peacekeeping must embrace the role of regional
organizations and entities in a streamlined and
synergistic manner in order to increase the chances of
success and the effectiveness of the United Nations.

In South Sudan and the Sudan, peace will remain
elusive unless the gains realized following the signing
of a series of agreements in late 2012 are harnessed,
followed through aggressively and implemented
expeditiously. United Nations peacekeeping has to
play its role to facilitate the peaceful resolution of the
ongoing disputes.

Furthermore, the security situation in Darfur
remains volatile, despite the deployment of the large
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur in 2008. Ethnic and tribal conflicts that continue
sporadically, along with clashes between Government
forces and rebels, pose serious threat to peace. The
hybrid peacekeeping mission there is expected to help
resolve those difficulties.

The emergence of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23) in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has rekindled sad memories of rebel
groups that controlled the area in early 2000. The
recent action by the M-23 in several towns, including
Goma, should be a wake-up call for all of us as to
the need for an urgent review of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its mandate, as well as of
the concept of operations and the logistics support
package that governs the operational capabilities of the
United Nations force. Peacekeeping cannot be passive
and indifferent to the plight of populations, lest it lose
credibility and do irreparable damage to the reputation
of the United Nations.

Normalcy is returning to West Africa in Cote
d'Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone, but the recent
takeover of northern Mali by Al-Qaida and affiliated
Islamist militia and the developments in the Central
African Republic are a tragic reversal. Worse yet,
they inject into the region the added complexity of
asymmetrical warfare. The situation calls for a quick,
decisive and concerted response by the international
community and, more important, a more sophisticated
and specialized counteraction by United Nations
peacekeeping.

In Somalia, the African Union Military Observer
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has made significant
progress in disrupting Al-Shabaab activities. Peace
and constitutional democracy are now beginning to
take root in the wake of AMISOM's achievements.
However, resilience and continued engagement will be
the key to sustaining those gains, particularly in helping
the Somali Government to establish governance and
security institutions, as well as justice and rule-of-law
capabilities, among other things.

The reality of modern peacekeeping operations is
that they are expensive, even if cost-effective. Troop-
contributing countries spend significant amounts
of money preparing troops, maintaining readiness
and deploying expensive equipment to support given
mandates. Across the spectrum of peacekeeping
operations, the majority of troops are drawn from
developing countries, which in turn expect timely
reimbursement for legitimate expenses incurred
whenever and wherever they commit troops and
equipment.

Whereas it might not be the case in every mission,
allow me to cite the case of Kenya when it deployed
troops and equipment to Somalia in October 2010 and
received Security Council support through resolution
2036 (2012), of February 2012. After more than a year
of full engagement in Somalia, my country has been
reimbursed only a fraction of the millions of dollars
committed by the Council and expended by my country.
Clearly, that is an unacceptable and unsustainable
situation for a country such as Kenya - a developing
country that has great needs for resources to invest for
urgent economic and social development.

It is in that connection that I request the Security
Council and the relevant departments of the Secretariat
to ensure that the logistical needs of troops are addressed
seriously and comprehensively and that timely and full
reimbursement is made without unwarranted delays. It
is only by doing so that the multidimensional approach
necessary for modern peacekeeping can continue
to receive the obligatory support it requires from
developing countries and the commensurate investment
of troop-contributing countries, including under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Kenya's
commitment to shoulder its responsibilities and to
continue to support United Nations mandates in the
interest of preserving peace and security on Earth.

