Mr. Obadi (Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me first, Sir, to express sincere thanks to you and
your friendly delegation, and to the delegations of all
members of the Council, for having convened this
meeting of the Security Council to discuss the serious
situation in the occupied Arab territories, and Israel's
continued cordoning off of Palestinian territories.

We pay tribute to the delegations of the non-aligned
group for the honourable position on the rights of the

 

Palestinian people that they have taken in all international
forums, and in particular in the Security Council. In recent
weeks and to this day the Palestinian people have suffered
under heinous Israeli measures, consisting of a blockade
and siege imposed on the self-governing territory of
Palestine. Israel has reoccupied areas from which it had
previously withdrawn, and is not complying with its
obligation to withdraw from Hebron in accordance with a
timetable agreed to in Taba and in Washington.

The continuation of such measures and practices by
the Israeli Government threatens efforts to complete the
peace process. It also seriously threatens the process itself.
The reprisal measures are in contravention of the Geneva
Convention of 1949 and agreements between the parties.
The only result will be serious damage to the peace
process. Israel's blockade of the Palestinian people, its
confiscation of land, and the restrictions Israel has imposed
on Palestinian towns and villages have paralysed the lives
of Palestinians at all levels. They have paralysed the free
circulation of persons and goods in the West Bank and
between the West Bank and Gaza, which, according to the
Declaration of Principles, constitute a single entity.

The blockade policy could lead to a human and
economic catastrophe for the Palestinian people, if Israel
does not lift the barriers imposed on Palestinian towns and
villages. The continuing blockade of the Holy City of
Jerusalem is a violation of commitments made in the peace
process.

My delegation believes that the Security Council must
act. It must call upon the co-sponsors of the peace process
and donor States to continue to provide assistance to the
Palestinian people, to ensure that the blockade is lifted and
to bring about an end to Israeli repression, massive
reprisals, confiscation of land and bombing of houses.

The Palestinian people must be given an opportunity
to rebuild their economy on a solid basis and ease the
economic restrictions that have been imposed on them so
that they can create their own democratic institutions and
attain a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the region.
Israel must realize that redoubled efforts are necessary to
achieve peace and stability in the region, especially as it
continues to occupy Arab territories.

Peace will be impossible unless it withdraws from the
occupied Arab territories. The latest aggression against
Lebanon by Israel will create an obstacle to the peace
process and, in addition, could weaken international efforts
that have been made to resume the comprehensive peace
process in the Middle East.

The bombing of the capital, towns and villages of
Lebanon threatens the entire population of that country
and constitutes a serious threat to peace and security in
Lebanon as well as a violation of human rights.

We declare our solidarity with the fraternal people
of Lebanon, and we support its right to defend its
territory.

We call upon the Council to exert pressure on Israel
to put an end to those measures and to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. It must
comply with Security Council resolution 425 (1978), and
it must withdraw from all Lebanese territory. The
Security Council, the sponsors of the peace process and
the international community must shoulder their
responsibilities and force Israel to resolve all pending
issues concerning the Middle East and, in particular, those
relating to international legal requirements that Israel
withdraw from the Syrian Golan so that a lasting peace
can be attained for that region. We reiterate our appeal.

We commend Syria's role in seeking to make a
success of the peace process. Yemen reaffirms its
commitment to the peace process and to the end of
violence. We call upon the Security Council to act
quickly to put an end to Israeli practices and policies so
that the peace process can attain its goal: the
establishment of justice and stability for all peoples of the
region.
