Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I should like to state at
the outset that Japan supports the report before us. On
that basis, let me stress the following four points.

First, Japan believes that, in restructuring the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), it is important to
secure the coordination of existing structures within the
United Nations, such as the Secretariat, and thereby to
strengthen the United Nations as a whole. We are
convinced that the role of the CTC will be further
strengthened if, as recommended in the report, the
Committee is able to enlist the services of experts who
are well versed in the various trends reflected in recent
terrorist acts, and if, with their assistance, the CTC is
able to analyse the large body of information gathered
from Member States and to propose common measures
to be taken by all States, as well as specific measures
to be taken by certain States, for the eradication of
terrorism. However, since technical support such as
assistance in developing legislative measures related to
counter-terrorism is already provided by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), we
would like to request the CTC fully to coordinate and
cooperate with other United Nations organs, as
mentioned in the recent report, so that there will be no
duplication of work among them.

Secondly, I would like to stress the importance of
promoting and enhancing support for counter-terrorism
measures. While we appreciate the role which has been
played by the CTC in this regard, we believe that the

CTC, under its new structure, should continue to
facilitate appropriate technical assistance, for example
by sending experts to the countries concerned. Japan,
believing in the importance of promoting cooperation
to combat international terrorism, has been actively
extending assistance for capacity-building. My
Government has been holding a variety of seminars
with a view to assisting in capacity-building for
counter-terrorism, primarily for Asian countries, in six
main areas: immigration control, transportation
security, customs cooperation, export control, police
and law enforcement, and measures against terrorist
financing.

Thirdly, I would like to emphasize the need to
continue to assign high priority to cutting off the
sources of funding that make terrorist activities
possible and to preventing the outflow of arms to
terrorists. Such measures are indispensable for
preventing terrorism. For that purpose, importance
should also be attached to the CTC's coordination of
activities with those of the Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) -
the so-called Taliban and Al Qaeda sanctions
Committee.

Japan has taken measures to freeze the funds and
other financial assets of well over 400 individuals and
entities implicated in terrorist activities. We intend to
continue encouraging Member States to enact the
domestic legislation needed in order to take measures
against the financing of terrorism.

Fourthly, as I said at the outset, Japan supports
the recent report on revitalization of the CTC.
However, that does not mean that expenditures for that
purpose should be allowed to grow unrestrained. In that
regard, we would like to commend the point made in
paragraph 6 of the most recent report that all measures
to be taken, including reinforcement of the CTC
structure, "should not increase in a disproportionate
way the budget and resources already allocated to the
CTC."

It is also important to ensure transparency with
regard to the sources of financing of the CTC's
activities. We are often warned that when a new
organization is established, people tend to attach more
importance to its continuation and expansion than to its
original objectives. In this connection, I would like
also to welcome the inclusion in the proposal of a
sunset clause terminating the new structure on 31
December 2007.

The CTC is now well into its third year of work.
We believe that the time has come to verify once again
whether the counter-terrorism measures which we have
been taking are functioning effectively, both in their
organizational and their operational aspects. In this
regard as well, my Government believes that the recent
proposal is on the right track. Expectations are high
regarding what the CTC is capable of achieving. I
would like to request that the work conducted by the
CTC be reviewed continuously and seriously with a
view to verifying whether the Committee is effectively
fulfilling its goals. I would also like to add that the
work of the CTC is a matter of interest to all States
Members of the United Nations. I hope, therefore, that
future reports concerning the evaluation of the
activities of the CTC will be provided to all Member
States without delay.

