Mr. Zarif: During the latest reporting period and
since, important progress has continued to be made
towards the implementation of the agreement reached
between the parties on 19 April. Leaders in Pristina
and Belgrade have upheld their commitment to work
towards the implementation of the agreement in a
timely and constructive manner, notwithstanding some
complications in the process. Such progress remains
fundamental to building mutual trust and realizing
the key aspirations of both parties, the population in
Kosovo and, indeed, the region.

Following the appointment in June of a Kosovo-
Serb from the north as commander of the northern
regional police directorate, his leadership team was
announced on 20 August, including a Kosovo-Albanian
deputy from the south. On 11 July, the Kosovo Assembly
approved a revised version of a draft law on amnesty in
order to facilitate the transition of qualified personnel
from police offices of the Serbian Ministry of Interior
in northern Kosovo to the Kosovo Police. However, that
law, along with two others essential for implementation,
faces challenges raised by the opposition in Kosovo's
Constitutional Court.

In early July, Serbia's Interior Ministry completed
the closure of its police offices in the four northern
municipalities, subsequently verified by the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR) and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). While the local population remains
wary of changes in the status quo, the initial stages of
implementation in the police area have been met with
broad public acceptance.

On 17 June, Serbia's High Judicial Council
instructed the three operating Serbian courts in Kosovo
to cease receiving cases in anticipation of the full
implementation of the court-related components of the
19 April agreement. The provisions on the functioning

of a unified justice system in Kosovo - detailed in
both the agreement and its integral implementation
arrangements of 22 May - will require substantial

additional work by the parties in order to be fully
realized. It is commendable that each side has
demonstrated full awareness of the importance and
delicacy of the subject and has proceeded with further
talks on implementation in a cautious and deliberate
fashion.

During the fifteenth round of meetings in Brussels
on 27 August, Prime Minister Dacie and Prime
Minister Thaci discussed the complex subjects of
telecommunication and energy - on which progress
has been slow - and agreed that discussions would
continue at the technical level. The parties also took
stock of progress in the implementation of the 19 April
agreement, including preparations for holding local
elections in Kosovo on 3 November. Given the short
time frame, organizing local elections throughout
Kosovo has presented particular challenges.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe responded swiftly and garnered necessary
resources to facilitate voting in the northern
municipalities, as well as by eligible internally displaced
persons. The registration of political entities for the
elections is also an intensive exercise in the short time
window. Although registration has begun, it remains a
challenge that requires a flexible, confidence-building
approach from all quarters, as does finding other
mutually acceptable voting arrangements and material.

It is crucial that elections succeed in delivering
Viable local authority able to properly represent and
defend the interests of local communities, as foreseen
in the agreement. To that end, it is important that full
participation in the election be encouraged, particularly
in the northern municipalities, where local authority
has long lingered under dispute and controversy. To
achieve that result, steadfastness and flexibility will
be required from each side, in particular to address
effectively the concerns of the local population and
overcome the uncertainty that currently prevails in the
north.

As I have previously stated in the Council, the
implementation of the historic 19 April agreement and
each of its elements is a delicate process that demands
sustained efforts and focus. In that light, it is essential
for the parties to keep their focus on the implementation
of what has been agreed, without introducing additional
fundamental issues that are, at present, outside of the
political dialogue agenda. Doing otherwise may put at
risk the progress achieved so far.

Of equal importance for success is a sustained
effort to improve confidence and promote progress
in inter-community reconciliation. That is a shared
responsibility of political leaders at all levels and
will also require continuing international support.
Accordingly, long-standing issues of vital importance
for reconciliation should also receive renewed attention
and vigor during this period, alongside bolstering the
political process.

The determination of the fate of persons missing
since the time of the conflict has made little new
progress in recent months, despite the joint efforts of
the Kosovo-Albanian and Serb family associations
of missing persons to encourage more effective and
collaborative action. While EULEX is prepared to
undertake new investigations, within its mandate and
means, to support comprehensive reviews of legacy
cases, and to support new police investigations when
and wherever new evidence can be uncovered, it cannot
succeed in that task without additional information
from all concerned.

Achieving greater success in that regard requires
foremost the exertion of renewed political will to
encourage more information to be brought forward
and to afford adequate witness protection. The affected
families rightly demand justice, reparation and closure
on the cases of their missing loved ones. On the eve
of the International Day of the Victims of Enforced
Disappearances, I call upon the parties to rededicate
their commitment to that end.

Of similar importance are the further steps being
taken to safeguard religious and cultural sites in
Kosovo, both in the context of the high-level dialogue
and work at the municipal level. Successful preparations
by the Kosovo police have enabled it to take over from
KFOR the responsibility for the protection of the Pec'
Patriarchate, in early August. It is important that such
efforts do not falter, as is threatened, for example,
by the procedural delays in the establishment of the
cultural heritage council in Rahovec/Orahovac.

An important and timely visit in June by
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, served to underscore
many of the same issues and outline a range of areas in
which institutions responsible for the rule of law and
human rights protection in Kosovo could be made more
effective. Her recommendations focused, in particular,
on remedies for weak legislation, more vigorous
implementation of the law and tougher responses to
instances of hate speech and ethnic intolerance.

On 28 June, the European Council issued important
decisions on its enlargement, including the decision
on the start of the accession negotiations with Serbia
and the opening of negotiations for a stabilization and
association agreement with Kosovo.

Those major steps are, in great measure,
attributable to the visionary leadership demonstrated
by both sides during the European Union-led political
dialogue. Helping the parties sustain momentum is
now the shared and central goal of all the international
presences in Kosovo and beyond.

Among the greatest challenges is building
confidence in the process in the north, where little such
confidence presently exists. I wish to acknowledge
efforts being made in that respect by the parties and,
equally, to note the significant gap that is yet to be
closed. The formation, outside the framework of the
19 April agreement, of a provisional assembly for
Kosovo and Metohija is a sign of the still predominant
apprehension in northern Kosovo concerning the
implementation of the agreement.

The political challenge involved is difficult to over-
estimate, not least in view of the ambitious time lines
foreseen in the implementation plan. Accordingly, the
parties should persevere with a high degree of creativity
and flexibility and redouble efforts to address the
substantive and detailed questions emanating from the
population in the north.

For our part, UNMIK continues to actively adapt
its activities in the field to most effectively support
the political process and related work on the ground.
UNMIK's facilitation and mediation roles have been
enhanced by additional experienced personnel in the
north, while the UNMIK Administration in Mitrovica
has continued its active engagement in local mediation
and conflict prevention.

Preparations are currently under way for
the implementation of confidence-building and
reconciliation projects in a number of key areas
throughout Kosovo, mostly through the United Nations
Kosovo team and other international partners. Our
local mediation role and capacity continue to be drawn
upon throughout Kosovo, providing an effective
communication link in support of resolving practical
public and social service issues. We are contributing
to building local confidence, which helps keep residual
tensions low and, in turn, broadens the space for further
progress in the political dialogue.

The implementation of the 19 April agreement
requires concentrated efforts and the avoidance of
distractions related to issues that are yet to be tackled
through direct dialogue. Through its ongoing support
to the parties as they pursue solutions by making
necessary compromises, the Council continues to
play a key role in supporting the long-term success
of this process. I wish to express deep appreciation
to the Council members for their continued political
engagement in that regard.

I close by thanking you, Madam President, and
all members of the Council for their support for
UNMIK's work as we continue to promote progress and
reconciliation on the ground.

