Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
on Afghanistan. I also thank Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan for his statement, and I would like to
welcome Mr. Bob Carr, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia, to the Security Council debate today.

Afghanistan faces a number of issues that it must
tackle as it moves towards the security, political and
economic transition in 2014. The phased transfer of lead
security responsibility from the International Security
Assistance Force to Afghan security institutions is
progressing as planned. The continued efforts of the
Afghan Government to implement the commitments
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
including preparations for the elections, are noteworthy.
The timely development of a credible electoral
framework through a transparent and participatory
process is the key to holding successful elections. The
work of the High Peace Council in the Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process should
also be duly noted and encouraged.

We also welcome recent progress in the
development arena, including the endorsement of the
aid management policy. Over the course of the past
year, the international community has demonstrated
renewed commitment to providing long-term support
for the Afghan people at conferences in Chicago in
the United States of America, Kabul and Tokyo. Now,
timely and faithful implementation of the commitments
is vital to ensuring a successful transition. While the
Afghan Government's ownership of the overall process
must be ensured, the sustained assistance of the
international community will be all the more critical
for the peace and stability of Afghanistan leading up to
2014 and beyond.

We welcome the decline in the number of civilian
casualties in 2012, the first such decline in six years. The
international forces and Afghan authorities have made
progress in minimizing the risk of civilian casualties.
However, we are deeply concerned that women, girls
and children continue to suffer enormously, including
through the use of children as suicide bombers and the
targeted killings of women.

Increased efforts to train the Afghanistan national
security forces and provide them with all necessary
support will remain crucial tasks in order to effectively
protect civilians and ensure accountability.

Afghanistan's refugee situation remains one of the
largest protracted such situations in the world, with
nearly 3 million refugees and half a million internally
displaced persons. We call on the Afghan Government
to enhance its efforts to protect and assist them in order
to ensure their sustainable return.

Another area ofconcern is the increasing production
of, and trafficking in, narcotics in Afghanistan. With an
increase in poppy cultivation for the third consecutive
year, more efforts are needed to address that threat. We

urge the international community and regional partners
to further support Afghan-led efforts to tackle the drug
problem.

The Government of the Republic of Korea has been
actively supporting Afghanistan's capacity-building.
As part of the provincial peconstruction team (PRT)
evolution strategy, the Korean Government transferred
its PRT base, previously located in Parwan province,
to the Afghan Government at the end of last year, and
is currently running a down-sized PRT. Furthermore,
following a contribution of $15 million to the Afghan
National Army trust fund in 2011, the Korean
Government contributed an additional $15 million to
that trust fund, and another $15 million to the Law and
Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan in 2012.

We appreciate the crucial role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in assisting the people of Afghanistan and laying the
foundation for sustainable peace and development. With
the adoption of today's resolution 2096 (2013) to extend
the mandate of UNAMA for a year, we look forward to
the Mission's continued role in supporting the Afghan
Government in development and governance priorities,
electoral preparations and the peace and reconciliation
process. The Republic of Korea will remain committed
to working with the Afghan Government and its
people and will lend its full support to UNAMA in
implementing its mandate.

