Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): Allow me first to
pay tribute to you, Madam President, and your
delegation for organizing this important thematic
debate on the relationship between the Security
Council and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We commend South
Africa for its leadership on this issue and for the
importance it attaches to it.

The Charter of the United Nations confers a role
upon regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security through the pacific
settlement of disputes or, as stated in Article 53,
enforcement action. Regional organizations also have a
role in preventing conflict through early warning
mechanisms, as well as in post-conflict peacebuilding
and recovery. The Charter commits us all to "unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security".
By this, we recognize that our collective, united
strength, exerted in the maintenance of international
peace and security, is greater than the sum of its parts.

There is no doubt that regional organizations,
particularly the African Union (AU), play a central role
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Regional and subregional organizations have
demonstrated the capacity to respond quickly to crises.
They also possess Vital local knowledge and a good
understanding of local sensitivities and cultures.

We commend the African Union and AU troop-
contributing countries for their contributions to AU
peacekeeping missions in Burundi, Darfur and, more
recently, Somalia. Peacekeeping in those places is both
difficult and dangerous. However, despite that fact,
African States commit troops and resources to
peacekeeping out of a genuine political commitment to
assist nations and societies in their emergence from
conflict towards sustainable peace and security.

The Charter clearly states, in Article 24, that the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Therefore, as many other speakers have already said,
when regional organizations undertake peacekeeping
duties they do so on behalf of the Security Council and
the broader United Nations membership. It is therefore
imperative that we begin to see greater involvement by
the broader United Nations membership in
peacekeeping operations that are undertaken in its
name by regional organizations.

The African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS), to
which my country is a major troop contributor, has
done a commendable job despite very difficult
financial and logistical constraints. Although there has
been significant support from various international
partners, the Mission has suffered recurring financial
crises as well as crippling logistical problems such as a
lack of vehicles. The Mission has often been unable to
fly its few helicopters because of a lack of fuel. We
should not allow this situation to continue.

Some representatives of Member States have said
that AMIS is ineffective. We ask them "How can you
give AMIS such a difficult task, causing it to work in
such difficult physical conditions, deny it adequate
resources, and then expect it to be 100 per cent
effective? How can you deny peacekeepers the tools to
be effective, then fault them for not meeting your
expectations?"

It is clear that there is tremendous scope for a
closer relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union. Specifically, we believe that when the
AU undertakes a peacekeeping mission under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the mission
should be funded through United Nations-assessed
contributions. In addition, adequate logistical support
should be provided to AU peacekeeping operations.
That would ensure proper burden-sharing with respect
to peacekeeping responsibilities, rather than leaving
small countries like Rwanda to do the heavy lifting.

We therefore welcome the preparations, including
discussions and extensive consultations with the
Sudanese Government, for the establishment of a
hybrid mission in Darfur. This may well provide a
model for future cooperation and joint peacekeeping
operations between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Such joint operations will benefit from
the local knowledge and understanding possessed by
regional organizations, as well as from international
involvement and the participation of the United
Nations.

There is also tremendous scope for cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
institutional, operational and human resource capacity-
building in the area of peacekeeping. In that
connection, therefore, we welcome the adoption last
November of the Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union, set out in the
declaration entitled "Enhancing UN-AU Cooperation".
We look forward to the full implementation of the
Programme.

Finally, it is also important for the Security
Council to hold frequent meetings with the Peace and
Security Council of the AU. Such meetings would
provide an opportunity for the regular exchanges of
views, lessons learned and other perspectives on issues
before both bodies. It would also ensure co-ownership
by the African Union of peacekeeping missions.

