I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif for the briefing. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is working around the clock to address the impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), while ensuring that it continues to accomplish its mission, which is not an easy task. We commend MINUSMA, along with the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and international security forces, for their critical work during this challenging time. I want to recognize the progress that has been made over recent months to meet benchmarks of the Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, including the redeployment of reconstituted elements of the Malian armed forces to northern Mali, a high-level workshop on women's participation in the peace process and recent legislative elections. However, despite these examples of progress, the security situation continues to deteriorate, gross human rights abuses against civilians continue to be committed and the Algiers accord remains far from being fully implemented. As we approach MINUSMA's mandate renewal in June, the Council needs to reflect on why the situation has continued to deteriorate so rapidly and on what changes should be made to the mandate to more effectively achieve MINUSMA's objectives. The new mandate must further encourage the Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups to swiftly implement the 2015 Algiers peace accord so that MINUSMA can begin its eventual exit. The United States is committed to helping bring about peace, security and a brighter future for the people of Mali, the Sahel and West Africa. Included in that commitment is our dedication to helping the United Nations and Mali counter the threat of COVID-19. MINUSMA has reached a critical juncture, and we must now determine what the Mission can realistically accomplish in the face of a growing terrorist threat that is both asymmetric and kinetic. I look forward to working with the members of the Council between now and June to develop an approach that can deliver the lasting peace and stability that all Malians deserve.
