Mr. Suarez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of June and assure you that you
can count on our support. I would also like to extend
our thanks to the Lithuanian delegation for the work
carried out during the month of May. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank Presidents Meron and
J oensen and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for the
reports they presented and to recognize the leadership
of Chile at the head the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports the
arduous work of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in prosecuting
and sentencing those responsible for crimes against
humanity and war crimes that shocked the conscience
of humankind. The work of the Tribunals has bolstered
the international community's resolve to guarantee that
those responsible for such abominable acts will not
enjoy impunity. We hope that the efforts of Member
States will be consistent in ensuring that acts as horrific
as those that occurred in those countries will not be
repeated.

Now, as we approach the closure of these Tribunals
and the transfer to the International Residual Mechanism
of their archives on the cases of the fugitives, cases of
contempt or of perjury, and on the protection of victims
and witnesses, we consider it important to highlight the
need for cooperation from States to ensure compliance
with all the mandates set forth in resolution 1966
(2010). Without such support, the Mechanism will fail
to achieve its goals.

In relation to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, it is important to note that final
verdicts have been handed down in 147 of the 161
individual cases assigned to it. To date, the Tribunal has
not had before it a single case involving a fugitive from
justice, but we observe with great concern that although
over two decades have elapsed since the creation of the
Tribunal, several proceedings at the trial level remain
ongoing, due to procedural delays on various grounds
that we believe could be effectively resolved so that the
trials could be completed within an established time
frame while guaranteeing the principles of due process
and judicial impartiality. It is not enough for judges
to act independently and impartially; they should also
conduct proceedings and issue their judgements in a
timely manner becausejustice delayed is justice denied.

Our delegation acknowledges the work undertaken
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
to complete the cases of 93 defendants, leaving only
one case pending in the Appeals Chamber - the
Nyiramasuhuko et al. (Butare) case - which involves
six accused, the completion of which is expected at the
end ofthis year. With respect to the nine cases offugitives
fromjustice that were referred to the jurisdiction of the
national courts of Rwanda and the other three cases
transferred to the Residual Mechanism, we encourage
the authorities to locate, apprehend and prosecute those
charged to as soon as possible. As long as that has
not occurred, we cannot speak of justice having been
served.

With regard to those who have completed their
sentences or have been acquitted, the ICTR has
transferred these cases to the Residual Mechanism
to assist in their relocation in view of the fact that it
is a humanitarian issue requiring the international
community's cooperation. Only then will these people
be able to reintegrate into society. In this regard, we
support the strategic plan adopted by the Residual
Mechanism consisting of expanding efforts to find
suitable places for relocation and thereby providing
them with appropriate humanitarian assistance that
would help limit the financial costs of their upkeep.

Finally, we appeal to the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia to continue to take all measures
necessary to complete its work expeditiously and ensure
that all cases still in proceedings be completed in 2017,
as has been planned. In this way, the commitment it
made to the international community to promote the
rule of law and end impunity would be fulfilled.

