Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, I take this opportunity to express
my delegation's appreciation for the outstanding
leadership you have shown in conducting our work in
connection with this formal meeting, which was convened
to address the situation of settlements in East Jerusalem.
I also welcome the presence of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, who is with us this evening.

For several days now, the Security Council has
devoted itself to discussing this matter, which is of crucial
importance to the Middle East peace process. My country
took part in the debate with a broad and well-defined
position in support of the immediate resumption of the
peace negotiations aimed at achieving full implementation
of the Oslo agreements. Negotiations on these agreements
were held under the visionary, energetic and bold
leadership of the late, martyred Prime Minister of Israel,
Yitzhak Rabin, and later continued by Prime Minister
Shimon Peres and his successor, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu, and by the Chairman of the Palestinian
National Authority, Yasser Arafat.

On that occasion, Costa Rica was very clear in
expressing its dissatisfaction at the recent decision by the
Government of Israel to begin building a settlement at
Har Homa in East Jerusalem. My country also reiterated
its support for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people, as well as for Israel's just historical claims to
secure borders.

On that day, my Government stressed the important
mediating role that President Clinton and the United
States Government have played and continue to play in
support of a firm, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. We also recognized the valuable contribution
made by President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and His
Majesty King Hussein of Jordan.

My country's statement in this context concurred in
its essential points with what was said in this Chamber by
all the members of the Security Council. Accordingly, my
delegation lent its support in the following days to the

 

draft text submitted by the countries of the European
Union, on the understanding that the text's contents would
accurately reflect what was expressed in the formal debate.
Costa Rica felt that in this regard there were no
inconsistencies between the European text and what was
stated by the members of the Council, and that the
substance of this consensus could be expressed accurately
and with a single voice by the Security Council. What we
wanted was for this unity of thought to be expressed, be it
in the format of a resolution or as a presidential statement.
The important point, in my country's judgment, would have
been to preserve the unity of that message in the content of
the text, in whatever format the will of all the members of
the Council had been expressed, as a resolution or as a
presidential statement.

Unfortunately, the negotiation process took a different
path, and the necessary consensus was not reached. During
the informal consultations we stated, and we now reaffirm,
that it would have been much more effective to maintain
that unity of thought and opinion, even if it had been
expressed not as a resolution, but rather as a presidential
statement. That unity of purpose is what is needed by the
peace process in the Middle East. We believe that that is
the message the Security Council should send to the parties
to the conflict, as an expression of the unqualified support
of the international community for the peace process and
the Oslo agreements.

However, faced with a de facto situation that we truly
did not want and that in our opinion is not the ideal one,
and having exhausted our possibilities of influencing
matters in order to maintain that necessary unity in the
Security Council, the Government of Costa Rica has
decided to vote with the majority in support of the draft
resolution before the Council as an expression of its support
for the peace process and with the honest and firm intention
to place on record its full support for the Oslo agreements.

Our message is that the spirit of Oslo must be
maintained at all costs. That is the only way towards a
stable and lasting peace in the Middle East. That is the
message that we wish to see reflected in this decision by
the Council.

