Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We also thank the
Permanent Representative of Spain for his briefing and
for his leadership of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). New
Zealand welcomes the mandate of the Committee and
now more than ever urges the Committee and its Panel
of Experts to continue their good work.

New Zealand joins others in acknowledging the
critical juncture we are at with regard to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) and in addressing the Iranian
nuclear issue. During this time it is essential for the
credibility of the Council and the Plan of Action that the
integrity of the sanctions regime against Iran remain
intact. We acknowledge the fact that the Committee
and the Panel of Experts are in an unusual position, but
the Council position should be clear. We also urge the
Panel of Experts to continue with its programme work,
which is based on the premise that they are conducting
business as usual until such time as Iranian obligations
are met.

We note that, with adoption day approaching, the 1737
Committee, along with a joint commission established
under the Plan of Action, will have a significant role
to play in authorizing exemptions to current sanctions
to facilitate Iran meeting its commitments. However,
we also note that only transactions formally exempted
through the appropriate process will be considered
legitimate.

Member States have a responsibility to adhere to all
sanctions regimes, and Council members in particular
have a responsibility to demonstrate leadership
in that regard. We urge all parties to approach the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action and of resolution 1737 (2006) with the same
positive intent and good faith that led to the agreement
being reached.

New Zealand is acutely aware of the challenges
faced by Member States in implementing complex
sanctions regimes such as the one designated in
resolution 1737 (2006). Council members and Member
States will all require guidance to manage expectations
and clarify obligations under resolution 2231 (2015) and
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. We invite the 1737 Committee to consider how
best to provide such guidance.

