Mr. Motoc (Romania): Sir, I hope you will accept
the last, but no less true and sincere, expression of
delight at your assumption of the presidency and of
confidence in the able discharge of your
responsibilities during what looks to be a particularly
eventful period in the life of the Security Council.

I wish also to commend Ambassador Akram and
the Pakistani presidency for an outstanding
performance in guiding the work of the Security
Council during the month of May.

We are also grateful and appreciate very much
both the presence and the insightful and comprehensive
presentations made by Chairman Bryant and by Special
Representative Klein. I should like also to say a special
word of appreciation for the nice gift - the nice plate
that Ambassador Klein gave to each member. It
reminds me of a previous encounter I was pleased to
have with Ambassador Klein, when, in a previous
incarnation of his, he gave me a plate with an
inscription related to the mission he successfully
completed in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I wish him
continued success.

Romania is also very pleased to acknowledge the
progress made towards sustained peace and
reconstruction in Liberia, as well as the steps taken in
this regard by Chairman Bryant and his National
Transitional Government. We fully commend the
efforts of the Liberian authorities and encourage them
to carry out, in a most determined manner, the
measures and plans needed to lay the foundations of
good governance and socio-economic development.

At the same time, we take this opportunity to
convey our appreciation to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Klein and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for their important
contribution to the stabilization and national recovery
of Liberia. We are encouraged by the results of their
work. Indeed, 17,500 combatants disarmed in one
month is but one impressive indicator of the successful
discharge of their duties.

I would like to limit myself to just a few
observations and questions directed to the kind
attention of our invitees.

First, now that the disarmament and
demobilization process is firmly on track, the focus
will be reoriented towards the reintegration aspects of
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation (DDRR) programme, as an essential
condition for attaining the overall objectives of
securing peace and social reconstruction. Since any
major gap between these phases could have serious
destabilizing consequences on the ground, we would
like to ask, especially Mr. Klein, whether reintegration
capabilities match the very high caseload of
demobilized combatants.

Secondly, the security situation in the timber-
producing areas of Liberia still seems to be highly
precarious, impeding the proper functioning of the
Forestry Development Authority throughout the
territory of the country. We would be very interested to
hear from Mr. Klein about prospects for improving this
situation after the full deployment of UNMIL, in
parallel with the plans for the gradual establishment of
civil authority throughout Liberia. We would also
appreciate any further comments by Chairman Bryant
on this issue, taking into consideration the general
efforts to restore State authority throughout the
country.

And thirdly, one month ago, the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for Liberia
and Sierra Leone met in Monrovia, along with the
Force Commanders and civilian police commissioners
of UNMIL and the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), to discuss efforts to improve
cross-border security and review progress in the DDRR
exercise in Liberia. I would appreciate Mr. Klein's
assessment of the outcome of that meeting one month
later.

