Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for holding today's meeting.

We appreciate the untiring efforts of Mr. Ghassan
Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head ofthe United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), to achieve peace and stability in
Libya, and we very much appreciate UNSMIL's vital
and important role. We also thank Ambassador Olof
Skoog for the valuable information he has provided on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

I will focus on three key elements: political
developments, security challenges and economic
reform. First, with regard to political developments,
we reiterate our full support for the action plan,
which has helped to fulfil many aspirations related
to moving Libya from a situation of chaos to stability
and prosperity, including the launch of the preparatory

process for a general national congress, to be held
by the end of 2018, the promotion of national unity
through a dialogue facilitated by national reconciliation
initiatives, and the important agreement between the
House of Representatives and the High Council of State
on a mechanism to form a new executive authority.
We believe in this important plan and its provisions
for establishing security in Libya. We therefore renew
our commitment to the United Nations efforts aimed
at ending the protracted transitional period in the
country, the most important of which, at the current
time, is providing adequate support for the preparation
of elections and ensuring that they are accepted by all.
We hope that the voter registration update, which added
more than 2.4 million voters to the rolls, will help to
ensure the participation of the largest possible number
of Libyans in the voting process.

We welcome the positive experience observed
in the municipal elections in Zawiya, which went
smoothly and transparently and showed great integrity.
We commend all those who participated in exercising
their constitutional right to elect their representatives
in the municipal council, in a rate of participation that
exceeded 60 per cent. We hope that the Libyan people
will follow suit with great voter participation in the
other Libyan cities that elect municipal councils this
year. We agree with the Secretary-General on the
need for positive indicators such as these in order to
ensure that the House of Representatives shoulders its
responsibilities without further delay. It must establish
a constitutional framework with a view to holding
elections following the adoption of the necessary
constitutional legislation. We reiterate the message
in the resolution adopted by the League of Arab
States, one of the actors in the Quartet, calling for a
comprehensive political solution to the crisis and for
adherence to the Libyan Political Agreement as the sole
political framework for addressing it.

Secondly, with respect to the security challenges, it
is perhaps paradoxical that the most prominent security
incident during the reporting period was a terrorist
attack earlier this month targeting the headquarters of
the High Commission for National Elections in Tripoli.
We strongly condemn that cowardly act and express
our condolences to the families of the victims. This
incident, and other events that have led to a continued
escalation of tensions and violence, remind us of the
ongoing state of insecurity in Libya, which remains the
most notable feature of its security situation, especially
in the light of the escalation of confrontations in the
cities of Derna and Sabha and elsewhere.

This adds to the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in general and the ongoing violations of human
rights and human trafficking in particular. We reiterate
our rejection of these practices, which are contrary to
international law, and we call for an end to such acts,
which contribute to the killing and displacement of
civilians. In the Security Council, we must continue
to support Libyan efforts to establish the rule of law,
extend the authority of the State and move towards the
unification of the Libyan military and security forces
under a civilian leadership. We welcome the meetings
hosted by Egypt to discuss that unification.

Thirdly, with regard to economic reform, we
welcome the continuing production of more than
a million barrels of oil a day, which has increased
optimism about Libyan economic expectations. We
also welcome the adoption of a general budget for
2018. However, we remain concerned about the notable
increase in public spending, which will lead to a
financial deficit estimated at $7.5 billion. We would
like to recall here the resolution of the League of Arab
States, which calls on the Presidency Council, the
House of Representatives, the High Council of State,
the Central Bank of Libya and the national economic
institutions to work together to agree on solutions to
Libya's economic problems.

