Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I offer you
warm congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We very
much look forward to working with you, and we assure
you of our full support. We are very grateful also to
Ambassador Mayr-Harting and the Austrian delegation
for their distinguished presidency of the Council last
month. We are also very grateful to Presidents Byron
and Robinson and Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz
for their latest reports and for their briefings this
morning.

My Government also associates itself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of
Sweden as President of the European Union.

The United Kingdom welcomes the further
progress that has been made in implementing the
completion strategies of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
over the past six months. We acknowledge the
measures taken by the two Tribunals to expedite
proceedings, but we remain concerned that the latest
reports indicate further slippage in the timelines for
final completion. We recognize that some delays have
been caused by factors outside the Tribunals' control,
such as the illness of accused or counsel and, in the
case of ICTR, by the welcome arrests of two fugitives.
Nevertheless, we urge both Tribunals to take all
necessary steps to keep the trial and appeal schedules
on track. In that context we would welcome
confirmation from President Robinson and President
Byron that all current Trial Chambers are sitting full
time to hear their cases.

We have noted the comments of both Presidents
concerning the terms and conditions of staff and judges
of the Tribunals, and those points will need to be
addressed by the appropriate organs of the General
Assembly. While the primary responsibility for
ensuring timely completion lies with the Tribunals
themselves, the Security Council must also play its
part. It particular, it is our responsibility to take the
necessary decisions to extend the mandates of those
judges who need to be retained by the Tribunals to
complete the remaining cases.

It is clear from the forecasts by the Presidents
that even with expedited procedures, trial work will not
be complete until 2011-2012 and appeal work not until
mid-2013 - provided that additional resources are
reallocated to the Appeals Chamber. While we regret
the delay, we must accept the reality of those timelines
and act accordingly. If the Security Council fails to
extend judicial mandates until the last minute, there is
a risk that the uncertainty created will cause more
judges to leave before completion of their cases, thus
generating greater disruption in the Tribunals' ongoing
work.

As my Government has made clear on many
occasions, full cooperation by all States is vital to
ensure the completion of the mandates of the ICTY and
ICTR. In particular, the remaining fugitives - two in
the case of ICTY and 11 in the case of ICTR - must
be located and surrendered to The Hague and Arusha.
We reiterate that the mandate of the Tribunals will not
be complete until those individuals have been brought
to justice.

My Government appreciates the detailed
assessments of cooperation by States in the region of
the former Yugoslavia provided by the Prosecutor of
the ICTY, Mr. Serge Brammertz. In relation to Croatia,
we agree that the establishment of the Task Force is a
positive step, and we welcome it. Nevertheless, my
Government is disappointed that the Croatian
Government has not sufficiently demonstrated to the
Prosecutor that they have pursued all avenues of
investigation and that key requested documents
relating to the Gotovina case remain to be found or
accounted for. We welcome the further developments
reported by the Prosecutor this morning and urge
Croatia to achieve full cooperation by taking the
necessary further measures to complete a
comprehensive and credible investigation towards
finding or accounting for missing documents.

We are very pleased by Serbia's sustained
improvement over the last six months, as reported by
the Prosecutor, which demonstrates its increased
commitment to cooperation with ICTY. We support the
Prosecutor's view that it is essential that Serbia
maintain the current level of cooperation in tracing the
fugitives Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzie.

In the case of ICTR, we welcome the
intensification of the Prosecutor's efforts to track
fugitives, which has led to the recent arrest and
surrender to the Tribunal of two fugitive indictees. We
also welcome the cooperation provided by Uganda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in facilitating
those arrests. The transfer of Idelphonse Nizeyimana to
Arusha only one day after his arrest in Uganda is an
example, as President Byron said, of swift and efficient
cooperation by a Member State with the Tribunal.
Nevertheless, it is deeply unsatisfactory that so many
ICTR fugitives remain at large, and we call on all
United Nations Member States to cooperate in this
issue.

In particular, we regret that Kenya has not
responded to the Prosecutor's requests for information.
We urge the Kenyan Government to step up its level of
cooperation with the Tribunal and to share any
information that it may hold on the current
whereabouts of Felicien Kabuga. If I remember
correctly, when the Council debated these issues last
June, the representative of Kenya said that his
Government was certain that Kabuga had left Kenya.
That, of course, meant that the Kenyan Government
knew that Kabuga had been in Kenya and begged the
question what evidence they had of his presence in
Kenya and his subsequent departure, and what they
could do with that evidence to help track Kabuga's
current location.

My Government notes the Prosecutor's intention
to refer this matter formally to this Council, and in any
case we would welcome more detailed assessment of
State cooperation in the ICTR Prosecutor's future
reports. The Security Council needs to be kept fully
informed of developments in tracking the fugitives to
enable us to consider all options.

Finally, I would like to look forward to the
establishment of a residual mechanism to carry out the
essential functions of the Tribunals that need to be
continued following completion of their trial and
appeal work, such as witness protection, review of
judgements, sentence enforcement, management of
archives and, if necessary, trial of fugitives. We
consider that the Tribunals should do everything
possible to refer all appropriate cases to national
jurisdictions to reduce the trial burden of the residual
mechanism. In that context we warmly welcome the
effort being undertaken by Rwanda to enhance the
capacity of their judicial system to facilitate referrals,
efforts which my Government is supporting.

Establishment of that mechanism will be vital for
the legacy of the Tribunals. We welcome the report of
the Secretary-General issued earlier this year, which
provides useful guidance to the Security Council on
how these issues can be managed (S/2009/258). We
also recognize and appreciate the preparatory work
undertaken by both Tribunals in making ready for the
establishment of the mechanism, including
implementation of recommendations in the Secretary-
General's report.

My Government will continue to play an active
role in the ongoing discussions under the able
chairmanship of Austria. We hope we will be able to
reach agreement in the first half of next year on a
resolution on the establishment of the residual
mechanism. Even though final completion of the
Tribunals' work is still some way off, it is important
that we take timely decisions, particularly on location
and core functions of the mechanism, to allow for
orderly planning of the completion and post-
completion phase of the Tribunals' activity.

