Mr. Baja (Philippines): My delegation is pleased
to welcome you, Sir, in chairing this special event
under the Pakistani presidency on a subject of mutual
importance to our two countries as troop contributors
to United Nations peacekeeping missions. The concept
paper prepared by your team for today's debate has
provided the Council with a valuable appreciation of
the multidimensional scope of peacekeeping. Your
presidency's initiative in this regard comes highly
commended.

If we assess the outcomes of peacekeeping, the
report card yields mixed results. High scores will be
accorded to beneficiary countries currently
experiencing stable peace and security or, at least,
sustained cessation of hostilities; average scores to
those that have gone through a roller-coaster
experience, but have inched towards stability from a
traumatic past; and low scores to those that have
undergone protracted crisis or experienced a standstill
for lack of political progress in their peace and security
situations.

These differences are attributable mainly to the
complexity of the situations in different conflict-
stricken countries and to the difficulty of contriving
appropriate peacekeeping policy measures, owing to
resource constraints, on the one hand, and to the
political dynamics attendant on evolving peacekeeping
mandates, on the other.

The Brahimi Panel report issued four years ago
contained recommendations deserving not only serious
but continuing consideration by the organs of the
United Nations, the Security Council and the General
Assembly in particular. Although a number of the
Panel's recommendations have resulted in new policies
have strengthened the United Nations peacekeeping
capability, the review process on the implementation of
these policies should be given equal importance for
many reasons, such as the upsurge in demand for
peacekeeping operations and the accompanying need
for rapid deployment.

My delegation commends Pakistan for subjecting
peacekeeping to a review by the Council. More than
three years have elapsed since the Council adopted
resolution 1327 (2000) on 13 November 2000 in
response to the Brahimi Panel report. Considering the
upsurge in the need for peacekeeping operations, the
Council should consider reviewing resolution 1327
(2000) more often. My delegation endorses the
presidential statement on peacekeeping operations
which will be issued shortly.

As reform is a continuing process, I would like to
invite the attention of this Council to a few points my
delegation considers important if peacekeeping is to be
wielded as a veritable instrument to achieve the basic
purposes of the United Nations. Two of them are
doctrinal and the others policy-oriented.

My first point calls for a doctrinal shift from the
traditional dichotomy between peacekeeping and
peace-building to a continuum as an integral process
leading to a common end. It is similar to the
continuums between security and development and
between a secure political environment and sustainable
development. Many argue that peacekeeping is the
responsibility of the Security Council, while peace-
building belongs to the General Assembly. That is a
divisive argument and loses sight of the fact that these
two organs are guided by common goals and
functionally complement each other in pursuit of these
goals. Peacekeeping and peace-building should
therefore be planned in tandem with each other, a
process also requiring closer coordination between the
Security Council, the General Assembly and even the
Economic and Social Council.

The doctrine of equality among nations should
not only be recognized, but also observed, particularly
in peacekeeping. All countries potentially or currently
under Security Council mandate should receive equal
treatment. Influential global players should engage
themselves in risky peacekeeping operations, even
when the conflict-stricken countries do not fall within
their spheres of Vital interests. Success stories in
peacekeeping are generally associated with the level of
involvement of these important global players, whether
military or logistical; the scope or scale of United
Nations mobilization; the pace of deployment; and
even the content or depth of Council mandates. We
have to demystify any North-South divide by
discarding selectivity and upholding the doctrine of
equal treatment of States, notwithstanding their
geographic location and strategic importance. At the
end of the day, United Nations performance is gauged
in terms of human lives protected from conflicts,
notwithstanding the locus of such conflicts.

Exit strategies for peacekeepers should stand out
in policy formulation. However, we have to caution
ourselves against precipitate withdrawal. The Council
should guard against resorting to the termination of
peacekeeping operations as an option due to resource
constraints to allow the redeployment of troops or the
rechannelling of resources for emerging crises. We
have to learn lessons from the past to avoid the same
pitfalls of having to cope with a relapse of conflict
arising from precipitate withdrawal. Exit strategies
should be linked to peace-building measures in order to
ensure long-term peace and stability. Peacekeepers and
peace-builders are therefore inextricably linked to each
other.

The lack of strong mandates and robust rules of
engagement in hostile environments hampers the
success of peacekeeping operations. Moreover, robust
operations and clear mandates should not be limited to
proactive measures to prevent killings and other
destructive and violent actions against civilians, but
should also give due regard to the need for the
unhampered implementation of peace-building strategy
in order to help enhance and ensure the success of a
mission.

Another policy area to be decisively addressed
deals with rapid deployment. Despite all the merits of a
United Nations rapid deployment capability, such as
deterring the further escalation of conflicts, the final
arbiter in decision-making is the availability of United
Nations resources. To forestall this problem, many
countries are willing to provide troops, self-sustaining
for a limited period, for rapid deployment, but could be
discouraged from doing so because of delays in
reimbursements. In this connection, there is an urgent
need to further strengthen Headquarters capability by
infusing it with adequate and highly qualified
personnel who should help provide solutions to troop-
contributing countries' problems.
Allow me to stress one final point. There are a
number of areas where progress can be made in
ensuring the safety and the protection of United
Nations personnel. They are key players, coordinating
United Nations-wide programmes in the field such as
serving as the conductor in orchestrating the delivery
of direly needed assistance and services not only in the
humanitarian, social and economic fields, but also in
the rebuilding of political institutions and processes. In
short, their crucial role can also be likened to a doctor
who has to be protected to be able to continue
attending to patients. Peacekeeping should therefore
integrate the security of United Nations personnel into
their rules of engagement and the overall discharge of
peacekeeping mandates.

In conclusion, in crafting mandates, the Council
should consider looking beyond the cessation of
hostilities to sustainable peace, which can be ensured if
peacekeeping is complemented by peace-building and
if a peace-building strategy allows for the maximum

participation of concerned stakeholders - whether
governmental or non-governmental, secular or
sectarian - acting in synergy and in close

coordination, overseen by impartial international civil
servants - the men and women of the United Nations.

