Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his useful and
comprehensive briefing. The hour is late and I will not
attempt to emulate him, either in length or in detail, but
I do want to make a few points which my delegation
feels are relevant to our consideration of the situation
in Kosovo as it now stands.

First, I would like to stress the importance that
the United Kingdom attaches to the decision of the
Kosovo Serbs, embodied by the Serb National Council
of Gracanica, to rejoin the joint administration
structures. That decision is right and brave and
deserves our full recognition.

At the same time, we regret the decision of
Hashim Thaci not to participate in the meetings of the
Joint Interim Administrative Structure (JIAS). As we
said last month to the Kosovo Serb delegation that was
in this Chamber during the briefing given by Special
Representative Kouchner, working with and within
those structures is the best way towards lasting
stability. We very much hope that Mr. Thaci wiIl
reconsider his position soon.

Assistant Secretary-General Annabi rightly
concentrated on the security situation in Kosovo. We
remain concerned about continuing violence against
Serbs and other minorities. Mr. Annabi indicated the
usefulness of statements deploring ethnic violence and
asking for tolerance. He can take it that the United
Kingdom is fully behind those sentiments. Those on
the ground in Kosovo will be aware of the United
Kingdom-led programme of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), Operation Trojan, although it may be less
familiar to some of us in this Chamber. That
programme is doing pioneering work in central Kosovo
to improve the security and quality of life of the Serb
community. We hope others will replicate this example
to help Serb communities elsewhere in Kosovo.

I would like also to draw attention to the vital
importance of expeditiously putting in place
procedures for the holding of municipal elections on
time and on schedule. The Special Representative has
yet to set a date for the elections, but I want to repeat
now, as I said during our last briefing on Kosovo, a
remark about the importance of registration and of
participation in those elections by all the communities
in Kosovo. It is of concern that the registration effort
among the Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Turks has not
yielded the results we had hoped for. I would urge
everyone with an influence to redouble their efforts to
ensure that the registration process is as full and as
complete as possible.

My other comments will refer specifically to the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and, in particular, to staffing issues. We
welcome the decision taken by the Secretary-General
to devolve responsibility for staff recruitment to
UNMIK. We hope this will speed up the recruitment
process and help to alleviate staffing shortages within
UNMIK. It is very important that the Secretariat should
get this right. Adequate staffing is a key and vital
element of making the system work better.

As we have said before, reinforcing the justice
system remains of key importance. I am pleased to be
able to say that UNMIK has accepted two United
Kingdom candidates as prosecutors. In response to
UNMIK's request, we have sent in more than 60
applications for court clerks. We are now gathering
applications for international judges and have received
over 250 expressions of interest. We hope these
applications can be processed quickly and turned into
people on the ground, so that the work that so urgently
needs to be done can be done.

Finally, the United Kingdom is playing its part in
stamping out organized crime, which has had such a
destabilizing effect throughout the Balkan region. We
are on course to deploy 20 police officers and other
specialists to form the core of the UNMIK criminal
intelligence unit in late August. We hope that the final
organizational arrangements, for us and other
contributors to that unit, can be completed quickly.

