Mr. Kakanur (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council.

At the very outset, I would like to express my
delegation's appreciation for the work done by the
delegation of Kuwait on this crucial issue in its
capacity as the Chair of the Informal Working Group
of the Security Council on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

As an organ of the United Nations tasked with the
maintenance of international peace and security on
behalf of all Member States, the work of the Security
Council - and the way it chooses to organize that
work - is a matter of interest to all those who are
affected by its outcomes.

The edifice of the working methods of the Council
is erected on the nebulous expanse of rules of procedure
that remain provisional even 70 years after adoption
and a series of quasi-formal presidential notes. For a
body with responsibilities as significant as those of
the Security Council, the procedure is as political as
its politics. As the challenges to international peace
and security evolve and expand, it is our expectation
that the Council will change with evolving norms to
match with the emerging challenges. The Council's
record, however, has been lagging behind. The working
methods ofthe Council have, in several cases, regressed.
Let me make three points to highlight that issue.

First, I want to touch upon the issue of the
Council's engagement with the General Assembly.
One way in which that engagement is intended to be
meaningful is through discussion of the report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly. While there
have been longstanding demands for such reports to be
more substantive and analytical, those reports are more
often full of the usual factual indicators - how many
times the Council met, how many debates it had and so
on. The way in which those reports are submitted also
causes delays in how and when they are discussed by the
General Assembly, thereby depriving the membership
of an important opportunity to engage with the Council.
Such engagement between the two organs needs to be

restored and strengthened.

Secondly, with regard to the issue of the subterranean
world of subsidiary bodies, we have seen several such
bodies over the years being created and tasked with
crucial responsibilities, such as taking decisions on
listing and delisting individuals and entities from the
various sanctions regimes of the Council. Not only
do those subsidiary bodies have varied and custom-
made working methods, but they also follow obscure
practices that do not have any legal basis in the Charter
of the United Nations or any Council resolutions.

Those committees undertake their work outside
the norms of transparency and hardly any efforts are
taken to make the broader United Nations membership
or the international community aware of their various
deliberations and decisions. For instance, while we
are informed about those committees' decisions to list
individuals and entities, the decisions taken to reject
listing requests submitted by Member States are neither
made public nor conveyed to the larger membership.
Furthermore, just as the efforts of Member States
to designate terrorist leaders go unnoticed by the
membership, the efforts of terrorist leaders trying to
get themselves delisted are also going unnoticed.

Thirdly, I would like to touch upon the issue of
the Council's peacekeeping-related work, the impact
of which is highly visible and relevant to many of us.
While it is a common understanding that listening to the
views and concerns of troop- and police-contributing
countries is crucial for improved implementation of
peacekeeping mandates, it is even more important for
such understanding to be translated into action.

My delegation hopes that the abovementioned
suggestions, as well as those offered by my colleagues,
will find their way into the rulebook of the Council
sooner rather than later.

