Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing the Indonesian delegation's appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this formal meeting to address
the situation in Burundi, an issue of urgent importance to
the international community. We welcome this open debate,
as it provides the opportunity for Member States to express
their views, which will constitute valuable input for the
Council.

The international community is faced with a serious
challenge to legitimacy and rule of law as a result of the
coup d 'e'tat in Burundi, which has halted all efforts to find
a peaceful solution to the conflict, to avert the recurrence
of genocide and to promote national reconciliation,
especially those undertaken by the neighbouring States and

 

spearheaded by former President Nyerere. I would like to
reiterate Indonesia's position that a peaceful solution to
the conflict in Burundi can be attained only through
negotiations and dialogue between all parties. In view of
the dangerous potential for this conflict to spill over to
the neighbouring countries, threatening peace and stability
in the region, my delegation believes that any further
procrastination and ambivalence on the part of the
Security Council will not only have severe consequences
for Burundi, but will also encourage the spread of
instability in the Great Lakes region. It is in this context
that we welcome the regional and international peace
initiatives, particularly the efforts of former President
Nyerere, which we fully support.

The conundrum that Burundians must face in order
to end any further ethnic massacres and to begin
comprehensive negotiations is reflected in the views of
Mr. Nyerere that to be successful, talks must find
solutions for two problems: first, that the Hutu have been
politically disenfranchised since independence 35 years
ago and, secondly, that many Tutsi genuinely fear they
will be massacred if the Hutu come to power. Hence, the
conflict in Burundi stems from the deeply rooted
perception that the survival of each community will be
imperilled unless it secures the reins of power for itself.
In this regard, we share the Secretary-General's View that
the forceful overthrow of the legal Government in
Burundi, which was elected to change the status quo
through democratic means, will not solve the problems of
the country. It symbolizes the continued control of one
ethnic group over the reins of power. Military means have
only provoked further violence as the country has fallen
into a cycle of violence which seems to perpetuate itself.
Clearly, the coup of 25 July 1996 has only complicated
the already dangerous situation by reinforcing the fears on
one side and strengthening extremists on both sides. The
only viable solution can be found in the establishment of
a political mechanism for power-sharing between the
majority and the minority.

To reach this goal, the international community
should send a strong message to the leaders who are now
in control in Bujumbura and take the necessary measures
to ensure that, first, they undertake immediate and
unconditional negotiations with all parties inside and
outside the country; secondly, that they return to
constitutional order and legality; thirdly, that they restore
the National Assembly; and, fourthly, that they unban all
political parties and assure the protection of their
members. It is therefore imperative for the international
community to assist in the effective organization of

 

all-inclusive negotiations towards reaching a political
settlement. It is our considered opinion that once
negotiations have been undertaken in earnest, this would
provide renewed impetus for the resolution of all aspects of
this conflict. The desire of Burundians to break with the
political traditions of the past and begin a dialogue
conducive to national reconciliation has to be respected.
Failure to do so will only permit the present situation of
prevailing insecurity and impunity for violent acts to
continue.

In this context, we commend the swift and unified
response of the countries of the region against those who
are now in power in Burundi. The regional leadership has
indeed taken measures to pressure Burundi to restore
respect for constitutional legitimacy and resume the process
of finding a comprehensive political settlement through
dialogue and negotiations. It is essential for the
international community to lend its support to those
regional initiatives. Failure to do so will send the wrong
signal to Bujumbura.

The international community has a definite role to play
in alleviating the risk of a humanitarian catastrophe in
Burundi. Given this context, my delegation fully supports
the establishment of humanitarian corridors which will not
only alleviate the economic difficulties due to the sanctions,
but may also reduce the risk of further escalation of
tensions due to the shortage of basic humanitarian needs.
We would also like to place our support behind the
development of contingency planning for a rapid
humanitarian response in the event of widespread violence
or a serious deterioration of the situation in Burundi.

Another role the Security Council can play is in
promoting transparency and informing the international
community of events in Burundi, both past and present. In
this regard, we are pleased to note the publication of the
results of the International Commission of Inquiry that
investigated the assassination in 1993 of Burundi's first
elected President and the massacres that followed, in which
both Tutsi and Hutu were killed. We would like to recall
that all persons who committed or authorized the
commission of serious violations of international
humanitarian law are individually responsible for such
violations and should be held accountable. Those
responsible for crimes against humanity and, in this case,
their fellow countrymen should be brought to justice. The
United Nations can also contribute to the edification of an
impartial and independent judicial system, as this would
solve and correct one of the fundamental inequalities and
causes of conflict in Burundi.

 

