Mr. Rai (Papua New Guinea): Small island
developing States, which are sovereign equals at the
United Nations, deserve a seat on the Security Council
on a regular and consistent basis. My delegation is
therefore pleased that the Dominican Republic, a
fellow small island developing State, has been rightly
recognized and empowered to play its part in the
Council. We applaud the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
His Excellency Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, for the
Dominican Republic's leadership in this open debate
on a topical issue that is highly apt, timely and a great
starting point to launch its tenure on the Council.

I would like to align these remarks with those to
be made by the representatives of Nauru and Tuvalu
on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum and the Pacific
small island developing States, respectively, and the
statements made by the representatives of Australia,
Fiji and New Zealand.

In my own country, on the sinking Carteret Islands,
in the autonomous region of Bougainville, the majority
ofthe population has been forcibly dislocated, displaced
and resettled in-country as a consequence of rising
sea levels. Their in-country resettlement continues
to be beset by tension and conflict between them and
the people from the area of settlement over land and
resources. That is due to the land tenure system in my

country, in which the people, not the Government, own
the majority of the land.

We are also seeing the same in the northern part
of our country, where people from Manam Island have
been displaced and relocated as a result of regular
volcanic eruptions. Just imagine the same scenario
multiplied several times over and the attendant
consequences posed to peace and security and in a
transboundary context. Those examples demonstrate
the importance of addressing the root causes of the
threats to peace and security, including from climate
change and natural disasters, both at the national level
and collectively through the United Nations system,
including the Council.

Secondly, we remind the Council that, when we
speak of international peace and security in the remit
of the Council, we should not forget that we are talking
about the lives and livelihoods of "we, the peoples of
the United Nations". The basic needs of humankind are
food, water and air. We are witnessing the diminishing
quality and quantity ofthose basic needs in many places
around the world, which is affecting countless lives and
livelihoods as a consequence of the adverse impacts of
climate change and natural disasters. The recent report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
is unequivocal. Therefore, all aspects and potential
sources of instability and insecurity that threaten the
welfare of all peoples everywhere must be addressed.
That includes the impacts of natural disasters and
climate change on peace and security. Let us not allow
the doubting Thomases ofthis world to be the reason for
not saving ourselves from the onward dangerous march
of climate change and its perils to peace and security.

Thirdly, we value and welcome the continuing
debate in the Council on this seminal topic. However, we
remain seriously concerned about the unacceptable gulf
that continues to exist between the views of the General
Assembly and those of the Security Council. General
Assembly resolution 63/281 marked the first time that
the international community collectively recognized
the security implications of climate change. The
resolution specifically invites the relevant organs of the
United Nations to intensify their efforts in considering
and addressing climate change, including its possible
security implications. Despite the resolution, there
remains minimal concrete or coordinated action at the
international level to address the security implications
of climate change. That needs to be strengthened now,
not in the future.

We welcome the small step in the right direction
taken recently by the Security Council in acknowledging
the adverse impact of climate change and peace and
security in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel region.
We urge that this be viewed in a wider context to cover
many other suffering regions, such as our own.

Finally, let me also congratulate and wish Belgium,
Germany, Indonesia and South Africa well as they
assume their mandate on the Council. We look forward
to working in partnership with them to advance our
cause and address the issue of climate change.

