Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Iwould like
to thank the United States delegation for introducing
today's resolution 2235 (2015), establishing a
Mechanism to investigate the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.

The adoption of the resolution is important for
several reasons. First, it enables the Security Council
to find some unity on Syria during a conflict, the worst
since the twenty-first century began, that has lasted more
than four years. The Council could not remain silent in
the face of the fact that despite two resolutions (2118 (2013) and 2209 (2015)) condemning them, hideously
cruel chemical attacks continued to occur repeatedly
in Syria in 2014 and 2015. Several investigations by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) in The Hague have confirmed cases ofthe use
of chlorine gas in Syria, but without a mandate they
could not identify the perpetrators of the attacks. But
the investigations contained disturbing details about the
systematic presence of helicopters during the attacks,
and we know very well which party to the conflict
is the only one with that kind of capacity. The Joint
Investigative Mechanism we have set up today will
enable us to authorize a neutral and independent body
to establish who has been responsible for the chemical
attacks in Syria in the past few years. It will work in
close cooperation with the OPCW.

Our vote for this Investigative Mechanism is also

important because it marks progress in the efforts to end
impunity for attacks on the Syrian civilian population.
We will be able to identify the perpetrators of these
particularly grave crimes. Without that fear of justice,
the criminals in Syria who are using these inhumane
weapons can rest easy in the certainty that they will
not have to answer for their crimes. In April several
doctors came to testify at an Arria Formula meeting of
the Security Council. Their stories, and the images they
showed at that time of children asphyxiated by chlorine,
still haunt us. We all understood that we owed it to them
and to those who gave us their testimonies to respond.

Finally, this vote is important because it sends a
clear message of deterrence to all the parties to the
Syrian conflict. These inhumane attacks must stop.
The conflict has killed more than 230,000 people,
most of them civilians. Beyond the chemical attacks,
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks on civilians
have continued, such as those happening now in
Zabadani, in violation of international humanitarian law
and Council resolutions. It is crucial that we commit to
ending the violence in Syria and resuming the dialogue
and political process as soon as possible. In that regard,
we are giving our full support to the ongoing efforts of
the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. For
all those reasons France sponsored today's resolution
and voted in favour of it.

