Mr. di Tella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): It is a special pleasure for me to see Italy preside
over this important meeting, especially given the deep
friendship that unites our two countries based on indelible
bonds.

Almost 50 years ago, under the presidency of
Australia, the Security Council met for the first time.

The occasion of an anniversary allows us a brief
respite in the currently endless activity of the Security
Council to attempt to reflect upon what has been achieved
and what remains to be done.
The cold war, which indelibly marked these decades,
found the Security Council to be one of its most prominent
stages. The succession of reciprocal vetoes, the sharpness
of the exchanges, the modest scope of many of its
resolutions and, above all, its silences in the face of serious
crises which affected international peace and security
reflected the narrow margin for action available to the
Council and the United Nations when set against an
overwhelming strategic struggle which shattered the hope
for any multilateral solution.

At the end of the cold war, we all perceived that the
United Nations had before it a new and perhaps unique
opportunity. Barely three years after such a formidable
manifestation of hope, a feeling of doubt and a certain
concern have crept into our hearts once again.

In the face of uncertainty, one might wonder if this
vision of the longed-for opportunity to build a new world
order, a more equitable, compassionate and peaceful
world order, was merely a mirage.

However, in evident contrast with the past, this
Council has not remained indifferent towards situations
that directly affect or threaten international peace and
security.

The crises in Cambodia, Rwanda, Lebanon, Georgia,
Somalia, Mozambique, the former Yugoslavia, Iraq-
Kuwait, Haiti, Angola, the Middle East and many other
areas are systematically addressed in order to find
solutions to just as many human dramas.

Nobody could now argue that this body has been
excluded from the review and solution of serious
international crises as, unfortunately, was once the case.

Whenever there has been an opportunity for it to
participate in the Council, Argentina has tried to make a
specific contribution commensurate with the high
responsibility conferred by membership of the Council.

So it was in the early stages of the Organization,
during the Berlin crisis in 1948. Argentina also
participated actively in the solution of other important
issues addressed by the Council, including decolonization
issues such as the question of Namibia, and the process
following the special session held by the General
Assembly in 1967 which led to the adoption of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967), a decisive landmark in the
solution of the Middle East question. In all these
instances, and also in the current session, we strive to act
fairly and according to the spirit and the letter of the
Charter.

The central role of peace-keeping operations in the
work of the Security Council cannot be overlooked. This
issue cannot be sufficiently stressed, since peace-keeping
operations embody the highest hopes, as well as the
legitimate frustrations of many.

Sixteen ongoing operations, 80 States involved and
more than 60,000 troops in the field are unmistakable
signs of a new willingness and an unprecedented
commitment to peace-keeping operations on the part of
most Members of the international community.

 

Nevertheless, there has been some criticism of peace-
keeping operations in the light of limited perspectives. In
response to those objections and the easy scepticism they
harbour, it is always worth stressing once again that the
incomparable legitimacy of a multinational force acting on
the instructions of this Council is far preferable to other
alternatives which, sooner or later, lead to unilateral
solutions.

Argentina is supporting the international community in
this effort. We have generously contributed more than
9,000 military personnel, equipment, field hospitals, vessels
and aircraft which, far from our borders, have proved with
concrete action the authenticity of our commitment to the
strengthening of the United Nations.

Our participation in peace-keeping operations, which
we hereby reaffirm and to which we commit ourselves for
the future, is a clear example of the way in which all
countries can contribute to this endeavour, involving
themselves in the solution of international crises and giving
their armed forces a central role in the global process.
Peace-keeping operations are pivotal in the efforts towards
a genuine system of collective security.

Times have changed, and so have the challenges at
hand, challenges which the Council will undoubtedly have
to address. International terrorism is one of the scourges in
this new international scenario of increasing
interdependence and globalization. Nobody is safe from its
attacks. Issues and problems apparently foreign to a region
of the world suddenly emerge in it with brutal force, taking
innocent lives in distant corners of the planet which might
mistakenly have been considered safe from these crises.

My country drew the attention of the Security Council
to this issue following the occurrence of horrible terrorist
attacks. Since then, new and recurrent episodes have only
confirmed our fears. International terrorism knows no
boundaries, erodes the power of Sates and destabilizes
whole regions. It is a challenge that the international
community has not yet faced with the determination and
cohesion necessary for its prevention and eradication.

Much to our dismay, international terrorism is a new
and insidious item on the agenda of international security,
which the Security Council cannot ignore.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
related technologies is another new and disturbing
development that the Council has to address. In the
statement issued by the Council at its meeting at the level
of Heads of State and Government held in 1992, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction was rightly
considered a threat to international peace and security.
However, apart from such an honest definition of the
problem, the Council has done little to address an issue
defined as a real and present threat.

Argentina has tried to strengthen the role of the
Council in these areas through specific initiatives.

In the same vein, we have drawn the attention of the
Council to more sensitive issues, such as the illicit traffic
of weapons. In our view, only concerted and coherent
action on the part of the international community can be
an effective antidote to these illegal and potentially
destabilizing practices.

Much has been said about the functioning of the
Council and how it could be revitalized in the present
circumstances.

During its work on the Council, our delegation has
consistently promoted changes in the Council's
procedures, by encouraging consultations, supporting its
missions and establishing greater dialogue between the
States that contribute to peace-keeping operations. The
aim of all this is to increase both the efficiency and the
transparency of the Council's work.

We believe that the fundamental value that must be
preserved in this context is the effectiveness of the
Council's action, which must be timely and speedy in its
response to serious international crises. The Council's
action can be strengthened through restructuring only if
that restructuring is realistic and based on objective
criteria. This is how our predecessors proceeded 50 years
ago, when they endowed the Council with a structure that
was suited to the demands of the reality they then faced.

In this context, we need broad consensus so that we
can study imaginative formulas designed to increase
representativeness. This could be achieved through
rotation mechanisms, enabling countries, from all the
various regions, that are most active and interested in
international peace and security issues to accede to
membership of the Security Council more frequently.
Such mechanisms would allow the countries that now
cannot hope to gain access to the Council for many years
to do so more frequently.

Fifty years ago, the United Nations embarked on a
journey, determined to build a more just and peaceful

 

world. Today, we recall that almost visionary determination,
and we are fortunate to do so in an organization that is
vibrant with issues to address and problems to solve, and
that is deeply involved in finding solutions to major
international crises and increasingly committed to economic
development, human rights and social and environmental
problems.

Only at the United Nations does success depend on
collaboration. Once success is achieved, then it belongs to
everyone. Let us preserve and strengthen the efficiency and
agility of this forum of peace.

