The United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) is crucial for stabilizing the Abyei area as long as there is no lasting political settlement and hence no governance structure that can address the many challenges for the population arising from a lack of socioeconomic development, humanitarian needs and rising criminality and intercommunal violence. The mission must be adequately equipped to address these challenges. In this context, let me express our gratitude to Ethiopia for contributing high-quality peacekeepers. Regarding the forthcoming UNISFA mandate renewal, we agree with the Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandate should be extended by six months. However, as we have said here again and again, the mission must be calibrated to effectively respond to the changing realities on the ground. The mission must have the capacity to address the rise in criminal activity; support community- level peace processes, mediation and dialogue; and advance its support to the African Union Commission and the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, as well as to the two parties. To address rising crime rate and deteriorating overall security situation, we underline the urgent need to strengthen the police component. We note with great concern and disappointment that the mandate adaptations made by the Security Council have not been implemented. On a positive note, female officers account for almost 30 per cent of the police component. This percentage should be maintained once the enlargement of this component is finally implemented. We strongly urge the Sudan to issue visas without further delay, in particular to allow the mandated increase in UNISFA's police personnel as soon as the current restrictions imposed in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) allow for their deployment. We also see a continued need to strengthen the civilian component of the mission in order to support the efforts of the communities in Abyei to reconcile and create enduring peaceful relations. Particular support is needed for initiatives for the full and effective participation of women at all stages of the peace process. The mandate needs to ensure continued effective human rights monitoring, including of any sexual and gender-based violence and violations and abuses of human rights, including those committed against women and children. We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's recommendation to deploy more human rights expertise to UNISFA. Regarding the political process, Abyei needs a political solution and both parties - the Governments of the Sudan and of South Sudan - are in the driver's seat. Sustainable peace in both countries, which are so closely intertwined, cannot be achieved without a constructive solution to the Abyei question. To date, little progress has been made by the parties on the issues of border demarcation or the process leading to a final status of Abyei. We commend the efforts of the UNISFA leadership to convene peace conferences in the Abyei Area to bring together the traditional leaders of both the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya and urge the parties to support these efforts. We further urge the parties to jointly investigate the attacks of 19 and 22 January, which left 36 civilians dead, and to jointly bring the perpetrators to justice. Such action would be a sign of responsible ownership by both parties. The question of Abyei cannot be solved by the international community but only by the Governments of the Sudan and of South Sudan. We offer our support, but local stakeholders must not operate under the false impression that they can hide behind the international community forever. We encourage regional actors to actively engage the parties on the question of Abyei. We would welcome more detailed reporting in the Secretary-General's reports on the engagement of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel and of the Special Envoy. There is a need to make tangible progress and define a finite timeline. We call on the parties to hold regular meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and to consult on Abyei at the ministerial level. To conclude, echoing the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, it is paramount that differences be resolved with a view to dedicating all efforts to curbing the spread of COVID-19.
