Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by welcoming the presence of the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom at today's meeting, as
well as the initiative taken by the British presidency to
organize this meeting on South Sudan. I would also like
to thank the speakers for their briefings. In particular,
I commend the Secretary-General for the strength of
his personal commitment to South Sudan. France fully
subscribes to the priorities he has just outlined and
fully supports him in his efforts to promote a return to
peace and stability in that deeply scarred country.

After three years of conflict, the situation in South
Sudan remains a serious source of concern. Famine is
now added to the violence, atrocities and human rights
violations that have been endured by the people of
South Sudan for far too long, and to a large extent it is
a result of those other problems. We cannot and should
not remain inactive in the face of this situation. We
should pursue three objectives.

First, priority should be given to a cessation of
hostilities and access to vulnerable populations. The
responsibility rests with all of the parties to the conflict
and, first and foremost, with the Sudan People's
Liberation Army and the Sudan People's Liberation
Army in Opposition. They must finally respect the
multiple ceasefire agreements that they have reached
and that they violate constantly. The emergence of
militias and the expansion of the combat zones make
that first step all the more essential.

The cessation of hostilities must be accompanied
by an immediate end to the obstructions that have been
inflicted on the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and humanitarian actors. The attacks,
violence, harassment and looting to which the Blue
Helmets and humanitarian actors fall victim are contrary
to international humanitarian law. We salute the courage
and dedication of those men and women in their tireless
efforts to help the most vulnerable. The Council must
be ready to impose sanctions on all who engage in such
attacks against them. We also strongly regret that the
protection and assistance efforts of both UNMISS and
humanitarian personnel have been subject to access
restrictions and bureaucratic barriers. The Government
of South Sudan must make every effort to put an end to
such obstructions and to facilitate these people's work.
Only progress on those two fronts - an end to violence
and the facilitation of humanitarian access - will
make it possible to establish an environment conducive
to peaceful political dialogue.

My second point is about the implementation of a
political settlement, which is the only possible long-term
solution to the country's challenges. In that respect, we
know the terms of the political solution, for they are
contained in the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan ofAugust 2015.
That document provides a comprehensive and detailed
road map that must be implemented in order to restore
security and stability in the country. In that regard,
we welcome the work of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission (JMEC) under the leadership
of President Mogae. It is essential to continue to
monitor the peace agreement and to firmly remind the
Transitional Government of National Unity - itself
the result of the Agreement - and all other South
Sudanese stakeholders of their responsibilities. Again,
it is unacceptable that those who have committed to
implementing those measures do not respect their word.

In that context, following the example of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union, the Council must recall
its expectations regarding the implementation of
the measures provided for in the peace agreement,
including and perhaps primarily in the field of security.
We therefore welcome the continued engagement of
IGAD and the African Union, in full coordination with
the United Nations. The mission entrusted to President
Alpha Konare to advance the implementation of the
peace agreement and to promote the inclusiveness of
the national dialogue is essential in that regard. We call
on all parties to work with him to that end. Any national
dialogue would be in vain, even counterproductive,
if it detracted from the implementation of the peace
agreement and was not fully inclusive and conducted so
as to assure its autonomy, its impartiality and the trust of
all participants. In that regard, I would like to recall that
France is of the view that instituting an arms embargo
would improve the prospects for a political solution. By
restricting access to weapons used to commit abuses
against civilians, an embargo would help to lower the
level of violence and foster an environment conducive
to peaceful political dialogue.

Thirdly and lastly, we must remember that the
cycle of violence and suffering can be broken only
if real progress is made in the areas of justice and
accountability. As Ms. Sunday said, women have
suffered disproportionately in this conflict. The use of
rape as a weapon of war, which has been abundantly
documented by the United Nations, the African Union
and civil-society organizations, may constitute a war
crime or even a crime against humanity. Violence
against children and the recruitment of child soldiers
are equally revolting violations.

Faced with the current inadequacies in the efforts
to combat impunity in South Sudan, we must remind
the perpetrators of those crimes that they will be
held to account. We can help to prevent such crimes
by considering the punishment of those who commit
or order them. We should also support judicial
accountability efforts. Again, the peace agreement
provides for mechanisms to that end, including the
establishment of a hybrid court. We call for progress in
that direction and reiterate our encouragement for the
work of the African Union along those lines. If there is
no improvement in this area, violence and human rights
violations will only be repeated in South Sudan again
and again.

Let us be realistic. The tragedy in South Sudan may
yet worsen. Butifthe parties assume their responsibilities
and the Council remains fully mobilized, that does not
have to be a foregone conclusion.

