Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)(S/2002/62), submitted
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999). My delegation also
thanks Mr. Guehenno for his introduction of the report
and for his very detailed briefing on the situation in
Kosovo.

Further, my delegation welcomes the election of a
legislature and the subsequent efforts to forge a
governing majority in Kosovo. We thank UNMIK for
having made internal adjustments for the handover of
significant powers to the provisional institutions of
self-government and for having ensured that the
incoming administration will have a fully funded
budget so that it can discharge all of the responsibilities
that will fall to it at the end of the United Nations
mandate. That would also help ensure security and the
establishment of authority.

The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
wishes also to note its pleasure at the November
election of the Kosovo Assembly; we are glad that this
was generally considered a success. As the report
notes, no party gained enough seats in the Assembly to
govern alone, and a coalition must now be formed,
bringing together several of the Kosovo parties. That
coalition would represent all the sectors and groups in
Kosovo in a balanced manner, and would be able to
take the reins of self-government. It would carry out
legislative and executive functions, ensure the return of
refugees and displaced persons, and make sure that
security and stability are provided in Kosovo.

My delegation further welcomes the signing of
the Common Document, which will provide a solid
foundation for relations between UNMIK and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

Because security in Kosovo is a very important
issue, we agree with the statement in paragraph 43 of
the report that UNMIK and KFOR will do what they
can to eliminate weapons and prevent violence. Here,
the newly elected Assembly members have a particular
responsibility to create conditions conducive to
coexistence among the various sectors of the Kosovo
population. Those Assembly members must also create
conditions conducive to improving inter-communal
relations and promoting reconciliation, which must
begin in the Assembly in order to set an example for
the entire population of Kosovo.

In that connection, we entirely agree with the
representatives of Mexico and of Singapore about the
importance of education in bringing together the people
of Kosovo so that conflict can be brought to an end.

Let me also mention the question of reviewing
the duration of UNMIK's mandate with a view to
making a genuine tangible improvement in the lives of
the people of Kosovo.

We pay tribute to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo for its achievements
during a critical phase in its mandate. UNMIK is
working to encourage and assist with self-government
in line with the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
We agree with the observation in paragraph 44 of the
report of the Secretary-General that UNMIK is
reaching a critical stage in the implementation of its
mandate and that the next phase will require careful
management and the continued, strong commitment of
the international community.

