Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April and to wish you every success in
your work. I also wish to thank and commend the
representative of Guinea for the effective way in which
he conducted the Council's work last month.

Colombia fully endorses the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Peru on behalf of the
Rio Group. However, the Government of Colombia has
decided to speak in this open debate of the Security
Council because of the importance of this issue to our
country, which is waging an unrelenting struggle
against terrorism and which seeks international
solidarity in this endeavour.

I want to begin by thanking the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, for his briefing and for his intensive work.

At the meeting on 20 February 2003, Colombia
highlighted the two inseparable aspects - internal and
external - that exist in our conflict today. With regard
to the internal aspect, we stated that we recognized our
obligations. Colombia has undertaken the struggle
against terrorism within a democratic framework, in
accordance with its Constitution and laws, the
international treaties on human rights and international
humanitarian law. Our democratic security policy seeks
to protect all Colombians: civilians, union members,
human rights defenders, businesspeople and workers.
Democracy in security means security for all.

But there is also an external aspect that is key in
the fight against terrorism. It has been shown that the
international financial networks used by terrorists are
similar to those used by the illicit drug and arms
traffickers. On 20 January 2003, the Security Council,
meeting at the ministerial level, issued a declaration,
annexed to resolution 1456 (2003), which rightly
reaffirmed that,

"terrorists must also be prevented from making
use of other criminal activities such as
transnational organized crime, illicit drugs and
drug trafficking, money-laundering and illicit
arms trafficking".

For that reason, we wish to thank the Government
of Canada for having included on its list of terrorist
organizations the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army
(ELN) and the United Self-defence Groups of
Colombia (AUC), illegal armed groups that direct their
activities against the rule of law and civilians in my
country. This constitutes ethical, political and legal
support that indicates a procedure which we hope will
be taken into account by all countries wishing to assist
us in our fight against terror.

Recognizing that reality is fundamentally
important for Colombia, where terrorism is supported
by such international criminal activities, which are
fundamentally related to the global problem of illicit
drugs. Our experience has taught us that the
international community's struggle against the global
drug problem, in which the principle of shared
responsibility has been accepted, is a key factor in the
fight against terrorism. Similarly, success in combating
terrorism will depend on the extent to which we also
make the principle of shared responsibility effective in
this area. Combating terrorism is the responsibility of
us all. In this fight, every State must undertake a task
in keeping with its circumstances and in accordance
with its capacity to carry it out.

On the issue of shared responsibility, Colombia
calls on the international community to wage a full
fight against the criminal activities that feed terrorism
in our country. As President Uribe of Colombia has
said,
"We have the moral authority to ask for
international cooperation because we are
committed to respecting human rights, because
our democracy is one that is governed by the rule
of law and not by the whim of rulers. We have the
moral authority to ask for international
cooperation against terrorism because we have
never rejected dialogue or humanitarian
agreements. The international community is
aware of our unswerving decision to defeat
violence and of our infinite readiness for
reconciliation in sincere peace".

In reaffirming our support for the work that is
being done by the Security Council and its Counter-
Terrorism Committee in combating this universal
scourge, I wish to restate our gratitude to Ambassador
Greenstock for the important work he has done and to
state our certainty that the Ambassador of the Kingdom
of Spain, Inocencio Arias, will continue, with fresh
impetus, to pursue the important tasks of the
Committee and the Security Council. Both of these
bodies have the tremendous responsibility of meeting
our peoples' expectations concerning their historic role
in combating terrorism in all regions of the world.

In conclusion, Colombia reiterates its call for
cooperation on the part of the international community,
not in terms of funds but in terms of legal and police
activities, such as those called for in resolution 1373
(2001), in order successfully to combat terrorism. The
nature of acts of terrorism should not be determined
solely by the location in which they are committed or
by their global or national scope, but also by the origin
of the phenomena that trigger them and the monies that
finance them. In this area of international cooperation,
the United Nations has the capacity, experience and
moral authority to assist the regions of the world
afflicted by the scourge of terrorism.

