Mr. Nishida (Japan): Madam President, I would
like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to
address the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East. Japan continues to be deeply concerned
about the evolution of the situation in Syria over the
past year. We condemn the Syrian authorities' wide-
scale use of force and violations of human rights
against their own citizens, and we profoundly deplore
the deaths of more than 9,000 people as a result of
violence.

Japan strongly supports the Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and commends his mediation efforts.
We reiterate our call on the Syrian authorities to
unconditionally implement Mr. Annan's six-point
proposal in its entirety in order to bring an end to all
violence and human rights violations, secure
humanitarian access, and facilitate a Syrian-led
political transition based upon the Syrian people's
legitimate aspirations to democracy.

Japan welcomes the adoption of resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012) as important steps in the
international community's concerted efforts to address
the situation in Syria, and highly commends the
dedicated work of all those concerned, in particular the
members of the Security Council, the Secretary-
General and the Joint Special Envoy. At the same time,
we express deep concern over the escalation of
violence in recent days and the failure of the Syrian
authorities to fulfil their commitments. We call upon
all parties in Syria to refrain from resorting to force of
any kind, so that a complete cessation of armed
violence may be fulfilled and the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria may thereby carry out its
mandate fully and effectively. In this connection, we
underline the importance of ensuring the safety of
deployed observers, and call upon the Syrian
authorities to fully cooperate with the relevant United
Nations personnel in order to ensure the effective
operation of the Mission.

Japan is also concerned about the humanitarian
situation of the Syrian people, including internally
displaced persons and refugees in neighbouring
countries. For this reason, the Government of Japan
provided $3 million in emergency grant aid in March
through the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. We underline the
importance of allowing humanitarian personnel full and
unimpeded access to people in need of assistance.

With regard to the Middle East peace process,
Japan firmly supports a two-State solution in which
Israel and a future independent Palestinian State would
live side by side in peace, security and mutual
recognition. A two-State solution can be achieved only
through sincere negotiations between the parties
concerned.

In this connection, Japan supports the elements of
the Quartet's statement of 23 September 2011, which
was reaffirmed by the Quartet principals two weeks
ago. Japan also pays respect to the leadership of the
Government of Jordan in advancing dialogue between
the parties. We strongly expect that the recent efforts,
including the correspondence from President Abbas to
Prime Minister Netanyahu, will lead to the early
resumption of direct negotiations.

Japan does not recognize any measures that
prejudge the outcome of final status negotiations, and
in order to build mutual trust calls upon both sides to
refrain from any provocative actions. Both parties must
abide by their obligations under previous agreements.
Japan reiterates its strong call on Israel to immediately
freeze its settlement activities in the West Bank,
including in East Jerusalem, which are a violation of
international law. At the same time, we call upon the
Palestinian Authority to continue its efforts to improve
security and fulfil its commitments to ceasing violence
and working against incitement.

Japan supports the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority towards establishing statehood. Prime
Minister Noda conveyed our commitment to
strengthening assistance in that regard directly to
President Abbas during his visit to Japan earlier this
month. Japan also calls upon the Government of Israel
to support the fiscal stability of the Palestinian
Authority, including by conducting sustainable tax
transfers to the Palestinian Authority.

