Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank the South African delegation for
organizing today's debate. I also want to put on record
my sincere personal thanks to you, Madam President,
and to President Jacob Zuma for presiding over this
meeting. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and the representatives of the African Union
(AU) and the subregional organizations for their
valuable statements. The presence of so many high-
level dignitaries from the capitals testifies to the
importance of today's discussion.

We appreciate the initiative of the South African
delegation to organize a workshop of the interested
stakeholders in preparation for today's meeting. It put
in clear terms the steps that are required for enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. These are also reflected in the draft
resolution that is before the Council for adoption today
(S/2012/25), which we have the privilege of
co-sponsoring.

A much as two-thirds of the active items on the
Council's agenda concern Africa. About three-fourths
of the Council's time is spent on African issues. It
would therefore be no exaggeration to say that the
success of the efforts of this Council in Africa will
determine in significant measure its overall
effectiveness in the implementation of its Charter-
mandated role as the principal organ of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

In this connection, it is important for us to listen
to Africa and its organizations so that the Council's
activities will not only be based on Africa's needs, but
will also complement those of African countries and
3
organizations. Cooperation with Africa will also enable
the Council to act with better understanding of the
situation on the ground, which would establish Africa's
ownership of the solutions and promote lasting peace
and security on the African continent.

Indeed, Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter recognizes the importance of regional
organizations and their role in matters relating to
international peace and security. The Charter also
provides a broad framework for the Council's
cooperation with regional organizations. We therefore
support the strengthening of partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union.

We think that this partnership should be based on
long-term strategic and operational perspectives, taking
into consideration the complementarity of the strengths
that the two organizations possess. Focus should be on
capacity-building of the African Peace and Security
Architecture so that the AU becomes a more effective
and capable partner of the United Nations system. In
this connection, we welcome the establishment of the
United Nations Office to the African Union, which
should facilitate systematic and broad-based
cooperation between the two organizations. We expect
the Office to expeditiously establish formalized
structures of interaction with different AU bodies and
subregional organizations. Other steps, such as the
annual dialogue between the Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council, the Secretary-General's 10-year
capacity-building programme for the AU, linkages
between the United Nations and AU Secretariats, inter
alia, are also welcome and should facilitate regular
consultation.

The African Union has already proven beyond
any doubt its ability to address African problems. The
AU High-level Implementation Panel for the Sudan has
facilitated dialogue between the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We continue to
support its efforts for peace and security in Darfur
through the Darfur political process. Similarly, the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is the
mainstay of international efforts to stabilize the
situation in Somalia. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has greatly helped
in the improvement of the situation there, including
through community welfare programmes.

If these missions are to succeed and other joint
missions undertaken in the future, it is necessary that
there be better understanding between the United
Nations and the AU at the strategic and operational
levels. The Council should be more forthcoming in
extending support to the AU in the critical areas of
financial resources, force multipliers and force
enablers, as may be required by the missions.

If cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU is to be effective and enduring, it is necessary
that the Council not adopt a selective approach to this
cooperation. Partnership should not be restricted only
to the areas of the Council's convenience, but also
extended to areas where there may be differences, and
be based on mutual respect. This requires a mindset
change in approach and demands the expansion of the
permanent membership to make the Council reflective
of contemporary realities and increased representation
of developing countries, including those of Africa. This
will not only make the Council more representative,
but also enhance its ability to successfully address the
challenges that the international community faces
today.

Conscious of the AU's role in handling African
issues, not only those concerning peace and security
but also those related to social and development
matters, India has institutionalized its cooperation with
the African Union. I would like to recall here the
historic visit of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to
Addis Ababa in May 2011 to participate in the second
Africa-India Forum Summit, signifying the importance
of our relations with African States. Given the
similarity of our objectives with those of the African
Union, the Summit further deepened the India-AU
development partnership, as well as peace and security
cooperation.

India has contributed $2 million for AMISOM
operations - $1.5 million through the AU - without
any caveats. India is also providing credit lines of
$5 billion for the next three years to help Africa
achieve its development goals. India will provide an
additional $700 million for the establishment of new
institutions and training programmes, in consultation
with the African Union and its institutions. India is also
offering 22,000 scholarships in various areas of
capacity-building to African nationals during the three
year period from 2011 to 2014.

All those activities will enhance the AU's
institutional capacity, and help the Council as well in
12-20579
dealing with African issues, in partnership with the
AU.

