Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): It is most
unfortunate that the Security Council could not reach
agreement on authorizing a military observer component
to the United Nations Human Rights Verification Mission
in Guatemala, the Mission that we call MINUGUA. After
36 years of war, the Guatemalan people have the chance
to fulfil their rich potential. The Guatemalan Government,
the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG),
the United Nations, the Friends of Guatemala and others
have invested significant diplomatic and financial
resources in bringing peace to Guatemala. We regret that
one member of the Council was not able to give the
larger interest of regional peace and security the priority
it deserves.

Since democratic government was restored in
Guatemala in 1985, the United States has supported a
negotiated settlement of the conflict. We are proud to
have served as a member of the Group of Friends since
1994, when the United Nations took over moderation of
the negotiations. The international community has made
peace in Guatemala a priority. The tireless efforts of the
Government of Guatemala and the Guatemalan National
Revolutionary Unity, together with the international
community, have now come to fruition. On 29 December
in Guatemala City, the Government of Guatemala and
URNG ended their nation's long, bloody civil war, which

 

has cost more than 100,000 lives. The realization of a
comprehensive peace in Guatemala is a tremendous
achievement. It ends the last conflict in Central America
and the longest-running armed conflict in the hemisphere.

The most immediate need in Guatemala is to
demobilize 3,000 URNG guerrillas and help them return to
civilian life. Unfortunately, this body failed to agree upon
the Secretary-General's recommendation for the
establishment of a military observer group to monitor that
demobilization.

URNG and the Guatemalan Government agree on the
need for a short demobilization period that will quickly get
URNG fighters back into productive civilian life. The
United States and the other Friends of Guatemala will
continue to seek a means to that end.

The reconstruction of Guatemala's infrastructure and
reconciliation in Guatemalan society will take time and
substantial international support: financial and moral.
Donors will meet in Brussels later this month to coordinate
international assistance to Guatemala. The United States has
already begun an ambitious post-war assistance programme
that will provide millions of dollars in additional aid as part
of a process to create a new, peaceful and prosperous
Guatemala.

Despite this setback today, we remain determined that
those who support peace in Guatemala will find a way to
support the noble ends of the Guatemalan peace process.

