Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, I would like to thank you for having
organized this emergency meeting, following the
serious deterioration of the security situation in
Kosovo. I would also like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro and to thank
him for having come to New York to give us an update
on the situation in Kosovo.

My country is following with serious concern the
developments in Kosovo after the acts of violence
provoked by the inter-ethnic clashes between Kosovo
Albanians and Kosovo Serbs that have left 22 dead and
several hundred wounded. We condemn these acts of
violence, which, if unchecked, will stir up inter-ethnic
rivalries, exacerbate the feelings of alienation between
Kosovar communities, revive the confrontational
mindset that led the country to the brink of chaos, and
compromise everything that has been patiently and
painstakingly achieved in Kosovo.

As a result, my country calls on all parties to put
an end to these lethal clashes and to work together for a
return to calm and an improvement of the security
situation. Maintaining order and a return to normalcy
in Kosovo are also the responsibility of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and KFOR. They must fully shoulder that
responsibility. The reinforcements dispatched to
Kosovo in order to stabilize the situation and restore
calm in the province are thus very encouraging. The
police investigation currently being conducted to
determine who was responsible for these confrontations
and to bring the perpetrators to justice will help
restraint to prevail and put an end to these clashes.

This abrupt outbreak of violence is especially
regrettable since it follows striking progress and a
significant improvement in the political and operational
conditions in Kosovo and since it comes at a time when
intense efforts have been deployed to build a Kosovo
which is multi-ethnic, tolerant, democratic and
prosperous, in which the rule of law prevails and
human rights are respected.

However, these tragic incidents have revealed the
ongoing nature of these ethnic schisms and have
reinforced, at the same time, our deep conviction that
there is no alternative to a multi-ethnic and tolerant
society in Kosovo. Kosovars have no other choice than
to live together, harmoniously and in peace with one
another. Multi-ethnic integration in Kosovo obviously
requires that reconciliation and understanding among
the different Kosovar communities be promoted and
that differences and resentments resulting from the
period of confrontation be overcome. Reconciliation
among all segments of Kosovar society is the key to
any progress towards that end. This aspect must
henceforth be one of the international community's
highest priorities, and the international community will
need to support fully the reconciliation process.

To conclude, I would like to take this opportunity
to express our full support for the efforts of UNMIK,
KFOR and the provisional authorities to establish
stability and to allow for a return to calm in Kosovo.

