My delegation wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. We are confident in your wisdom and able leadership. I thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/946) and his statement. I also thank the UN-Women Executive Director, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo- Ngcuka, and other briefers for their important briefings. Myanmar welcomes the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. We have witnessed significant progress in the promotion of the women and peace and security agenda since the adoption of the resolution 1325 (2000), 20 years ago. The meaningful participation and representation of women in conflict resolution and prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding as well as in the protection of women and girls in armed conflict has never been more relevant. It is encouraging to see a positive trend in the number of women peacekeepers in United Nations peacekeeping operations around the world. However, challenges remain to the meaningful participation of women in the area of peace and security. The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) offers the Security Council and Member States an opportunity to take stock of past achievements, highlight gaps and further identify challenges for advancement in the women and peace and security agenda. After decades of successive authoritarian rule, isolation and ongoing internal armed conflicts, Myanmar has relentlessly been striving to build a peaceful, prosperous and democratic nation. The civilian Government has put gender equality and women's empowerment at the heart of national development strategies towards a people-oriented democratic society. The Government is therefore encouraging the participation of more women in the democratic transition as well as in the ongoing peace process. In this regard, the Government of Myanmar has undertaken the following initiatives to promote and protect the rights of women and girls and advance the women and peace and security agenda. The 10-year National Strategic Plan for the Advancement of Women 2013-2022 is based on the 12 priority areas of the Beijing Platform for Action and the principles of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which include women's empowerment; preventing violence against women and girls; women's participation in politics and public office; women and peace and security; and gender mainstreaming. The Myanmar Sustainable Development Plan, adopted in 2018, is a comprehensive social, economic and environmental policy reform agenda dedicated to supporting the rights of individuals, especially women and girls, and to supporting gender equity, increased women's participation in politics and the economy, and social inclusion. Myanmar is committed to, and implements, a zero-tolerance policy against sexual violence. Accordingly, we have carried out domestic legal reforms to better protect the rights of women and girls. In this regard, the prevention and protection of violence against women law has been drafted and will soon be enacted by the Parliament. The new law reinforces protection of women from all forms of violence, including domestic and sexual violence. To demonstrate its strong commitment to addressing conflict-related sexual violence, the Government of Myanmar signed, in December 2018, a joint communique with the United Nations on prevention of and response to conflict- related sexual violence. Then, in March 2019, the National Committee on Prevention and Response to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence was established to implement the joint communique. With technical assistance from the United Nations, we have drafted a national workplan. Furthermore, one-stop women's support centres and 24-hour helplines have been set up to provide women and girls with physical, legal, psychological and social support. The one-stop women's support centres and helplines are operating 24/7 during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic to provide crucial services, as women and girls are more vulnerable during lockdowns. Victims of sexual violence are also provided with a one-time financial support for rehabilitation. To assist with case management for gender-based violence, a new set of standard operating procedures has been developed since 2019, using a survivor-centred approach. Clinical guidelines are also being developed for responding to rape. The child rights law, which was adopted in July 2019, criminalizes sexual violence, requiring the Government, the Tatmadaw (military) and armed groups to take necessary measures to protect children from sexual violence. Moreover, Myanmar submits reports to the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women on the protection of the rights of women and prevention of sexual violence against women and girls, and is also included in the Universal Periodic Review process of the Human Rights Council. With the aim of ending ethnic armed conflict and ushering in a democratic federal union, the Government has been convening the Union Peace Conference, 2lst-Century Panglong, since 2016. Even in the midst of the formidable challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government successfully convened the fourth session of the Peace Conference, in August 2020, to advance the peace process. Since the gender perspective is an important part in the process, it is integrated into the Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement, signed in 2015. During the third session of the Union Peace Conference, 2lst-Century Panglong, four gender agreements were included in the political sector basic principle of Part II of the Union Accord. The Government is also promoting the meaningful participation of women in the peace process. The Government is implementing the Women, Peace and Development Action Plan for the Advancement of Women in Kayin, Kayar and Mon States (2020-2022), in line with resolution (1325). In response to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire during the pandemic, the Tatmadaw (military) announced a three-month nationwide ceasefire from 10 May to 31 August 2020, which was extended twice, until end of October, to help fight the COVID-19 pandemic. The unilateral ceasefire applies to all conflict areas except where terrorist groups have taken positions. In terms of accountability, the Independent Commission of Enquiry submitted its final report to the President in January this year. The report was based on interviews with close to 1,500 witnesses and came out with findings and recommendations for further investigation and prosecution. The Attorney General is heading up the criminal investigation and prosecution body mandated to investigate and prosecute the perpetrators based on the findings of the Independent Commission of Enquiry. The military has also set up a court of inquiry to investigate the allegations of human rights violations during the security operations in Rakhine state. There have been three courts martial. Moreover, an investigation of possible broader patterns of violations in northern Rakhine in 2016 and 2017 has started. Such alleged broader patterns could include an inadequate distinction between civilians and Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army fighters, the disproportionate use of force, a failure to prevent the plundering of property and destruction, or acts of forcible displacement of civilians. Despite all the formidable challenges it is facing, the Government of Myanmar is committed to enhancing human rights for all its citizens, especially the most vulnerable groups, such as women and girls. Let me conclude by reaffirming our commitment to promoting gender equality and women's empowerment towards achieving national objectives as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We will continue to engage and work constructively with relevant United Nations agencies to achieve our common objective of advancing the women and peace and security agenda.
