Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We would like to tell you, Sir, that you can
count on our full support. We also wish to thank the
delegation of Guatemala for its successful leadership
in October.

We thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing and for
the fourth report on the investigation of the situation in
Libya pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). We support
the efforts of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to
bring to justice those involved in committing serious
crimes during the events in Libya. However, judging by
the report, the work in that area has started to become
bogged down recently.

We are of the view that instituting proceedings
against people who have committed the most serious
crimes under international law is undoubtedly a
matter for the State in question. The jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court complements but does
not replace national jurisdiction. In the case of Libya,
specifically, it is becoming increasingly clear that the
continuing effects of the crisis in that country are a
serious obstacle on the path to achieving nationaljustice.
Attempts to impose alien models of State-development
and State-building on Libyan society and to impose
values that disregard local political and legal traditions
and culture have resulted in a serious absence of
stability and lack of viable Government institutions and
of the rule of law in general.

The local revolutionary military leaders who
seized power on the ground understand the rule of law
each in their own way and, to put it mildly, extremely
specifically. They have no wish to submit to the central
authorities, which are simply not in a position to
bring them under their control. A stark example of the
inability of the official Libyan authorities to uphold the
rule of law was the detention in June for almost a month
in Zintan of a group of ICC officials, which is a matter

of serious concern to us. We seriously doubt that in such
circumstances the country's authorities can ensure fair
legal proceedings that meet high international standards
in the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. Nor do we completely understand what
prevented Libya from sending the ICC confirmation on
the progress of the national investigation into those two
individuals. We believe that the Prosecutor and Judges
of the International Criminal Court should investigate
this situation carefully.

We regret that during the past six months the
ICC has also been unable to make any progress with
the investigation of the alleged crimes committed by
officials of the States that participated in the operations
in Libya under NATO's leadership. We believe that
it is important that the ICC continue to assess the
information received through the United Nations
International Commission of Inquiry on Libya from
non-governmental humanitarian organizations and
other channels.

We welcome the Prosecutor's information on the
ongoing ICC consideration of additional materials
that could serve as a basis for instituting new criminal
proceedings within the framework of the Libyan
dossier. We emphasize the importance of conducting an
objective investigation into wrongful acts committed
by any participants in the events in Libya. It has already
been established that crimes were committed both by
representatives of Muammar Al-Qadhafi's regime and
by the rebels. We look forward with interest to the
results of the Prosecutor's analysis of the actions of
Al-Qadhafi's opponents, including those involved in
the extra-judicial killing of the former Libyan leader.

