Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate Luxembourg for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March as well as to thank you, Sir, for convening this
important debate and for the informative concept note
(S/2014/144, annex).

My delegation would like to thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Anthony
Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, and Mr. Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh for their important statements and
valuable perspectives.

As a member of the Human Security Network,
Thailand aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
later by the delegation of Greece on behalf of the
Network.

Children should joyfully play on playgrounds,
not fearfully take cover on battlefields. Thailand
therefore commends and fully supports the "Children,
not soldiers" campaign initiated by the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict
together with UNICEF.

As a State party to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, which prohibits the
recruitment or use of children as soldiers, Thailand
has clear rules and regulations to ensure that children
under 18 years of age are not conscripted, recruited or
involved in combat. The Royal Thai Government is also
in the process of amending its child protection act to
explicitly criminalize the involvement of children in
armed forces or armed groups.

Let me turn to the issue of mainstreaming
child protection into the relevant United Nations
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and political missions.
In armed conflict situations, peacekeepers are often at
the forefront in protecting children. We underscore the
importance of having clear mandates and guidelines
in order for them to operate effectively. Peacekeepers
and peacebuilders also need specific predeployment
and in-mission training on issues concerning children
affected by armed conflict.

We also envisage a growing role for female
peacekeepers in child protection and rehabilitation
during and after armed conflicts. Thailand has
intensified its national efforts to increase its numbers of
female peacekeepers. They will be specifically trained
in international law and international humanitarian law
on the rights and protection of women and children. It
is our earnest hope that Thai female peacekeepers will
be able to make an ongoing contribution, particularly in
cases involving violence against women and children,
who need special care and treatment.

Next Monday, 10 March, Thailand will organize a
side event on increasing women's contribution to peace
and security at the Japan Society here in New York.
Participants from Australia, Rwanda and Indonesia
will share their views and perspectives on the role of
female peacekeepers. In addition, two Thai female
peacekeepers will share their experiences from
peacekeeping missions in Haiti and Darfur.

In her concept note (S/2014/144, annex), the
President raises the question of how to make effective
progress on the issue of children and armed conflict. In
that regard, Thailand would like to reiterate the views
on the subject that it outlined in this Chamber last year.

First, the issue of child protection is
multidimensional. Different United Nations agencies
have different mandates. Synergies for protecting
children can be created by strengthening collaboration
and coordination within the United Nations system.
To avoid duplication of effort and make the best use
of limited resources, each entity's mandate should be
strictly adhered to and carried out in a transparent and
accountable manner.

Secondly, we have repeatedly stressed the
importance of the information that forms the basis of
relevant reports and analysis. Thailand recognizes the
importance of gathering information from all sources
and stakeholders, including civil society. However,
such information must be accurate, objective, reliable
and verifiable, as stipulated in paragraph 17 of the
Security Council's landmark resolution 1998 (2011).
Assessments based on false or incorrect information or,
even worse, biased analysis, can misdirect future policy
and programmes and would be counterproductive.

Thirdly, my delegation has always highlighted
the critical importance of working with the consent
of concerned Governments and in close cooperation
with them. All actions taken by the United Nations
should aim to support national efforts and increase the
capacities of concerned Governments, not complicate
their work or create unintended negative consequences
on the ground that could ultimately place children at
greater risk.

My delegation notes that resolution 2143 (2014),
just adopted, invites the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
brief the Council on the issue of delisting. We welcome
such actions. Clear criteria for delisting will enable
the countries and parties concerned to understand and
take appropriate measures to meet the requirements for
delisting. It will allow work to be focused on areas of
real armed conflict and those where action is needed to
ensure that children are protected. It will also ensure
the most efficient use of limited budgets, time and
manpower. All mandate holders and desk staff, as well
as members of the Secretariat and Member States, will
instead be able to devote their time, energy and efforts
to situations where they are really needed and where
they can make a difference, especially on the ground.
We hope earnestly that the Council will take our views
into consideration.

In closing, my delegation condemns all grave
violations and crimes against children in situations of
armed conflict. Let me reiterate Thailand's support
for and commitment to the effective implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions on this issue
and to all mandate holders working for children's best
interests.

