Mr. Andrabi (Pakistan): Madam President, the
Pakistan delegation would like to thank you for
arranging today's debate and for your insightful
concept paper (S/2011/16).

Today's debate coincides with the mandatory
review of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
concluded late last year, and the review of the
international civilian capacities, which is in its final
stage. I hope that our deliberations today will
complement the work of both these important review
processes.
The theme of institution-building can be placed
within the broad rubric of priorities identified by the
Secretary-General in his report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). The
Secretary-General's priorities included safety and
security, support for political processes, provision of
basic services, restoring core government functions and
economic revitalization. Similar priorities are also
outlined in the President's concept paper.

The international community can optimize its
institution-building efforts in conformity with priorities
of the countries concerned for ensuring national
ownership of all peacebuilding initiatives. To that end,
our approach must be people-centric and tailored to
specific needs or circumstances. It should not be seen
as outside interference. That is important for the
longevity and resilience of the nascent institutions built
in a post-conflict setting.

I wish to highlight four points in answer to the
very pertinent questions raised in the President's
concept paper.

First, institution-building should be factored into
a mission's mandate from its inception. That can be
done by focusing on security sector reform together
with strengthening national capacity to manage
intercommunity conflicts. Whenever such mandates are
devised, peacekeepers have always played an important
role, despite resource constraints.

As a leading troop contributor with vital stakes in
the success of the peacekeeping operations, Pakistan
has been supportive of mandates that ensure local
capacity-building to prevent relapse into conflict. That
is evident from our record in the Security Council, as
resolutions 1509 (2003) and 1565 (2004), which
authorized strengthened missions in Liberia and the
Democratic Republic of Congo respectively, were
supported by Pakistan during its term in the Council.
Pakistani troops also participated in those challenging
missions.

At present, nearly 10 United Nations
peacekeeping missions are performing a broad range of
peacebuilding activities, which also include institution-
building. Therefore, the role of peacekeepers in post-
conflict institution-building cannot be ignored. It will
be important to provide for the needs of peacekeepers
so that they can better perform their role. In this
regard, vital responsibility rests with the Security
Council, where these mandates are formalized, and
with the Secretariat, where the resources are provided
to back them.

Secondly, institution-building in a post-conflict
situation can be greatly facilitated by a targeted focus
on the development aspect of peacebuilding. Priority
areas could include the employment of youth and
women, engaging the private sector, building local
entrepreneurship, revitalizing the economy and
developing service-based infrastructure. Such an
approach will, on the one hand, build national
ownership and engage all stakeholders in
peacebuilding endeavours and, on the other, will
reinforce the notion of the people-centric approach,
bringing the benefits of peacebuilding to the common
man's doorstep.

Thirdly, organizational coordination within the
United Nations is essential to avoid duplication. We
note that an Integration Steering Group (ISG), which
includes peace and security, humanitarian and
development actors across the United Nations, is in
place in the Secretariat for policy coordination in
18 countries where there is both a mission and a
country team. The ISG can enhance the Secretariat's
responsiveness to the institution-building demands.

Finally, the Peacebuilding Commission, with its
unique composition, is ideally placed to establish an
integrated approach to institution-building and to
address the gaps in transition. In this context, I will
propose that a working group on institution-building
could be created within the Commission's
Organizational Committee or within its country-
specific configurations. Alternatively, a dedicated
theme of institution-building could be added to its
existing Working Group on Lessons Learned. That
would allow the Commission to optimize its advisory
role for all principal organs of the United Nations, not
just the Security Council, on the subject of post-
conflict institution-building.

