Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive
Director Coninsx for their briefings. We thank also
the Secretary-General; the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; and the staff of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (OCT) and of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), whose work underpins United Nations efforts
to defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS).

The latest report on the threat posed by ISIS
demonstrates the hard-won progress that we have made
over the past several years. It highlights the fact that the
number of ISIS attacks decreased significantly from
2017 to 2018 and that the group has suffered significant
military setbacks across the board, notably in Iraq,
Syria and the southern Philippines. These successes are
a testament to the work of the global coalition to defeat
ISIS, which just met in Washington, DC, last week.
Coalition operations have liberated all of the terrain
that ISIS once controlled in Iraq and more than 99 per
cent of such territory in Syria, including key cities in
both countries. The global coalition, by destroying
ISIS-controlled energy assets and removing key ISIS
commanders responsible for finance, has also severely
degraded the ability of ISIS to raise funds and finance
its operations.

The coalition is committed to preserving the
successes that we have achieved. To date, coalition
partners have pledged more than $1 billion in
stabilization programming in Iraq and more than
$325 million for stabilization assistance in Syria. These
projects are key to securing military gains and restoring
peace. The coalition is helping Iraq's local security
forces make their cities safe for the local population.

We are helping to clear neighbourhoods of mines
and explosive remnants of war and to restore basic
municipal services. In Syria, we are working to relieve
the suffering of ISIS victims. The United States is the
largest single humanitarian donor country to the Syrian
people, having provided $9.1 billion in humanitarian
assistance since the start ofthe crisis for those displaced
inside Syria and throughout the region.

All that being said, much more work remains
to be done to defeat ISIS. ISIS is seeking to survive,
reconstitute and ultimately re-emerge in Iraq and Syria.
ISIS is also coordinating with affiliates to plan attacks
elsewhere, including Afghanistan, South-East Asia and
West Africa. As ISIS evolves, we must adapt to the
changing threat it poses. To do so, the United States is
working to identify and stop foreign terrorist fighter
travel and to disrupt ISIS's global network of affiliates.
We now have information-sharing arrangements with
more than 60 countries to identify and track the travel
of suspected terrorists. Approximately 70 countries
have laws to prosecute and penalize foreign terrorist
fighter activities, but we need many more on board.

These efforts complement the work taking place
more broadly at the United Nations on foreign terrorist
fighters. Thanks to CTED and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Committee, Member States now
have comprehensive guidance on how to address
returning terrorist fighters through the recently adopted
addendum to the Madrid Guiding Principles. We urge
countries to use that guidance now.

We strongly support the OCT's efforts as well,
including its role in providing technical assistance to
Member States as they implement obligations under
resolution 2396 (2017). The OCT's new project on
enhancing the capacity of Member States to detect
foreign terrorist fighter travel via the use of advanced
passenger information and passenger name record
data is one that we particularly hope will make a
positive impact.

We strongly encourage the United Nations to
continue guiding and enabling Member States to
comprehensively prosecute, rehabilitate and reintegrate
foreign terrorist fighters and those associated with them,
including children. The work of the United Nations in
this area and, more broadly, on counterterrorism and on
preventing violent extremism must include civil-society
participation, and we expect the OCT to continue to
mainstream civil society into the core of its work. We
also expect CTED to continue its important work on
civil society, human rights and integrating a gender
perspective, as cross-cutting issues vital to its mandate.

Our collective success against ISIS has
demonstrated what we can accomplish when we bring
all of our tools to bear. We cannot relent in this fight.
The United States will continue to work with our
partners to pursue, degrade and, ultimately, defeat ISIS
and Al-Qaida.

