Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): I express Fiji's gratitude and
to you, Sir, and to the delegation ongypt for convening
this debate.

Fiji aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Since its admission to the United Nations in
1970, Fiji has had at the heart of its foreign policy a
strong commitment to the United Nations and its
peacekeeping operations. The primary motivation in
Fiji's contribution of peacekeeping personnel to the
United Nations is the determination to play our full
part as a responsible signatory to the Charter of the
United Nations. For many small States such as Fiji,
the international rule of law, peace and security are
guarantees for independence and equity. It is also the
basis for a stable platform for achieving human rights
and our development aspirations.

Approximately 70 years since the first United
Nations peacekeeping mission was established and
peacekeepers were deployed, peacekeeping remains
as important as ever. The nature of conflicts has
evolved as has the role of peacekeepers. Peacekeepers
are now asked to become much more involved and
essentially act as nation builders, thereby partaking in
multidimensional peacekeeping. The civilian, military
and police peacekeepers are expected to perform such
tasks as monitoring elections, building a civilian police
force, distributing humanitarian aid and reforming the
justice system, among others. That is in sharp contrast
to the type of peacekeeping activities that the United
Nations was originally designed to handle.

Therefore, an important element to sustaining peace
are the rules that govern United Nations peacekeepers.
The cardinal rules that were applicable and effective
during traditional peacekeeping days may therefore
need to be reviewed so as to respond to evolving new
security threats and meet the situation on the ground.
That is essential to ensuring that peacekeepers are
not harmed, while very much keeping with the same
approach of introducing new requirements, such as
those related to sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations personnel to ensure that peacekeepers do no
harm to others.

United Nations peacekeeping mandates need
to be clear. When the United Nations conducted an
assessment on the Somalia peacekeeping mission, it
concluded that the mandate was "vague and was open
to myriad interpretations". The mandate of a mission is
one of the critical aspects of any operation. The success
of any mission can be assessed through the achievement
of the objective. It is therefore imperative to have clear
goals in order to avoid ambiguity, or worse still the loss
ofinnocent lives should a conflict worsen.

That demands that there be effective collaboration
and structured consultation among the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and
the Secretariat in order to leverage the potential of
peacekeeping mandates and operations for sustaining
peace. Equally important is the need to sensitize
military, police and civilian personnel deployed in
peacekeeping missions about the evolving policy
discussions and approaches to peacekeeping. United
Nations peacekeeping missions need to have the right
leadership and competent personnel in order to give
credibility to the United Nations peacekeeping efforts
and deliver on their mandates. Equally, how the United
Nations equips its peacekeepers in terms of resources
during deployment is crucial to the success ofa mission.

In conclusion, peacebuilding and sustaining peace
are best achieved when it they are mainstreamed in
society. The involvement of broader stakeholders
in peacebuilding efforts is an important factor in
sustaining peace. Therefore, the engagement of
minorities, women, youth, civil society organizations
and faith-based groups, among others, can provide a
stable platform for sustaining peace. After all, everyone

is a contributor to peace.

