Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
choice of security sector reform as the topic of today's
thematic debate and for your stress on prospects and
challenges in Africa. We trust that today's discussion
will give us a better understanding of that complex
process and of the important support role played by the
United Nations in post-conflict countries.

I thank Mr. Herve Ladsous for his very clear and
enlightening briefing, and wish him every success in
his difficult and lofty mission. I also endorse the
statement to be made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

When mandated by the Council, security sector
reform is a critical process in the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. The establishment of a
security sector that is professional, effective and
responsible is crucial to laying the foundations of
peace, sustainable development and economic
recovery. The key principle in security sector reform
that has been underscored by most if not all of those
who have spoken before me is national ownership.

Security sector reform is the primary
responsibility of the State. The role of the United
Nations is to provide support to national authorities in
its implementation. Every country should have
ownership of the security sector reform process. At the
request of the host country, the United Nations should
provide security sector reform assistance through a
peacekeeping mission. That assistance should be
adapted to the particular circumstances and needs of
each country.

Reforms cannot be effective without the
leadership of the authorities of the country hosting a
peacekeeping mission. That leadership role first comes
into play in evaluating the security situation to ensure
that the subsequent reform has a chance of success. It
is essential to involve security actors so as to identify
dysfunctions and take the corrective action needed for
security institutions to once again function normally.
That leadership then involves national authorities
in the design and implementation of security sector
reform programmes. Very often, security sector
reforms unfortunately have been unsuccessful owing to
the lack of involvement by national authorities. It is
regrettable that attempts to set up security sector
reform at the national level very often has not come
from within a given country, but was instead
recommended by external actors. This has discouraged
national actors from taking part in the process.

Prior to security sector reform, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process plays a
crucial role in the development of inclusive security
bodies that are subject to effective control by political
institutions. In many situations, it has been clearly
shown that the success of any such reform is closely
linked to the ability to successfully complete the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.

In that respect, it is worth noting that security
sector reform cannot succeed without taking into
account the gender perspective. By deploying female
military and police officials, peacekeeping missions
can indirectly encourage host countries to include
women in their security institutions. The deployment of
female formed police units to peacekeeping missions in
Africa has played an important role in guaranteeing
women greater access to decision-making in security
bodies. In Africa in particular, it has been shown that
women's involvement has proven extremely useful,
and even crucial, in peacebuilding efforts.

Coherence among donors is one of the key factors
for the success of security sector reform. In the past,
donor activities in security sector reform led to
duplication owing to the lack of consultation and
coordination. We are pleased to note that the
experience of the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission has made it possible to
improve coherence. That has been accomplished
mainly by establishing legal frameworks, such as
statements of mutual commitment, which enable
national authorities, donors and the United Nations to
better channel aid and avoid duplication.

Security sector reform must be part of a larger
effort to build the rule of law. It should help to bolster
United Nations actions aimed at ensuring the rule of
law in peacekeeping operations without duplicating
activities or structures.

As an African country, Morocco has accumulated
numerous years of bilateral experience with many
nations, particularly in Africa, in the areas of technical
assistance and the training of security forces. We
continue to be willing to share our experiences and to
enhance them with best practices. One of the lessons
we have drawn from our own experience is not to
content oneself with enhancing the operational
effectiveness of security providers, but to also include
justice administration system reform and, beyond that,
to strengthen national capacity to handle the reform
process in a framework of democratic control and
monitoring in which human rights are respected. It is
only by stressing effectiveness, sound management and
open governance, as well as by ensuring that all of
these elements are mutually reinforcing, that we will
together be able to take up the challenge of security
sector reform.

