Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): Unfortunately,
indications are that Burundi is moving towards an
extremely dangerous situation. The gravity of the situation
has now been confirmed by the firsthand assessments of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mrs. Ogata, and by Ambassador Albright of the United
States. Indeed, the capability of the Burundi people and
leadership for self-government is being tested.

The latest developments in Burundi are a matter of
serious concern to the international community. We
condemn those responsible for the violence and strongly
urge all concerned in Burundi to desist from acts of
violence.

We pay special tribute to the international
humanitarian personnel on the ground for the dedication
and commitment with which they are carrying out their
mission. We also acknowledge the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in maintaining
military observers and strengthening the civilian
component of its Mission in Burundi under extremely
difficult conditions. It must be recognized that the OAU's
military presence on the ground has made a significant
contribution in deterring a broader tragedy in Burundi to
date.

As we are well aware, this dismal situation in
Burundi is of the Burundi leaders' own making, and,
therefore, the Burundi leaders, in particular, those of the
extremist elements who incite violence, are ultimately
responsible for the consequences.

None the less, given the urgency of the situation and
the potential human consequences of a further
deterioration of the crisis, as well as the far-reaching
implications for the stability of the entire Great Lakes
region, the international community cannot stand idly by.
It has the moral responsibility to help Burundi's people
and leaders restore peace and stability in the country.
That is why my Government is persuaded that it is time
for the Security Council to act.

In this connection, there are three broad objectives
the Council should try to accomplish in the context of
preventive diplomacy, as advanced by the Secretary-
General in his Agenda for Peace.

 

The first is to demonstrate the firm resolve of the
international community not to tolerate any further
deterioration of the situation and to send a clear warning to
those who encourage violence in Burundi of the possible
consequences of underestimating the determination of the
international community. In this regard, we share the
urgency of developing contingency plans.

Secondly, the Council should ensure the security of
the international humanitarian personnel on the ground so
that relief efforts may continue unhindered. We welcome
the Secretary-General's timely action of dispatching a
technical security mission to Burundi to examine ways of
improving existing security arrangements. We look forward
to a positive outcome of this mission. We also emphasize
the importance of closer cooperation between the United
Nations and the military observers of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), recommended by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. The Burundi authorities
should be served stern notice that they are responsible for
the security of the international personnel operating in that
country.

Thirdly, the Council should also address, in a longer-
term time-frame, the fundamental causes of the crisis by
promoting dialogue and national reconciliation across the
whole political spectrum in Burundi. We welcome and
encourage the efforts of the OAU, the European Union and
the facilitators appointed by the Cairo Conference of Heads
of State of the Great Lakes Region, held last November.
While commending the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-
General and his staff to this end, we encourage them to
work closely with the OAU and to build upon the
endeavours undertaken in the regional and subregional
contexts.

It must be borne in mind, in this connection, that the
initiatives of the international community cannot replace the
efforts of the Burundi leaders themselves towards genuine
national reconciliation. All that the international community
can do is to encourage and facilitate dialogue. Whether or
not a durable modus vivendi can be worked out from these
efforts depends ultimately upon the political will of the
parties concerned to make peace and come to terms with
one another. This is why we stress the paramount
importance of all concerned in Burundi pursuing dialogue
and national reconciliation and the imperative need for them
to do so.

Given that the foregoing views of my Government are
fully reflected in the draft resolution before us, my
delegation will vote in favour of it.

