Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): In the last few days,
Sir, my delegation has had an opportunity to recognize
your election to the presidency and to express our
confidence in your leadership. We have likewise
recognized the work of your predecessor, Ambassador
Mahbubani.

I would like, in the same vein, to congratulate the
members of the Monitoring Mechanism on a job well
done. Let me recognize the presence here of His
Excellency Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, Minister for
External Relations of Angola, which is testimony to the
importance of the work that is before the Council, and
we welcome him.

Having participated in the April 2000 debate on
the groundbreaking report (S/2000/203) of the Panel of
Experts on violations of Security Council sanctions
against the Uniao Nacional Para a Independencia Total
de Angola (UNITA), and having also been a sponsor of
General Assembly resolution 55/56 on the role of
diamonds in fuelling conflicts, which was adopted by
the Assembly on 1 December 2000, my delegation has
requested the floor to remind members of the Council
that the days of the no-questions-asked diamond-
buying policy should be over.

During the debate on the report of the Panel of
Experts on violations of Security Council sanctions
against UNITA, my delegation submitted to the
Security Council that failure to account for the
presence of economic agendas in conflicts had at times
seriously undermined international efforts to
consolidate fragile peace agreements. The report before
the Council today in document S/2000/1225 has
confirmed that the true cause of UNITA's war against
the Angolan people is not so much the loud discourse
of grievance we hear from Savimbi's spin doctors, but
the silent force of greed.

In the words of one scholar,

"conflict can create war economies, often in the
regions controlled by rebels or warlords and
linked to international trading networks; members
of armed groups can benefit from looting...
[U]nder these circumstances, ending civil wars
becomes difficult. Winning may not be desirable:
the point of war may be precisely the legitimacy
which it confers on actions that in peacetime
would be punishable as crimes".

In the case of Angola, Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the abundance of
natural resources such as diamonds has become a
curse. It is the availability of diamonds exported as a
primary commodity that spawns violent conflict,
because it provides incentives for extra-legal groups to
be formed on the basis of capturing loot which sustains
their activities.

Let me remind members that a primary
commodity such as diamonds offers several advantages
to rebel movements such as UNITA. Since they are a
generic product, their origin can easily be concealed,
and their marketing does not require complicated
processes as is the case for manufactured goods. It is in
that context that the importance of this report of the
Monitoring Mechanism on Angola Sanctions becomes
apparent.

My delegation urges Member States to consider
implementing the certificate of origin scheme with the
minimum of delay, as recommended in the report. We
further call upon the international community to
provide technical assistance to those countries that lack
the resources to implement a certificate regime.

It is commonly said that every diamond has its
own "DNA", and in that regard we call upon the
relevant ministries of diamond-producing States to
profile production from their mines by recording the
characteristics of diamonds from each mine in detail.
Such a record would enable parcels of diamonds whose
origin is disputed to be checked with available data
with a greater degree of certainty than is currently the
case.

The section of the report on measures aimed at
improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the
implementation of sanctions mentions that certain
countries have established structures and mechanisms
for the formulation of a proper policy to enforce and/or
monitor implementation. Some of the structures
identified include the establishment of task forces. The
region of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) is one such region, as has just
been said by the representative of the SADC Chairman.
It has always recognized that the successful
implementation of Security Council sanctions against
UNITA depends on the capacity and commitment of
Member States to deny UNITA the use of the
subregion's land routes, airports and airspace.

In recognition of this fact, at the nineteenth
session of the SADC Inter-State Defence and Security
Committee, held in Lusaka, Zambia, from 11 to
14 November 1997, an ad hoc committee on cross-
border crime was set up under the chairmanship of
Zimbabwe. The committee membership initially
included Angola, Malawi, Namibia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Africa, Zambia and
Zimbabwe; it derived its existence from paragraph 4 of
the report of the State security sub-committee of the
nineteenth session of the Inter-State Defence and
Security Committee, which - besides elucidating a
range of regional security problems that included
weapons smuggling and the illicit provision of
logistical supplies to UNITA made possible by
loopholes in the border-control mechanisms of member
States - recommended the creation of an
interdepartmental liaison mechanism within member
States to ensure effective sharing of information
between civil aviation authorities, immigration
services, intelligence services and defence and police
forces, and the establishment of a mechanism of
regional liaison.

The ad hoc committee of ministers met in Harare
on 19 November 1997 and set up a task force
comprising personnel from civil aviation, immigration
and intelligence services, armies and police forces. The
terms of reference of the task force were defined as the
following: to monitor all suspicious aircraft traversing
the subregion's airspace; to monitor all border posts
and check for material and goods likely to be destined
for UNITA and UNITA-controlled areas; to investigate
all allegations of UNITA activities in the subregion,
including companies and individuals providing
logistical support to UNITA; to investigate all
allegations of violations of Angolan airspace; to place
all airports and airstrips located in the subregion under
24-hour surveillance; and to ensure that sanctions
imposed on UNITA by the United Nations were not
violated by member States.

The task force recommended the establishment of
national information centres that would coordinate the
collection of data in accordance with the task force's
terms of reference. The task force also recommended
that a regional information centre, which would
process information received from the national
information centres, be established in Harare. The
regional information centre was to submit monthly
status reports to the national information centres. That
elaborate network has assisted SADC countries greatly
to reduce UNITA's capacity to violate sanctions.

Our experience in SADC has shown that the
sharing among member States of both strategic and
tactical information is an effective method of reducing
UNITA's war-making capacity. Zimbabwe, as
coordinator of the regional information centre,
submitted detailed operational procedures for the
control and monitoring of flights within the SADC
region which, when put to use by member States,
resulted in the interception of some cargo planes that
supplied UNITA with weapons, for example Johannes
Pereira's Inter State Airways, whose flights were
successfully intercepted. From information gathered by
the national information centres, the regional
information centre compiled a comprehensive dossier
of companies and individuals that engaged in
commercial transactions with UNITA. All that
information was made available to the Panel of Experts
when they visited Harare.

Experience has also taught us that resources are
critical if operational information and intelligence are
to be timeously disseminated. Because of the security
nature of some of the information that is transmitted
between the national information centres and the
regional information centre, without secure
communication the immediate relevance of some of
that information could be lost. While SADC is ready to
implement the recommendations in the report, we
appeal to the international community to make
available the requisite resources, including
communication and other monitoring equipment, so
that we can resuscitate and improve on the
infrastructure that we have already established.

Finally, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
support for the sterling work accomplished by the
Mechanism in producing a report that identifies -
"names and shames" - countries, companies and
individuals which, against all international norms,
continue to do business with UNITA. Although the
dependence of UNITA on international trade networks
renders its illicit trade vulnerable to a concerted
application of appropriate compliance and regulatory
measures, it is the considered view of my delegation
that that matter should be treated as more than a
specific policing problem, that the tracking and the
interdiction of illegal flights and the installation of
customs monitors is good as long as it is one of the
means of addressing the problem.

