Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): It is an
honour to take the floor on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/667) and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her briefing. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his statement. Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, candidate countries, endorse this
statement.

Haiti is committed to a delicate process of democratic
renewal, which is a precondition for the success of the
huge development efforts made by the country in recent
years, especially since the disastrous earthquake in
2010. The country is seeking to consolidate its as yet
fragile gains in democracy. Grave social and economic
inequalities persist. The efforts of all to ensure stability
and security remain paramount.

The EU remains a faithful partner of the Republic
of Haiti and is determined to act in unison with the other
partners to support the country in the current delicate
phase. After the 2010 earthquake, the EU stepped up its
efforts to support the reconstruction and consolidation
of the country, particularly of its infrastructure,
administration and economy. We welcome the continued
decline in the number of internally displaced persons
still living in camps, but grave humanitarian needs still
persist. As a result, the EU has decided to maintain
its humanitarian response programme again in Haiti
this year, with €11.6 million committed to meeting
the needs of persons still displaced, helping to keep
the cholera epidemic under control and assisting in a
sustainable manner the victims of food insecurity in the
rural population. The European Union also supports
the 2015-2016 transitional appeal recently launched by
the Haitian authorities and the United Nations, which
puts resilience at the heart of its strategy.

The European Union and Government of Haiti
signed a national indicative programme of assistance
for the period from 2014 to 2020 amounting to
€420 million, a testament to the European Union's
continued commitment to supporting the Government
in its strategy for development and socioeconomic
recovery. The European Union and the Government of
Haiti will continue to cooperate in order to improve the
country's financial capacity to promote administrative
reform, better budget management, a strengthened State
and governance and support for the implementation of
national policies in the areas of education, food security
and infrastructure and urban development. Together,
we are preparing a joint humanitarian development
framework. The European Union remains open to
conducting a dialogue with the relevant United Nations
humanitarian agencies in order to discuss concrete
opportunities for cooperation.

Haiti cannot afford any major new political or
security crises and must ensure that the progress it makes
cannot be reversed. The European Union welcomes
the start of the electoral process, which represents
a fundamental step in the right direction, despite the
violent incidents and irregularities that occurred during
the first stage of the elections on 9 August. The process
of restoring the country's democratic institutions should
continue in an atmosphere of peace, inclusiveness,
transparency and equality, and it is essential to ensure
that that is what will prevail during the next phase of
the elections, in order to improve the whole process and
avoid the violence and irregularities of the first. The
European Union has made a substantial contribution to
this process through a grant of €5 million to the election
fund managed by the United Nations Development
Programme. We have also deployed, as we did during
the 2010 elections, an election observation mission of
about 80 people. Together with the Club of Madrid, the
European Union has also been conducting a programme
of discussion and advice, aimed at a large number of
institutional actors and representatives of civil society.

The security situation remains delicate. The
European Union believes it is essential to ensure
a more stable and inclusive political climate. The
role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) remains absolutely crucial. The
European Union believes that MINUSTAH's presence
and its active participation, in particular, in securing
the upcoming elections in October and December is
essential. It can make a very significant contribution
to ensuring peace and stability throughout the electoral
process and thus supporting a peaceful political
transition.

I would like to express the European Union's
appreciation for MINUSTAH's important contribution
to stabilizing security and consolidating democracy
and the rule of law in Haiti. We remain committed to
supporting the efforts of the Haitian authorities, the
United Nations and the international community to
ensure a better future for all the people of Haiti.

Since this is the last time I will address the Security
Council in my capacity as Head of the Delegation ofthe
European Union, I would like to take the opportunity
to thank the Council through you, Mr. President, for
the splendid cooperation it has shown to the European
Union and its delegation here in New York over the past
four years.
