Mr. Owada (Japan): The Government of Japan
attaches great importance to the stability of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia as a key to the
maintenance of peace and security in the entire Balkan
region. In this context, the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) has been successfully
carrying out its mission for the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia in preventing the spillover of conflicts
elsewhere in the region into that country. UNPREDEP
represents one of the most successful examples of the
preventive deployment of peacekeeping forces.

My delegation shares the View of the Secretary-
General that a situation of peace and stability in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is at this stage generally
being maintained, although we should naturally be sensitive
to the factors that might have a negative impact on this
stability, such as the still fragile situation in the
neighbouring countries and the inter-ethnic relations within
the country itself. '

In view of the overall situation in and around the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, my delegation
agrees with the suggestion of the Secretary~General,
contained in his latest report, that consideration of exit
strategies, including the modalities of the termination of the
operation of UNPREDEP, be commenced.

At the same time, my delegation takes note of the
observation of the Secretary-General that any decision to
further downsize the military component could hardly be
implemented before the spring of 1998, owing to the
severe winter conditions in the region. Furthermore, ample
consideration should be given to the exit strategies and the
type of future international presence that would be most
appropriate in the wake of the exit of UNPREDEP from
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Taking all these factors into account, my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution. This draft
resolution, which has been drafted in principle in
accordance with the basic lines of the recommendations of
the Secretary-General, seeks to extend the mandate of
UNPREDEP for the final period until 31 August 1998.

In the meantime, the exit strategies and the most
appropriate type of international presence in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in the future should be
studied by this Council during the forthcoming period, in
the light of the recommendations of the Secretary-
General.

I should like to close my remarks by expressing the
deep appreciation of my Government to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Henryk
Sokalski, and to the Force Commander, Brigadier
General Bent Sohnemann, as well as to all the men and
women working with UNPREDEP for their efforts and
dedication in carrying out their important mission.

