Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union. I wish to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

At the outset, I would like first of all to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto, for his presence here today, for his
briefing and for his commitment to the work.

My country joins other Security Council members
in strongly condemning the recent terrorist attacks
in Kabul and other parts of the country. We extend
our condolences to the victims and their families and
express our full solidarity with the people and the
Government of Afghanistan. Those despicable acts
strengthens our determination to support Afghanistan's
institutions in the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism, which continue to pose a grave threat
to peace and stability. That is why we welcome, like
others, the Secretary-General's visit to Kabul last
week, as it sent an important signal to the international
community as a whole.

We welcome the successful outcome of the first
meeting of the Kabul process for peace and security
cooperation. By taking this initiative, our Afghan
partners have signalled their willingness to pursue the
peace and reconciliation process with renewed vigour.
We commend the Afghan leadership on these issues,
which further reinforces the principle that the process
should be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. Through
its participation in the Kabul process, Italy seeks to
express its full support for this initiative. We believe
that it is a starting point, and not an end point, and we
also hope that broad international backing can provide
a solid foundation for positive outcomes in this area.

The Kabul process also confirms the crucial
importance of cooperation among regional stakeholders.
Afghanistan's terrorist and violent extremist
phenomenon, both in its national dimension and beyond,
cannot be tackled effectively without close cooperation
and unity of purpose among neighbouring countries
of the region. Terrorism and violence extremism are
a concrete threat to those countries' stability as well.
There is a clear convergence of interests. However,
tangible measures to extend cooperation, especially at
the regional level, must be adopted. Italy supports all
initiatives geared towards that goal.

The need for a credible and broad-based reconciliation
process underscores the fact that peace in Afghanistan
can be achieved only through political means. There
is no military solution to this conflict, as we are all
reminded by the latest report of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on
the protection of civilians, which demonstrates how
the most vulnerable categories, especially women
and children, are increasingly at risk. The focus on a
broad-based and inclusive consensus as the foundation
for a successful reconciliation process is key, and we
welcome the decision by the Afghan Government to
make it the centrepiece of its strategy.

In that context, it will be essential to ensure women's
active inclusion and participation, and we renew our
hope that the commitment of the Afghan Government
and the High Peace Council in this area may find
further tangible application, for instance, through the
full implementation of the Afghanistan national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. That goal is all the more important in the
framework of safeguarding and further building upon
the progress made in women's rights in Afghanistan
over the course of the past 16 years.

The continued violent acts by hostile insurgent
groups remind us of the fundamental importance of
strengthening Afghanistan's institutions, specifically
those with the task of ensuring the security and defence
of the country and its people. My country supports
and encourages the Afghan Government to continue
to enhance its efforts to improve the capability of the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. To be
successful, those efforts will also require a determined
fight against all forms of corruption, which Italy will
continue to support through its training and advisory
activities in the framework of Operation Resolute
Support, the NATO-led mission.

The challenges Afghanistan is facing continue
to be enormously complex, and one cannot imagine
a successful pact for the future of the country in the
absence of unity and internal cohesion within the
Government and all Afghan institutions, to which we
renew our call for a constructive and inclusive approach
aimed at resolving outstanding disputes, which are not
compatible with the urgent needs of the country. That
is also an essential prerequisite for the implementation
of other indispensable reforms, as agreed with the
international community, which are necessary for
consolidating Afghan institutions and generating self-
sustaining growth in order to meet the legitimate needs
and expectations of the Afghan people. In that context,
we hope that the long-awaited electoral reform agenda
will soon be completed, thereby allowing the relevant
institutions to rapidly set an electoral calendar and
ensure a credible, inclusive and transparent process.

I wish to conclude by renewing our appreciation for
the crucial work that UNAMA carries out in many areas
and under very difficult conditions. Italy looks forward
to engaging within the Council on the outcomes of the
strategic review mandated by resolution 2344 (2017)
last March, in order to further strengthen the Mission
and enhance its overall effectiveness.

