Mr. Malloch Brown: I am grateful for this
invitation to address the Security Council on this
subject, which is very close to the institutional heart of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

Let me frame my remarks in terms of the political
economy of reconciliation and therefore talk a little bit
about the politics, the issue of building democracy,
how quickly to do it, the issue of other processes which
can sometimes substitute for or supplement democracy
as a means of achieving a national dialogue, and the
critical issues that we keep on running into of the
minority rights and the rule of law, as well as the role
of other institutions, such as the police, who are so
critical to sustained reconciliation.

I also want to say a word on the economics of
reconciliation, because, while it may appear to be less
important than the political or even the social
dimensions, it is a lot harder to reconcile populations
that have been in conflict in a context of economic
austerity and the lack of jobs and growth than it is if
you can achieve an economically dynamic situation.
Again, I want to say something about that, and then
briefly something about the institutional side of this -
the question you have posed, Madame, in this debate
today of what the United Nations can do - and
therefore, of course, particularly a little advertisement
for what UNDP seeks to do, as well as an observation
on the role of the Security Council.

Turning first to the political dimensions and
democracy. There is no bigger advocate across the
United Nations for democracy than UNDP. We have
long since concluded that it is at the heart of
sustainable development. However, I have to say that,
perhaps precisely because we are so enthusiastic about
it, we are also cautious about introducing it too quickly
and in too imperfect a way. We have come to recognize
from experience that, while over time you have to try
and shift the competition between different groups in a
society from an armed competition to a peaceful and
democratic one at the ballot box, nevertheless, if you
rush that shift - if you move immediately to a
democratic competition without addressing the
underlying causes of conflict - you can indeed drive
parties further apart. We have been very struck by the
value of the cautious approach adopted in Afghanistan
of moving directly to a recognized interim Government
and to a Loya Jirga process in order to both build a
consensus and then endorse a Constitution and only at
the end of that process to direct elections.

We contrast that to processes that we have been
very involved in in Cambodia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Haiti or Kosovo and recognize that there
is real value in getting it right and taking the time to
put in place the conditions for an electoral exercise
which will pull people together rather than drive them
further apart. I think we are all struggling with that
now in the context of Iraq. We are very anxious to see
that the democratic processes evolve in a way which
allows the maximum direct representation possible,
while ensuring that the different parties in that country
are not driven apart by the exercise.

It is for that reason that we as an Organization
have become very involved in the promotion of
national reconciliation dialogues, both where a
Parliament and an election do not yet exist and in many
situations where there is a Parliament but the
democratic process has somehow become narrowed or
not fully representative of the elements in a country.
We have seen, particularly in Latin America, starting
with the aftermath of conflict in Central America, how
the important role which a dialogue that brings together
different civil society groups with the political
leadership can, at the very least, supplement - and
often, in some cases, temporarily substitute for - a
more formal democratic process and can critically lay
the groundwork for a later democratic exercise which
will enjoy broader support.

As we have reviewed these national
reconciliation processes, we have noticed that, on a
number of occasions in Haiti in 1987, in Zaire in
1991, and in Cote d'Ivoire in 2001 - there were
struggling indigenous reconciliation processes which
were, perhaps, fatally handicapped by the lack of
strong international support. With the value of
hindsight, one sees that, possibly, the small sapling of
the beginning of a reconciliation that might have
avoided later conflict never grew into a stronger oak
because there was not the right international support
and encouragement. Equally, we have seen the vital
role of civil society in both formal democratic
exercises and in these national reconciliation dialogues
as well, where the requirement of bringing as broad a
range of opinion to the table as possible is absolutely

 
critical.

Let me make one other observation on the
political process, concerning the issue of minority
rights. Too often in straightforward, quick, early
elections after conflict, we see a winner-takes-all
mentality develop where those who have lost at the
ballot box - and perhaps had been the losers in the
previous military conflict - feel further alienated from
the situation and that their rights are not protected. Of
course, this is a tremendous incentive to conflict's
renewing. Indeed, in our Human Development Report
2002 on democracy, we spent a lot of time arguing for
a second generation of democratic reforms, where the
issues of minority rights and more broadly of human
rights, the issue of media freedom and the broader
culture of democracy - where the vote exists in a
much broader set of cultural and ethical values in a
society about respecting each other's opinions and
allowing the competition of ideas to take place in a free
political exchange - are critical. We must not blind
ourselves into believing that democracy consists solely
of an exercise of the ballot box.

As we have just heard from Mr. Kalomoh, behind
these issues lies the critical issue of justice and
reconciliation. He made many important points on this
and I do not want to repeat what he has said, except to
observe that, from UNDP's experience - and, I must,
say, in part my own as well - truth and reconciliation,
a little bit like democracy, cannot be rushed. I have
been very struck by the experiences of Chile and
Argentina, as well as by that of South Africa, that, for
this to be a genuine internal process - with a society
feeling strong enough and harmonious enough to take
on these issues in a thoroughgoing way - usually
some time has to have elapsed. Democracy needs to be
well established, and the feeling that the ghosts of the
past can be revisited without risk to the democratic
present takes time.

It is also, however, inevitable. I myself have yet
to see what I would consider a full reconciliation after
conflict where this process has not occurred. Thus,
while, arguably, it should not happen at the beginning,
it is an inevitable step on the road to a real healing. I
think there is a real issue of the international role in
this. Sometimes that international role may be a little
heavy-handed and too early in terms of trying to move
too quickly to a process of justice and accountability
before a country is ready for it. Secondly, at a critical
moment, international justice, through commissions or
other forms, can be a key catalyst for the country itself
taking hold of the issue and pushing it to conclusion. I
therefore think this is an area of enormous interest.

Let me say, however, that some more mundane
issues of institutions matter as well. UNDP as a
development agency is, I think, continuously surprised
to find the extent to which we have become a police
training agency, because Whether it is supporting the
German-led Trust Fund in Afghanistan or, more
directly, supporting police training efforts in countries
such as Haiti or Mozambique over the years, with the
help of Spain and many others in this room, we have
found that, unless citizens feel that their personal
security is being met by effective policing of their
streets and communities, a lot of the rest of
reconciliation and peace-building is hard to achieve.
Yet this is, in terms of international support, one of the
most costly, ambitious and difficult commitments to
secure. It is one which very much falls on the shoulders
of the United Nations, because the World Bank, for
example, treats this - I think understandably - as
being outside its mandate. One last institutional
political comment is that the vital tasks of
demobilization, reintegration and landmine collection
are key to these reconciliation processes, as well as -
often - being difficult to resource quickly or
effectively enough in the period when reconciliation is
just beginning.

I said at the start of my statement that I wanted to
say a word about the "economy" part of political
economy. It is a lot easier to achieve reconciliation in
the context of economic growth than it is in the context
of austerity and budget reduction. Yet the
characteristics of a post-conflict situation are usually
austerity and budget reduction. A post-conflict
Government almost always inherits a situation of either
no tax base or a very impaired one. The response of
many of the international financial institutions to that
has been to insist on a reduction of Government
expenditure to a level which reflects that situation -
and for very reasonable reasons, because as demand is
also at a low level in the economy, anything bigger on
the Government side can be highly inflationary, as well
as unsustainable.

Yet the fact is, unless you have an economic
strategy which is based on expansion and therefore on
job creation and the ability to finance the provision of
services, including health education, to the other
victims of conflict, and, above all, to manage the
downsizing of critical areas of Government, such as, in
particular, the army - which may have many of the
ex-combatants in its ranks - the financial stability you
may wish to achieve will fall victim to the absence of
real stability and to the renewal of conflict.

At Davos over the weekend I chaired some very
interesting discussions between the International
Monetary Fund and Professor Joe Stiglitz - who is the
champion of expansionary economics - on how to
reconcile these two sides of the dilemma. I think that
that is an area to which we need to give a lot more
attention as we move forward.

I would like to make two institutional points.
First, with regard to the role of UNDP, since the
Brahimi report I think there has been a very clear
understanding of the different roles played by the
various parts of the United Nations, under the
leadership of the Department for Political Affairs, in
post-conflict reconstruction in general and, therefore,
in reconciliation in particular. We as system have just
had a report on transitional work, prepared under the
chairmanship of Carol Bellamy of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), which touches on this.

For us in UNDP that presents a couple of critical
issues. First, as we move from relief to reconciliation
and our colleagues in the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) start to scale down their
roles, while we are required to build up ours, we see a
terrible funding gap. We see it today in Liberia. We
have seen it in every post-conflict situation.

Secondly, whereas our colleagues in OCHA have
an impressive massed strength in the different areas of
relief work, we in UNDP are much less well resourced
in areas such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the rule of law and justice and early
support for building electoral systems. We work in all
of those areas and, under Julia Taft's leadership, have
strengthened enormously our capacity in each. But I
sometimes feel like those generals who say that they
can deploy their armies in only one foreign operation at
a time. I have huge difficulty in providing adequate
support to half a dozen of these activities around the
world at one time, and have therefore begun a
conversation with key supporters in this area about
how, first, we can strengthen our own capabilities in
this regard - to both learn the lessons of these
operations and have enough human capacity to deploy
to support our country offices and United Nations
teams in these areas - and how, secondly, the
international community can make funds available
more quickly for the early steps of reconciliation.

The situation is comparable to that of a heart
attack victim. All the research tells us that the greatest
propensity to revert to conflict is in the early months
after conflict. But that is the period when we are least
able to put up the resources for successful
demobilization and reintegration. That brings me to a
final point about the Security Council, and to another
medical analogy. You are very good in the operating
theatre - you do peace agreements well, you do
peacekeeping well. But my challenge to you all - and
I say this without making any comment on the debate
between the various organs of the United Nations - is
that the real statistics of peace-building demonstrate
that the most critical interventions are, in a medical
sense, in the preventive health phase - the pre-heart-
attack phase - as well as in the rehabilitation - the
post-heart-attack phase. Yet the focus of all your
activities is in the operating theatre, not in the clinic
afterwards - let alone giving the patient the
preventive help beforehand.

