Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
wishes to explain its vote on resolution 2182 (2014),

adopted a few moments ago.

At the outset, I wish to stress that Jordan supports
the aim of achieving stability and security in Somalia,
and the efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia to
meet the challenges it faces, including the illegal trade
in charcoal and illicit weapons by terrorist groups.
Unless the international community acts to help
Somalia to address these phenomena, it will not be able
to tackle those challenges.

Jordan stresses that the authorization contained in
paragraph 15 of the resolution for any State to inspect
ships not only off the coast of Somalia but also on the
high seas is subject to legal and political constraints
and limitations. Although the resolution includes some
of the limitations and conditions proposed by Jordan
when it was being drafted, it may still be open to abuse
and threaten the maritime trade on the high seas in
one of the world's most sensitive regions. It could be
exploited for political purposes that transcend its own
aim to fight the illicit trade in charcoal and weapons.

The scope of the authorization for the naval forces
in the area, as worded in paragraph 15, is broader than
that requested by the President of Somalia in his letter
to the President of the Security Council. The insistence
on giving such authorization to any State raises many
questions in that respect. Allowing any State to
undertake such inspections on the basis of "reasonable
grounds" is no guarantee against abuse of that
authorization or obstruction of maritime navigation.
It would have been better to base the authorization on
such objective controls as reliable information, and not
to open it to the subjective criteria that could be used by
an interdicting State. We hope that the limitations set
forth in paragraph 20 will be included in the report of
the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group.

The rules of international law should be respected
by all States, including the provisions ofthe 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea concerning
freedom of navigation on the high seas. The Convention
specifically addresses the matter of the interdiction of
vessels on the high seas, yet the provisions of resolution
2182 (2014) go beyond those of the Convention. While
the Charter of the United Nations, including in its
Articles 25 and 103, grants the resolutions of the
Security Council priority over the obligations of States
under international agreements, the legal principle of
equal sovereignty should be respected, and Council
resolutions should not be used as tools to manipulate
the rules of international law.

