Mr. Taalas (Finland): Finland subscribes to the
European Union statement. I would like to make just a
few additional points from our national perspective.

Finland welcomes this debate. In the light of this
debate, of exchanges in many other forums, and of the
Secretary-General's 2009 report (A/64/350), it is clear
that climate change will have significant security
implications. The themes highlighted in the concept
note (S/2011/408, annex) and in this debate, including
rises in sea levels and food security, are directly linked
to international peace and security. Only 20 years ago,
it did not seem imaginable that small island nations
could be submerged due to sea-level rise. It sounded
like science-fiction. Today, that prospect is all too real.

Climate change will have an adverse effect on
food production and freshwater resources. That impact
will be worse in areas already under environmental
stress, which could lead to population movements and
political unrest. While the impact of climate change
varies from region to region, the small island
developing States are most at risk. They are not the
cause of climate change, but they may very well
become its first victims unless remedial action is taken.
They must be our priority.

Finland is actively partnering with many small
island developing States in building their capacity to
act internationally and adapt locally. As an example,
Finland supports the capacity development of the
Alliance of Small Island States and the Pacific small
island developing States, and has meteorological
cooperation projects in the Pacific and Caribbean
regions.

Action and ownership at the local level are
crucial to slowing climate change and mitigating its
effects. Women have a key role, as they are often the
most powerful agents for change. That is why Finland
has for years supported the Global Gender and Climate
Alliance and the participation of women
representatives in climate change negotiations.

Finland welcomes the discussions on climate
change within the United Nations and believes that the
Security Council and other United Nations organs can
and should contribute to this, within their respective
competences. The Security Council should, given its
pre-eminent role in maintaining international peace and
security, keep an eye on the emerging security
implications of climate change. If elected to the

 

Security Council next year, Finland will contribute
actively to any such assessment and action.

