Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): First of all, let me
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Pakistan
for his stewardship of the work of the Security Council
for this month and to thank him for convening today's
important meeting.

I take this opportunity to welcome Australia,
Argentina, the Republic of Korea, Luxembourg and
Rwanda as incoming members of the Council. I am
confident that they will make significant contributions
to its agenda.

Kazakhstan consistently advocates the
strengthening of global security through the efforts of
the United Nations and the international community to
fight international terrorism.

No terrorist activity has any justification; nor
is it tied to any nationality or religion. It does cause
serious damage to international peace and security
and to global sustainable development. Terrorism has
a criminal undertaking. Behind the rhetoric of terrorist
groups lies criminal activity that undermines the
foundations of society.

We are convinced that no country in the world can
sufficiently address contemporary challenges alone,
especially terrorism. We therefore attach great value to
the development of cooperation on counter-terrorism,
and we support in practice all international and regional
efforts in that direction.

We advocate the further implementation of the
main provisions of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy at the national and regional levels.
A concrete step in that direction was the adoption of
the Joint Plan of Action for the Implementation of the
Strategy in Central Asia, which took place in the city
of Ashgabat in 2011. The Plan is the fruitful outcome of
thejoint efforts of countries of the region, the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the European
Union and the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia. In 2012, a
consultative meeting was held in Almaty, with the
support of the Government of my country, to discuss
how to implement the Plan in conjunction with the
major regional organizations.

Kazakhstan is an active participant in the
anti-terrorist centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the regional anti-terrorist structure
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
efforts of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
in the fight against terrorism and extremism. My
country is also undertaking counter-terrorism measures
in accordance with its individual partnership action
plan with NATO. In addition, it is currently engaged in
ongoing dialogue and collaboration with the European
Union.

The Astana Declaration on the Prevention of
Terrorism, adopted at a conference, reaffirmed
the commitment of participating countries of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and State partners to the fight against the scourge of
terrorism.

We support the international community's efforts
to combat the threat of nuclear terrorism. We attach
great importance to international cooperation and to
the implementation of measures to prevent the spread
of weapons of mass destruction and to avoid having
them all into the hands of terrorists. My Government
therefore organized a conference on the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, with special focus on
countering the financing of terrorism, and held the first
meeting of the Implementation and Assessment Group.

At the national level, within the framework of the
Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy, adopted this year, we have
started to develop a new State programme to combat
religious extremism and terrorism, an important part
of which will be devoted to regional and international
cooperation, improving national antiterrorism
legislation, including questions on providing assistance
to victims of terrorist attacks, and preventing terrorism.

Terrorism, as experience proves, cannot be
completely eliminated by methods of force alone.
We therefore consider it necessary to promote
sustainable economic development and education. We
wish to promote the elimination, as far as possible, of
preconditions for conflict situations in every region
and to create new, reliable mechanisms for overcoming
social, ethnic and religious tensions. In that context, my
country intends to use the advantages of the interactive
platform of the Congress of Leaders of World and
Traditional Religions to create a new platform for the
resolution of conflicts on religious grounds.

A ministerial meeting of the Istanbul Process on
Afghanistan will be held in Astana in April, with a view
to developing concrete proposals for reducing the threat
of terrorism to the region as a whole. We are confident
that that forum will make an important contribution to
the process of the political settlement, reconstruction
and regional integration of Afghanistan.

We live in the age of the Internet and advanced
technology, where the flow of information is enormous.
It is regrettable that those new information capabilities
are used by terrorist and extremist organizations to
spread their destructive ideology. In that regard, we
support the efforts of the Russian Federation and China
to develop a mechanism for ensuring international
information security.

