Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): First, I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister De Gucht,
Foreign Minister Thambwe and Permanent
Representative Nsengimana to the Council today.

The United States remains deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We therefore welcome the
unanimous adoption of the Security Council resolution
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for
another year. In implementing this mandate, we believe
it crucial that MONUC recognizes limitations and
prioritizes tasks. We urge MONUC to focus its efforts
in particular on the protection of displaced and
vulnerable civilians and the establishment of
humanitarian zones, in keeping with the MONUC
disengagement plan.

We urge all parties to deal with the primary
causes of instability in the East, including the
continuing presence of the Forces democratiques de la
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) and the continued
provocation of Laurent Nkunda and the Congres
national pour la defense du peuple (CNDP). We
welcome the direct personal involvement of the
Secretary-General in bringing regional leaders together
in Nairobi last month. We give our full support to the
peace talks led by United Nations Special Envoy
Obasanjo. We hope that ongoing direct discussion
between the representatives of the Congolese
Government and the CNDP will produce concrete
results. While these discussions are still at an early
stage, we hope that they, together with the complete
implementation of the Nairobi Communique and the
Goma Peace Agreement, will pave the way for lasting
stability in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The United States also supports the adoption of
the draft Democratic Republic of the Congo sanctions
resolution, which will be before the Council later this
morning. Improved enforcement of the measures listed
in that draft resolution should be another element in
our strategy to foster stability. We appreciate the
professional and balanced work of the United Nations
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and we urge the Democratic Republic of the
Congo sanctions Committee to respond to the serious
sanctions violations that the Group has recently
documented, particularly with respect to financial
networks tied to illegal mineral exploitation.

MONUC cannot work in a vacuum. All parties
must adhere to the political process and abide by
previous agreements, if MONUC is to carry out its
work. The international community and all concerned
parties must commit to doing what we can to support a
lasting peace for the people of the Great Lakes region.
We greatly appreciate MONUC's continued efforts to
protect civilians in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo under the most difficult of circumstances.

