Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain voted today in favour of draft resolution
S/2015/562, presented by Malaysia, and we regret that
it could not be adopted. My delegation believes that
the draft resolution was an appropriate follow-up to
resolution 2166 (2014), which the Council adopted
unanimously a year ago. It is important to highlight
the fact that resolution 2166 (2014) remains in force
today. It is also important to preserve the unity that the
Council demonstrated at that time.

In that context, I wish to reiterate Spain's
condemnation of the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 last July as well as our sorrow at the
fate of its 298 civilian passengers and crew, to whose
memory I wish to pay tribute once again today.

My country has repeatedly called for accountability
of those responsible for this indescribable act. It is
unacceptable that the parties to a conflict could resort
to indiscriminate violent attacks against civil aviation.
The Security Council cannot remain unmoved in the
face of this kind of action. On the contrary, it must
ensure that those responsible are brought to account, as
set out in its resolution 2166 (2014).

I wish to reiterate Spain's firm support both for the
technical investigation of the events directed by the
Dutch Safety Board in accordance with International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) principles, as well
as for the criminal investigation being carried out by the
Joint Investigation Team. I wish also to acknowledge
and give thanks for the role that the United Nations
system, in particular ICAO, has been playing, in a
rigorous and independent manner, in support of the
technical investigation.

As we have previously stated, Spain believes that
the creation of an ad hoc international criminal tribunal,
as detailed in the Malaysian draft resolution, would be a
step forward in the fight against impunity and the quest
for justice for the victims. It is important to continue to
work to attain this objective and to convey the message
that such execrable acts are unacceptable. We have a
responsibility to contribute through our actions to the
prevention of further such acts, especially because more
and more non-State actors are able to do so today. In
this way we will contribute to strengthening the safety
of international aviation and, ultimately, international
peace and security.

