Mr. Schori (Sweden): I thank the President of the
Security Council for organizing this meeting and
Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
briefing. I also warmly welcome the presence here
today of Mr. Xanana Gusmao and Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The Central and European
countries associate with the European Union-
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey, as well as Iceland and Norway, European
Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
statement.

The EU welcomes the progress that the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) has made during the last couple of months
in the implementation of its mandate, and the EU fully
supports Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello in his efforts to
ensure full implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1272 (1999) and 1338 (2001). Our common
objective of early independence for East Timor has
come decidedly closer. The main political step in East
Timor's transition to independence during the past
three months has been the adoption of a regulation on
the establishment of a Constituent Assembly. The EU
remains committed to the success of the East Timorese
transition to independence and supports the electoral
timetable. We will support the electoral process in the
area of election monitoring as well as in civic
education.

The European Union is satisfied to hear that
measures are being carried out by UNTAET in order to
secure broad public participation in the constitutional
development process, and it believes that the civic
educators could play an important role in the
construction of an independent East Timor. We
encourage UNTAET to continue these efforts. The EU
also welcomes the voter education programme that is
being carried out.

The EU is concerned about the rather slow pace
in the Timorization process. Recruitment and capacity-
building efforts need to be strengthened in all
governance areas, including at the district level, in
order to ensure the good governance of the country
once full independence is reached. We would
appreciate hearing the Secretariat's assessment of
progress in this field.

The EU remains seriously concerned about the
unresolved issue of the armed militias and the large
number of East Timorese refugees remaining in camps
in West Timor, and its implications for the security
situation in East Timor. While the EU welcomes efforts
by Indonesia to improve relations with East Timor, we
call on the Government of Indonesia to implement all
measures called for by the Security Council in
resolution 1319 (2000).

Given the continued threat of militia activities,
the EU notes the Secretary-General's assessment
regarding the need to maintain a military component
essentially in its present form until more detailed
reports on developments in the security situation are
available from the Secretary-General. It is also
important that the international community support the
build-up of the East Timor Defence Force. The
continued presence of international civil police is
important until the Timor Lorosa'e police service is
operational.

The Union notes with satisfaction the efforts
made by UNTAET, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) and
other relevant parties aimed at increasing the number
of refugees returning to East Timor. The EU is
seriously concerned that those waiting to return may
not do so in time to vote in the elections for the
Constituent Assembly in August. We urge the
Government of Indonesia to finalize and implement its
"global plan" for the repatriation and resettlement of
refugees without further delay.

It is indeed very disappointing that the
jurisdiction of the ad hoc human rights tribunal will be
limited to acts committed after the popular consultation
of 30 August 1999, thus excluding several serious
crimes. The European Union expects that Indonesia
will cooperate with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights as well as UNTAET
in accordance with the memorandum of understanding
to ensure that the violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in East Timor during
1999 will be prosecuted.

The European Union has already expressed its
deep disappointment with the judgements of 4 May on
six men in connection with the killings on 6 September
2000 of three international UNHCR staff in Atambua,
West Timor. The brutality of the murders does not seem
to be commensurately reflected in the judgements.
They represent a strike against the efforts to ensure the
safety and security of all United Nations humanitarian
personnel. The Union welcomes the decision by the
prosecutor to appeal the judgements. It is our
expectation that the appeals court will honour the
commitment of Indonesia in the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights that the murders in
Atambua will be dealt with in conformity with
international standards of justice and fairness.

The European Union welcomes the working
group on post-UNTAET planning, as well as the
establishment of an integrated task force at
Headquarters. We note also the Secretary-General's
views on the need for a significant international
presence after independence. We are looking forward
to further recommendations in his next report.

