Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
the Senegalese delegation would like to thank the
Ethiopian presidency for having organized this meeting.
We also welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Ibrahim Abdulkarim Al-Jafari, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq, among us this morning.

Senegal was a sponsor of resolution 2379
(2017), which the Security Council has just adopted
unanimously in order to reaffirm the position that all
of us here share as a community of nations regarding
the reprehensible nature of terrorism and violent
extremism, in particular the actions of and violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), known as Da'esh, an organization that now more
than ever appears to pose a global threat.

With the setting up of the investigative team led by a
Special Adviser, in implementation of the mandate that
has just been adopted, the United Nations will be able to
lend the necessary assistance to the Iraqi authorities to
gather evidence on the basis of the highest standards in
the field on acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and crimes of genocide committed by
ISIL. This will help shed light on the truth and facilitate
the necessary process of bringing the perpetrators to
justice. It also opens the door to interesting prospects in
terms of cooperation with Member States in the field of
international criminal justice concerning acts carried
out by Da'esh.

Though this resolution, we are also showing our
active solidarity with the people and the Government
of Iraq, to which we wish to reiterate our sincere
congratulations for the decisive victories they have
achieved in the fight against ISIL. We have no doubt
that with the ongoing support of the international
community, including the United Nations, through
its United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, the
Iraqi authorities will continue their efforts aimed
at reconciliation so as to eradicate in a lasting way
ISIL's ideology.

By way of conclusion, I would like to convey my
gratitude to the delegation of the United Kingdom
for its ongoing efforts during the whole process of
negotiations, which, of course, enabled us to achieve
this outcome, which is a harbinger of great hope for the
many victims who deserve thatjustice be done.

