Mr. Giacomelli Da Silva (Brazil): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this important debate. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing.

Brazil has traditionally underscored the
interdependence between security and development.
That relationship was the subject of an open debate
convened by the Brazilian presidency of the Security
Council in 2011 (see S/PV.6479), as acknowledged by
the concept note (S/2017/1016, annex) circulated by the
Permanent Mission of Japan for this meeting.

The interlinkage between security and development
is complex and nuanced. Poverty and inequality may
exacerbate tensions in some scenarios but do not
necessarily endanger international peace and security.
Geopolitical rivalries, militaristic approaches and the
unilateral use of force are far more serious sources of
regional and global instability. Let us never forget that
throughout history, many of the most lethal conflicts,
serious humanitarian crises and appalling human rights
violations resulted from those causes.

While discussing the increasingly complex
dynamics that affect contemporary conflicts, we
should be careful to avoid misinterpretations and
generalizations that might be detrimental to the
coherence, effectiveness and legitimacy of the United
Nations. In particular while debating the means to
implement new concepts like sustaining peace, we
must be cautious in avoiding attempts to securitize the
development agenda.

Climate change, international migration, population
growth, food insecurity and other sustainable
development issues do not constitute threats to
international peace and security nor are they root causes
of conflicts per se. Latin America and the Caribbean,
a region that historically faces such challenges but is
not in conflict, is a clear example of that. This is why
such phenomena should remain within the purview of
the appropriate multilateral bodies with the adequate
legal mandates and technical expertise. The most
efficient way to meet these development challenges
is to allocate the necessary resources to tackle them,
including through technology transfer, technical
cooperation and humanitarian assistance, as well as
through the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

Among the threat multipliers mentioned in the
concept note, we should include the misjudgments
that gave rise to decisions authorizing the use of force
since they unilaterally create or intensify humanitarian
emergencies as the cases of Libya, Syria and Yemen
attest. In this regard, Brazil highlights the need to
enhance the mechanisms of accountability pertaining to
the use of force under the authorization of the Council,
and even more so in the absence of such permission.

Priority should always be given to the peaceful
resolution of conflicts. We support the Secretary-
General's call for a surge in diplomacy today and a leap
in conflict prevention for tomorrow.

In practice, successful peacekeeping operations
demonstrate the potential for a constructive
relationship between security and development. The
recent experience of the United Nations in Haiti is a
positive example, as rightly pointed out in the concept
note. Brazil was proud to play a significant role in those
successful peacekeeping efforts.

Brazil believes the Security Council would benefit
from strengthening its engagement with other United
Nations entities and agencies that have a role to play
in formulating strategies for preventing and resolving
conflicts. In this respect, the Peacebuilding Commission
stands out for its bridging role, as recognized by the
twin sustaining peace resolutions (Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution
70/262).

Finally, a reformed Security Council, with a more
democratic composition, a wider membership among
developing countries and more transparent working
methods, would increase its effectiveness in facing
the complex challenges to international peace and
security. By more accurately reflecting the realities
of the twenty-first century and including more diverse
perspectives on present problems, it would preserve the
legitimacy and credibility of the United Nations and the
multilateral system as a whole, allowing us to address
the true root causes of contemporary conflicts.

