Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, may I start by expressing my deep
appreciation to you for your efforts to convene this
meeting. This meeting provided the parties with a
useful platform for exchanges and cooperation on the
question of the Sudan. We wish also to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence and for his
statement.

We appreciate the efforts made by the Secretary-
General to address the question of Darfur. We support
the proposal and the constructive initiative to hold a
high-level dialogue on the Sudan. We welcome the
presence of the representatives of the Sudanese
Government, the African Union (AU), the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, three of whom made statements at this
meeting.
The Darfur issue is now the focus of the
international community's attention and a priority on

the agenda of the Security Council; the international
community has been working tirelessly to resolve it.
The African Union has sent the largest mission ever to
Darfur to undertake an arduous peacekeeping task.
Humanitarian workers from the United Nations and
other relevant organizations have swiftly delivered
relief supplies to refugees in the Darfur region to
alleviate the humanitarian situation there. Relevant
regional organizations and various countries have also
lent a helping hand or contributed advice and ideas.
The fundamental goal of their efforts is to help the
Sudanese Government restore peace in Darfur, assist
the local population and ultimately achieve peace
throughout the Sudan.

Since the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 1706 (2006), China has been closely
following developments related to the Sudanese issue,
particularly the situation in Darfur. We have noted that
although the parties disagree about how to address the
Darfur issue, they have a consensus on at least two
points. First, the United Nations should take over the
tasks now undertaken by the African Union Mission in
the Sudan (AMIS). That is a recommendation of the
Secretary-General and the collective position of the
AU; it is also a pragmatic solution. Secondly, we
should continue to seek the consent and cooperation of
the Sudanese Government regarding the deployment of
United Nations peacekeeping troops. Although that
Government has not accepted resolution 1706 (2006),
the door to dialogue should remain wide open.

On the basis of that consensus, China maintains
that the members of the international community
should continue to strengthen coordination and
cooperation. They should continue to seek to dispel the
Sudanese Government's suspicions and concerns
regarding the deployment of United Nations troops;
they should also swiftly take measures to ease the
security and humanitarian situation in Darfur.

At this point, we can proceed on two fronts. First,
we should adopt measures to strengthen AMIS. The AU
Peace and Security Council will soon hold a meeting of
ministers for foreign affairs in New York. At that time,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan will also
be present for the General Assembly session. On the
basis of full consultation, the parties can make
appropriate arrangements for the future of AMIS and
for its mandate.
Secondly, we must provide emergency
humanitarian relief and funding to remove the very real
obstacles to humanitarian assistance. We have noted
that Under-Secretary-General Egeland has often
appealed to the parties to honour their pledges
regarding assistance. The parties should heed that
appeal and honour their commitments as soon as
possible.

China has worked in a consistent, active and
responsible manner to advance the peace process in the
Sudan, devoting great attention to finding an
appropriate solution to the problems of Darfur. We
have often pointed out to the Sudan that the only
objective of the United Nations in taking over the task
of AMIS is to help the Sudan implement the Darfur
Peace Agreement. That is also the broad consensus of
the international community. We hope that the
Government of the Sudan will proceed from the
perspective of its long-term development and take a
flexible approach.

At the same time, we consider that the Security
Council should respect the views of the national
Government in question and that no United Nations
peacekeeping operation should be imposed. Moreover,
we must pay heed to the influence and the roles of the
relevant regional organizations. We believe that if all
the parties take a frank and pragmatic approach,
enhance mutual trust and cooperation and broaden their
perspective, we will certainly be able to achieve an
outcome that is satisfactory to everyone.

As this meeting is being held on the fifth
anniversary of 11 September 2001, the Chinese
delegation would like to express its sympathy to the
United States Mission and to the Government and the
people of the United States.

