Mr. Qin Huasun (China)(interpretation from Chinese): The recent changes in the political and military
situation of Afghanistan have caused widespread concern
among the international community and particularly
among the countries neighbouring Afghanistan, which fear
that the escalation of the internal conflict in Afghanistan
might endanger their border security. The letters before us
from the Russian Federation and the Republic of
Kazakstan, as well as the numerous statements we have
heard today, give expression to that concern.

We understand such concerns and anxiety. As a
friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China is also
concerned about changes and developments in the Afghan
situation. We sincerely hope that the open debate in the
Council today will be conducive to the peaceful
settlement of the conflict in Afghanistan.

The Chinese delegation is of the view that the key
to the attainment of this goal is the realization of genuine

 

national reconciliation, which, however, depends mainly on
the parties in Afghanistan. It can be said that the key to
national reconciliation is in their hands. Therefore, we hope
that the parties will soon resolve their political, religious
and racial differences, immediately stop armed conflicts in
the general interest of the country and nation, and establish
through peaceful negotiations, under the auspices of the
United Nations and the international community, a broadly
based and stable government acceptable to all parties. We
are confident that the Afghan people are fully capable of
resolving their own problems.

We appreciate the unremitting efforts made by the
United Nations and the international community to promote
the political settlement of the Afghan conflict and hope that
all parties will continue to play a constructive role to this
end. The prolonged ravages and disruptions of war in
Afghanistan have brought tremendous sufferings to the
Afghan people. They are also detrimental to peace and
stability in the neighbouring countries and the region at
large. Only when genuine national reconciliation and
stability is achieved in Afghanistan will the Afghan people
be able to rebuild their homeland and live and work in
peace and contentment. We sincerely hope that peace and
stability will come early to Afghanistan.

