Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): The
Syrian regime's use of torture, arbitrary arrest and
detention and enforced disappearances dates back
to long before the 2011 uprising. Those abuses have
always been a distinctive feature of the regime, and in
a push to eliminate all forms of opposition, they have
reached an unprecedented scale during the eight years
of conflict, with their widespread and systematic use
by security forces. The testimonies we heard today
illustrate that poignantly. The victims are political
opponents, peaceful activists, intellectuals, artists and
ordinary Syrians - victims of merciless methods. The
settlement of the issue of detainees and missing persons
is inextricably linked to the search for a political
solution to the Syrian crisis, which, at its core, is a crisis
of massive violations of human rights. It is therefore
essential that the Security Council remain seized of
the issue. In that regard, I would like to highlight three
imperatives

The first imperative is truth. All information on the
massive human rights violations committed in Syria by
all actors must be brought to light. In that connection,
France commends the invaluable contribution of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, whose impartial and
independent reports reflect the reality of the Syrian
tragedy. In particular, we welcome the report on
detentions that was published and presented to the
Security Council during an Arria Formula meeting in
November. The Council must continue to hear regular
briefings on this issue. That was the thrust of the joint
statement issued by France, the United Kingdom and
the United States at an event held during the high-
level week in September in the presence of Families
for Freedom and other Syrian non-governmental
organizations (NGOs).

The second imperative isjustice. Crimes committed
by the regime must not remain unpunished. The evidence
of those crimes will not disappear. The International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, established by the General Assembly, will see
to it. It is essential that all Member States, NGOs
and international organizations cooperate with the
Mechanism. The evidence is intended to be presented
before the appropriate national or international courts
to ensure that justice is done to victims, including
victims of arbitrary detention, enforced disappearances
and torture. Thanks to the Caesar file, delivered to the
French courts and containing photos of thousands of
bodies of hungry and tortured detainees, international
arrest warrants were issued by a French examining
judge against three senior officials of the repressive
Syrian apparatus. They have been charged with torture,
forced disappearances and crimes against humanity.

While that is an essential first step in the fight
against impunity, I also recall the importance of
ratifying the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance in order to
combat impunity for this crime. I also reiterate that the
death certificates issued by the Damascus regime do
not exempt it from its obligation to ensure justice. Nor
are they the dignified answer that the victims' families
and loved ones expect in order to properly grieve. They
have the right to the truth.

The third imperative is the safety of people. The
situation in Syria cannot be normalized without
creating a safe environment on the ground for
civilians - a precondition for any credible political
settlement in Syria and what Syrians, including
refugees and displaced persons, expect. We note that the
regime's systematic use of such practices is responsible
for the departure of thousands of people from Syria
and continues to prevent them from returning. Creating
a safe and neutral environment means, first and
foremost, a change in the regime's behaviour. That will
require putting an end to such practices and allowing
immediate and unfettered access of neutral parties to
all detention centres. Security Council resolutions have
explicitly called for this since 2011.

In view of the scale of the arbitrary detentions and
enforced disappearances, it is clear that any progress on
this issue will require the unconditional releases of all
persons detained for political reasons. France calls on
the allies ofthe Syrian regime to pressure it to do so. It is
a simple confidence-building measure that the Special
Envoy rightly pointed out. It is within the context of its
mediation that this issue must be addressed, through
discussions led by the United Nations in Geneva, in
consideration of the whole problem and not only certain
categories of detainees or the exchange of a limited
number of prisoners.

At the heart of the Syrian tragedy is an unnamed
cruelty. Giving freedom to the thousands of arbitrarily
detained prisoners and recreating the conditions for
a safe and dignified life in Syria for all is not only a
moral obligation, it is a political necessity. As we all
know, there can be no lasting and inclusive peace in
Syria unless justice is rendered and a credible political
solution is reached, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015).

