Mr. Zlauvinen: The International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), too, is pleased to participate in this
relevant meeting of the Council.

Many programmes and activities of the IAEA are
relevant to resolution 1540 (2004). The IAEA General
Conference has invited the Agency's secretariat to
provide assistance to member States, upon request and
within the scope of the Agency's statutory
responsibilities, for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

In particular, the Nuclear Security Plan for 2006-
2009 provides a compilation of activities and a plan for
their implementation. Through these activities, the
Agency assists States in preventing nuclear material
and related technologies from falling into the hands of
non-State actors and, accordingly, helps States fulfil
their international obligations, including those required
under resolution 1540 (2004).

The relevant programmes and activities include,
inter alia, the following: first, to provide legislative and
regulatory assistance to enable member States to adopt
the necessary legislation to implement instruments
under the Agency's purview, such as safeguards
agreements, additional protocols and the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material;
secondly, to assist in strengthening member States'
systems for controlling nuclear material and related
technology so as to enable Governments to implement
legal instruments to which they subscribe and to
tighten national controls; thirdly, to provide support to
States for the implementation of high standards of
physical protection of nuclear material, nuclear
facilities and nuclear transports; and fourthly, to
provide support for States' efforts to upgrade border
controls in order to enhance the capability to detect
illicit trafficking in nuclear material and related
technologies.

In addition, the IAEA facilitates the development
and publishing of a series of policy documents on
nuclear-security guidance containing recommendations
and proposing practical arrangements on how States
can implement their international obligations that are
relevant to strengthening nuclear security. Such
guidance, on how to establish and maintain a system of
accounting for and control of nuclear material,
facilitates the implementation of States' obligations
pursuant to their respective safeguards agreements. In
addition, guidance on the design and maintenance of a
physical protection regime applicable to nuclear
material and facilities is needed to support consistent
implementation of the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material.

To further assist States in their efforts to
implement their international obligations, the Agency
offers and carries out evaluation and assessment
services to help States identify what needs to be
improved in the area of nuclear security, including
their national systems for the accounting and control of
nuclear material and their regimes for the physical
protection of nuclear material and facilities. Since
2003, more than 70 such peer-based review missions
have been carried out by the Agency.

Capacity-building continues to be a cornerstone
of the Nuclear Security Plan for 2006-2009. As part of
it, the Agency helps States to address key needs in
human resource development. The Agency offers a
comprehensive education and training programme with
a wide variety of education and training events,
including technical and scientific visits and on-the-job
training in the fields of physical protection of nuclear
material and facilities and illicit trafficking. Last year,
a nuclear-security training course for lawyers was held
by the Agency to create a pool of legal experts who
would be available for participation in nuclear security
missions. Since 2003, approximately 150 training
events have been carried out, with more than 3,000
participants from more than 100 countries.

The Agency has also responded to some States'
physical protection needs by providing upgrades and
technical support for improved physical protection of
nuclear material and facilities. Some nuclear facilities
have also received technical support to strengthen their
nuclear-material accounting systems. For capacity-
building in the area of detection of nuclear materials in
illicit trafficking, including at border-crossing points,
more than 800 detection instruments have been
provided to some 20 countries.

The Agency's programmes and activities in the
area of nuclear security are funded mostly from
extrabudgetary resources. The Nuclear Security Fund
has been established to receive voluntary financial
contributions for that purpose. In addition, significant
in-kind contributions are received from member States.
07-24806
The cost of the activities carried out during 2006, for
example, was $20 million.

These support efforts will continue in 2007. An
increased number of assessment and evaluation
missions; legal and regulatory support activities; a
strengthened programme for human resource
development; and the provision of technical assistance,
including the necessary technical equipment, will be
carried out by the IAEA. Regional resource centres
will be established, through which much of the
required training can be offered.

The Agency has also strengthened its
international coordination efforts. Regular meetings are
convened with member States and other international
organizations. For example, the Agency develops, in
consultation with individual member States, the
integrated nuclear security support plans which bring
together all of the work that is required to implement,
inter alia, obligations under the legal instruments that
are relevant in the nuclear area. Those plans provide
comprehensive workplans for individual countries and
can be used to help coordinate activities and generate
the required resources. The plans improve the
efficiency of existing resources and help to avoid caps.
All activities are performed with due consideration to
maintaining the confidentiality of sensitive
information.

Let me present some suggestions on how to
strengthen cooperation between the 1540 Committee
and my organization. We would like to suggest that the
1540 Committee actively inform Member States of all
the programmes and activities carried out by the IAEA.
The most practical way forward continues to be for the
Committee to encourage those Member States
requiring assistance in the nuclear field to work
directly with the Agency and to report their progress in
the fulfilment of their international obligations, as
appropriate, to the relevant bodies, in particular to the
1540 Committee.

Such implementation would be further
encouraged if the Committee, in its summary reports,
were to devote a dedicated chapter to the assistance
provided by the IAEA for the fulfilment of obligations
relevant to nuclear weapons and related materials.
Information about IAEA activities in the nuclear field
and security field can be found on the Agency's web

page.
Finally, as a possible way for future interaction
and cooperation, the Committee could share with the
Agency information about those countries that have
been identified by the 1540 Committee as needing
further assistance.

