The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Makarenko for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Peru.

I would like to express my appreciation for
the informative briefings on the linkages between
international terrorism and organized crime provided
by Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Michele
Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; and Ms. Tamara
Makarenko, international consultant.

Since 2001, the Security Council has observed
with concern the close linkages between international
terrorism and organized crime and stressed the need
to promote coordination of initiatives at all levels in
order to strengthen the international response to this
serious problem, which is a threat to international
peace and security. Throughout its participation as a
non-permanent member of the Council and at the helm
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, Peru has led
through an inclusive process actions aimed at deepening
the understanding of the linkages between the two
phenomena with a View to identifying, preventing and
dismantling them.

In addition to the Arria Formula meeting we had
in 2018, we also supported the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/9 in May 2018, which
encouraged States, among other things, to continue to
investigate to better understand the nature and scope
of those linkages. We also held an open meeting on
counter-terrorism in October 2018 (see S/PV.8364) and
a special joint meeting between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities , which considered this problem from various
perspectives. In that context, Peru proposed a thematic
discussion in the context of Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations, which the Council is currently
negotiating with a View to strengthening States'
capacities and promoting more effective cooperation at
the national and international levels in response to the
linkages between organized crime and terrorism.

We believe that this effort, like all action aimed
at combating terrorism, must be coherent with
international law, international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law.
Specifically, it is crucial to address the relationship
between organized crime and terrorism beyond the idea
of financing to identify and dismantle the dynamics
of logistical support, including through such crimes
as the trafficking of drugs, weapons, persons and
natural resources.

In that regard, the future draft resolution will seek
to address those issues and urge States to strengthen
border controls and contribute more information both
at the national and the international levels. However,
we recognize that the two phenomena correspond to
different motivations and have separate legal frameworks
so they cannot be automatically linked. We recall that
my country has suffered from the manifestations of
the linkages between national terrorism and organized
crime, in particular drug trafficking.

We trust that today's meeting will provide
an opportunity for the Security Council and the
membership as a whole to share their assessments and
experiences with regard to this topic and contribute to
the negotiations under way. In particular, it is important
to understand the manifestations of the linkages in
their respective different regions, ways of identifying
and dismantling them, and ways of improving the
international community's efforts in that regard,
especially with the support of the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.

We hope that we can count on the support of all
Member States to join efforts with a View to preventing
and combating the linkages between international
terrorism and organized crime.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

