Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Let me
too reiterate in the open Chamber our congratulations
to Cote d'Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the
Council and our thanks and congratulations to China
for its excellent presidency in November.

I also congratulate Special Adviser Khan on his
appointment. I thank him for being here in person
today to brief the Security Council for the first time.
The United States looks forward to working closely
with him to fulfil the critical mandate of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant.
Last year, the Government of Iraq asked for
assistance in its efforts to hold members of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) accountable for
atrocities. Knowing how pivotal a period it was in Iraq's
rich history, Council members quickly responded by
unanimously adopting resolution 2379 (2017). History
has shown that swift and effective evidence collection
after atrocities are perpetrated is critical to the ability
to recover and move forward. The recent discovery in
Iraq of more than 200 mass graves containing as many
as 12,000 bodies makes today's discussions in the
Council all the more important.

I am pleased to announce today that the United
States intends to commit $2 million to support the
efforts of the Investigative Team. We thank those
who have already contributed, including the United
Kingdom, Qatar and the Netherlands, and call on other
countries to quickly lend their support as it begins to
carry out its mandate. Of course, money alone will not
guarantee the effective collection of evidence. We urge
Iraq's new Government to continue working closely
with the Team as well. Mr. Khan's meeting with Prime
Minister Adil Abdul-Mahdi of Iraq is an important step
in beginning that conversation.

No segment of Iraqi society has escaped the terror

of ISIS, and it is important to develop a balanced and
accurate account of events. That will give all Iraqis a
voice, including members of every religious and ethnic
group in Iraq that has been subjected to unspeakable
crimes. The appointment of Iraqi experts to the
Investigative Team, working alongside international
experts, will be critical to its success. At the same time,
the Government of Iraq must give the Team the space
to operate effectively. Independence and impartiality
are essential to its credibility going forward. In keeping
with the Secretary-General's efforts to enhance
coherence and collaboration across the United Nations
system, it will also be essential for the Team to work
closely with the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq and other relevant United Nations offices, as well
as civil-society groups, in order to coordinate efforts on
the ground. Its efforts must be matched with measures
to protect and support the families of victims and the
survivors of atrocious crimes, who are still living with
trauma from their appalling experiences.

There is much to be optimistic about in Iraq today.
We see Iraq's future in people like Nadia Murad, whose
foundation, Nadia's Initiative, is dedicated to helping
women and children who are victimized by genocide,
mass atrocities and human trafficking. Through her
efforts, Nadia has helped hundreds of Iraqi women
and children heal and rebuild their lives, and has set
an example to many Iraqis who are following her lead.
She has had an immeasurable impact on the global
conversation about ending the use of sexual violence as
a weapon of war. The United States congratulates her
on being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 2018. Nadia
is one of many Iraqis who bravely called on Council
members to come together and adopt resolution 2379
(2017) unanimously. Special Adviser Khan's attendance
at Nadia's Nobel award ceremony is an important
illustration of the new role of the United Nations in
seeking justice for Nadia and the many Iraqis like her.
We want to once again thank the Government of Iraq
and the Investigative Team for taking important steps
towards demonstrating that justice is never beyond
reach. ISIS will be held accountable for its many crimes
against the Iraqi people once and for all.

