Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like to congratulate you publicly,
Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like to
commend you on the manner in which you are
presiding over our debates. I would also like to express
my delegation's gratitude to the Chinese delegation and
Ambassador Wang for the excellent manner in which
they guided the Council's activities last month.

With respect to the topic at hand, my delegation
wishes first to thank the Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Brazil, Ambassador Ronaldo
Sardenberg, for his report, in which he clearly sets out
the activities, findings and recommendations of last
month's mission to Haiti, in which I had the honour to
participate. I also wish to make special note of the
leadership and excellent manner in which my friend
Ambassador Ronaldo Sardenberg undertook all his
tasks.

The Security Council's visit was an excellent
opportunity for all its members to have direct contact
with the main political, religious and civil actors in
Haiti, as well as with personnel of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Everyone
knows that Haiti is at a very delicate and critical
juncture for its institutional development, and is
perhaps at a decisive moment in its history.

We believe that the United Nations Mission
should help the Haitian people to achieve peace and
stability by cooperating in the reconstruction of its
democratic institutions and in development
programmes. In that context, I reiterate that, while the
political, economic and social problems besetting Haiti
are far from resolution, we believe that the country's
situation would surely be even more serious and tragic
if the United Nations had not acted. It is essential, in
our opinion, to guarantee the security conditions
necessary to the normal development of the election
process to begin on 8 October with the election of local
authorities and to continue in November with the
presidential election. To that end, the military and
police contingents should be expanded during the
electoral period and until the inauguration of the new
democratic Government, scheduled for February 2006.

We believe that MINUSTAH and its leaders
should ensure that the elections are free, fair, inclusive
and open to all political parties that publicly renounce
violence. The international presence should be
coordinated by mobilizing observers to cooperate in
the registration process already under way, as well as
in the voting and tallying of votes.

We also believe that it is indispensable to provide
assistance in rebuilding State institutions - in
particular in the reform of the judiciary and penal
systems, which are fundamental to combating impunity
and ensuring respect for due process and the defence of
human rights - through the measures being sought by
the Haitian people and the international community.

We must reiterate the urgency of the need for the
funds that have been pledged by the international
donors to be disbursed in order to implement
development projects in the fields of infrastructure,
energy, sanitation, communications and the
environment and thus to create the necessary
conditions for the inhabitants of the island to enjoy a
minimum level of well-being and, most importantly, to
enable them to see that the United Nations Mission is
there to help the Haitians to launch their economic
recovery and resume their development. The
reconstruction of the Haitian economy, the recovery of
democratic institutions and the restoration of a safe
environment based on the rule of law and respect for
human rights are fundamental prerequisites for
reversing the current situation.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Juan Gabriel Valdes, and his team for their support for
the Security Council mission. I extend my praise to all
MINUSTAH personnel for the professional manner in
which they are discharging their obligations in
extremely difficult conditions. In that context, I was
proud to witness the laudable work being carried out
by the various military contingents in Haiti.

