Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for taking the felicitous
initiative of convening this public debate on the role of
regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General
and thank him for his valuable contribution to the
consideration of this important issue, as well as for all
his initiatives to strengthen the Organization's
capacities.

Over the past two years, our experience as a
non-permanent member of the Council has made us
witness to countless situations resulting in death, injury
and other atrocities as the consequences of civil wars
and acts of terrorism through the devastating effects of
small arms and light weapons, of which Africa is most
certainly the principal victim.

The Council's actions with respect to such
scourges, while considerable in many ways, have
needed to be significantly and sustainably perfected. In
that regard, the visionary thinking of the founding
fathers of our Organization is evident in their inclusion
of Chapter VIII in the Charter, defining the
mechanisms and identifying the necessary means for
interaction between the Security Council and regional
and subregional actors. That most certainly
demonstrates the relevance of their vision, which is
even more vibrant today.
07-58364
There is no denying that the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security today represents
genuine progress and that the opportunities for
cooperation and interaction between the Council and
those organizations have become more diverse in
response to the need for a multidisciplinary approach
to addressing crisis situations, as described in the
Millennium Declaration. Regional arrangements in
matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security have now become an integral part of
collective security, as proclaimed in the presidential
statement of 28 March 2007, contained in document
S/PRST/2007/7.

However, those regional and subregional
organizations require the necessary capacity and
wherewithal to act. I refer here to the human,
logistical, financial and technical support that they
often lack. Indeed, the essential question today,
particularly in Africa, is whether or not the regional
and/or subregional organizations, acting on behalf of
the major organ of international peacekeeping, enjoy
sufficient support from the international community. If
so, how did it happen that the soldiers of the African
Union were on the front lines in Darfur without the
appropriate means to act in such a mission?
Unfortunately, the indispensable support that Africa
needed in that case - and that it still needs - has still
not been received and has not been perceived by
everyone as imperative. The situation regarding the
mission in Somalia is proof of that.

Additionally, for my delegation, the tragedy in
Haskanita, where African soldiers serving the cause of
peace were attacked in a cowardly fashion, killed and
humiliated, did not evoke a timely and appropriate
reaction from the Security Council. That shows a
certain lack of rationality in some of the reactions of
the Council. From our viewpoint, those are bad
practices, which must be eliminated.

How can the international community fail to note
that Africa is, in spite of the difficulties of the current
times, in the process of building up its regional
capacities, thus contributing further to improving the
situation on the continent? The African Union is taking
Africa's destiny in hand despite a lack of resources.
This is, we emphasize, an invaluable contribution to
the entire international community in terms of the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
respect, the fact that standing brigades are being

gradually installed in five regions and will be
operational by 2010 should be welcomed for the
support it will bring, over the next few years, to the
international community.

The case of Africa, which my delegation has
chosen in order to illustrate its comments, because it is
the largest test bed for cooperation between the
Council and regional and subregional organizations,
shows that the levels of intervention are both varied
and complementary in military and diplomatic terms.
In Liberia and Sierra Leone, as we all know, the efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) have been decisive in putting an end to
situations of prolonged conflict.

Central Africa, my own region, has not been left
out of the initiatives concerning conflict situations in
various member countries. In that context, a number of
countries in Central Africa have formed a military
contingent to stabilize the situation in the Central
African Republic, with the logistical support of France,
whom we would like to thank. We appreciate the
constructive role played by the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference in getting the Government of the
Sudan to consent to the necessary transition from the
African Union mission in Darfur to a United Nations
operation.

We also note the complementary and very
professional efforts on the part of Mr. Jan Eliasson and
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, respectively, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy
of the Chairman of the African Union Commission,
during the difficult negotiations between the rebel
groups in Darfur and the Government of the Sudan to
reach a political solution to the crisis.

We also know that African organizations are not
the only ones to intervene in that area. The European
Union, through its efforts in the Democratic Republic
of Congo and on the border between Chad, the Central
African Republic and the Sudan, has also shown that
they are very interested in Africa. That has allowed us
to understand how effective such expanded
partnerships are in that context, as well as in other
areas, such as Afghanistan, with the European Union
police missions. We consider those efforts to be best
practices that should be made known to others.
Congo has always pled for strengthened
partnerships between the United Nations and the

African Union, so that the decisions of the Security
Council, for example, might take into account the
concerns of African countries and be therefore
legitimate and applicable. We welcome in that context
the establishment of the hybrid operation in Darfur.

Congo has also always believed in the need for an
ongoing dialogue between the Security Council, on the
one hand, and the African Union, on the other hand,
through its Peace and Security Council. That dialogue
should involve the States in conflict and other States in
the subregion, because some conflicts, owing to their
complexity and ramifications, go beyond national and
subregional boundaries. That is the case in the conflicts
in Darfur, Somalia and the Democratic Republic of
Congo. We welcome the fact that that dialogue allowed
us to sign, on 16 November 2006, a memorandum of
understanding between the Security Council and the
African Union, which further formalizes the
mechanisms for cooperation between the two bodies.

Among existing mechanisms in Africa to be
included in the museum of good practices, I would like
to emphasize a subregional organization established in
1999 by the Economic Community of Central African
States, under the auspices of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa, namely, the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa. Its activities, which have
been continuously reviewed, have made a significant
contribution to improving inter-State relations and the
climate of peace and security in the African subregion.
The 26th ministerial meeting of the Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa,
held in Yaounde on 7 September 2007, led to a series
of recommendations, including the pursuit of regional
cooperation for the maintenance of peace and the
holding of a ministerial conference on questions of
cross-border security. That recommendation led to the
adoption of a statement of political commitment by
States in the subregion on establishing organizational,
administrative, legal and technical mechanisms for
cooperation in border zones in order to deal with
phenomena such as uncontrolled or forced movements
of populations, criminal activities by armed groups, the
illegal circulation of small arms and light weapons and
the exploitation of natural resources. We would note
here the very important role played by the Advisory
Committee in Central Africa and how useful its
multifaceted support is to our States. That momentum
should, therefore, be maintained.

Conflict prevention and resolution, the search for
peace and peacebuilding have rightly become nearly
permanent quests, especially in Africa. Indeed, the task
of restoring peace and rebuilding capacities for
development has always been at the centre of our
concerns.

In that regard, the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission in Burundi and Sierra Leone, with the
tremendous level of interest and commitment to it
expressed by the international community, deserves to
be welcomed. As we know, even the most developed
peace agreements do not eliminate the causes of
conflict. We need not only to implement them, but also
to assist in the resumption of dialogue, confidence-
building, respect for the law and economic recovery,
which are the sine qua non conditions for maintaining
the often fragile balance in developing countries. Here
too, the contribution of the regional and subregional
organizations is very important.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to note
that regional organizations should, in conformity with
Article 54 of the Charter of the United Nations, submit
periodic reports to the Security Council on the relevant
activities they have carried out. That would be the best
way to share experiences on best practices and to
commit the Council to periodic assessments in order to
better develop its plans of action in the short, medium
and long term.

Finally, my delegation fully supports the draft
Presidential Statement prepared by the delegation of
Indonesia.

