Mr. Beyendeza (Uganda): My delegation is pleased
to see you, Sir, presiding over this Council and this
debate. I would like to thank you for giving me the
opportunity to participate in this debate, which touches on
matters of particular importance to my country. This
debate was long overdue, particularly for my country,
which, since 1986, has witnessed up to 10,000 children
abducted by terrorist forces, namely, the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) operating in the northern part of
Uganda and the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), which
operate in the western part of the country.

Uganda's record on its commitment to human rights
is well known. Uganda is an original signatory to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and is also a party
to the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the
Child. Uganda is therefore fully committed to the
implementation of the letter and spirit of these
conventions.

The children of Uganda are the future of our society.
Their welfare, upbringing, protection and security are of
the utmost importance and priority to the Government and
people of Uganda. Nothing could therefore be more
painful for Uganda than the systematic abduction, torture,
detention, enslavement, mutilation and killing of these
innocent children. This is precisely what has been
happening for 12 long years in northern and now western
Uganda.

Let me give you a few statistics to illustrate the
gravity and the horror of this problem in my country. In
October 1996, 139 schoolgirls from Aboke Secondary

 

School were abducted by the Lord's Resistance Army; to
date, the majority are still missing. In June 1998, another
gruesome attack was made on Kichwamba Technical
School in western Uganda by the ADF in which over 80
students were burnt to death and 100 abducted. These are
only two examples of the systematic abuses wrought on our
children continuously since 1986.

These terrorist groups ambush communities, often
targeting women and children, the most defenceless
members of society. They target young children between 11
to 16 years, but at times they abduct younger ones of 5 to
9 years, often dragging them away after massacring their
parents and relatives. As a result, fear and uncertainty have
become permanent features of life in northern and western
Uganda. The Secretary-General has already documented this
situation in his report, and of course the Security Council
has been seized of these matters for some time now. In
fact, in 1997 our Prime Minister personally briefed the
members of the Council on these abominable acts.

I would have liked to catalogue the extremely painful
experiences these children go through - if they make it -
but I feel restrained by the need for brevity. Suffice it to
request the Council to at least begin to act in concrete ways
that demonstrate the resolve to put to an end so much
suffering borne by innocent children. Let us not ignore the
yearning of so many little children for a fuller and more
meaningful life. Let us demonstrate that the Council and the
United Nations are concerned and will act to protect these
children.

What the rebels have done and continue to do with
impunity in Uganda is alien to African culture, to our
traditional values and way of life. It is a unique and
exceptional situation which demands extraordinary action.
In our view, these violations against children should be
classified as crimes against humanity.

To date two important resolutions on children have
been adopted by the Commission on Human Rights, but
they have not been translated into freedom for the children
affected by armed conflict. We therefore call on the
international community to fully implement the provisions
of those resolutions.

Uganda will continue to call on the international
community to exert pressure on the Lord's Resistance
Army and the Allied Democratic Forces to stop the
abduction, killing, torture and sexual abuse of children and
women, and to release unconditionally all the children
under their control; to condemn the activities of the Lord's
Resistance Army and the Allied Democratic Forces as
being crimes against humanity; and to exert pressure,
including the imposition of embargoes if necessary, on all
those who sponsor and support these terrorist groups.

Uganda supports the work of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. We request that adequate
resources be made available to the Office for the
implementation of its mandate. The Ugandan Government
has extended an invitation to the Special Representative
to visit the affected areas in northern and western
Uganda. I should like to take this opportunity to renew
the invitation and to express the hope that he will find
time in his busy schedule to undertake an official visit to
Uganda in the near future.

The Ugandan Government, for its part, will continue
to protect all its citizens, especially children and women,
from abduction; ensure that all children receive prompt
and adequate access to medication and counselling while
in Government custody; release children as promptly as
possible to their families or appropriate child-welfare
organizations for speedy reintegration into their
communities; and further ensure full compliance by
Government soldiers with international human rights
standards.

We will continue to count on the support of the
international community and non-governmental
organizations to ensure that displaced people and those
temporarily living in protected areas have adequate food,
water and medication. Finally, we will initiate a
widespread awareness campaign to inform and educate
communities about the special needs of children who have
been abducted or otherwise affected by armed conflict.

In June last year, the Security Council held an open
debate on the same issues. On that occasion, the Council
issued a presidential statement. It is our hope that this
year will not be business as usual, but that the Council
will send a clear message to the international community
and to those who are responsible for these crimes against
children in armed conflict that the Council is resolved to
strongly address the predicament of these children,
whatever the causes of such conflicts.

