Mr. Negewo (Ethiopia): I thank the United States
presidency for organizing today's ministerial-level
meeting on an issue that has serious implications for
regional and international peace and security.

A year ago, I presided over a meeting ofthe Security
Council during the Ethiopian presidency at which we
discussed the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
issue (see S/PV.8053). We all recall the tense situation
that was prevailing in the Korean peninsula at that time.
Since then, we have come a long way in de-escalating
the situation. Determination and diplomacy, coupled
with all our united measures at the Security Council,
have led to three summit-level meetings between
the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, and another between the United
States and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
More importantly, it has resulted in the Panmunjom
Declaration and the Pyongyang Joint Declaration.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
latest commitment to dismantling a missile-engine
test site and launch platform as well as the permanent
dismantlement of the nuclear facilities in Yongbyon in
the presence of experts, as set forth in the Pyongyang
Joint Declaration, is indeed a step in the right
direction. The important steps taken by the Republic
of Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea at the Pyongyang summit, particularly military
confidence-building measures and an agreement to
reduce military tensions along the two sides' heavily
militarized border, will also significantly contribute to
reducing tension and avoiding any miscalculations on
the Korean peninsula. We hope that these commitments
and steps will lay the basis for the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula and the advancement of peace in
North-East Asia.

Finding a comprehensive, peaceful, political and
diplomatic solution to this long-standing issue and
ensuring the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula requires
continued dialogue. It is in that context that we welcome,
Mr. President, your readiness to travel to Pyongyang to
continue dialogue and possibly make more progress on
the issue.

In the meantime, we recognize the importance of
ensuring full compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. We note implementation gaps in relation to
the sanctions imposed by the Security Council. That
requires the continued cooperation of Member States,
and I would like to reaffirm Ethiopia's commitment to
fully implementing the relevant Council resolutions.

Overall, the recent developments that we have all
been observing on the political track, and the efforts to
ensure the full implementation of Council resolutions
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, require
the continued support of the international community.
That is why we support the call made by the Secretary-
General last week in that regard. The parties should
be encouraged to maintain the momentum in their
endeavours to achieve sustainable peace, security and
the complete and verifiable demilitarization of the
Korean peninsula, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Lastly, preserving the unity of the Council also
remains crucial, and we hope to continue to do so in
facilitating the quest for a comprehensive diplomatic
solution to the issues surrounding the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, with the ultimate
objective of achieving the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.

