Mr. Mazeiks (Latvia): I would like to thank the
Venezuelan presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today's open debate on respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
statement.

Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

During this seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations, we have reflected thoroughly on lessons learned
and on the future of our Organization. Today's debate
gives us an opportunity to reaffirm the importance
of the foundational treaty of the United Nation, its
Charter, and our respect for its purposes and principles.
The Charter was adopted as a firm response to the
suffering we endured during the Second World War.
Through its signing in San Francisco in 1945, Member
States committed to creating a better world for future
generations, and first and foremost to maintaining
international peace and security by establishing core
principles for the international system that had largely
been missing previously.

The United Nations has not always been able to
prevent conflicts or stop atrocities. Today we are again
living in troubled times, and the ideals and principles
of the Charter are threatened in many ways around the
globe. The ongoing conflicts and violence in many
parts of the world have forced millions to flee their
homes, more than at any time since the end of the
Second World War. Violent extremism is on the rise,
with terrorist groups such as Da'esh displaying new
levels of brutality. The continued subjection of peoples
to atrocity crimes is a stark reminder of the urgent need
for the international community to prevent and respond
to such horrors. Human suffering related to conflict
must not become a new normal. As the world's only
truly universal organization, the United Nations has a
responsibility to live up to its task to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war

The Security Council, as the main guarantor of
international peace and security, has a particular
responsibility to prevent and stop mass atrocities. In
the case of Syria, it has been unable to prevent the State
from committing crimes against its own population.
Latvia hopes that the renewed sense of responsibility in
the Council for reaching a political solution to a conflict
that has gone on far too long, as demonstrated by
resolution 2254 (2015), will have tangible results, and
we would like to express our support for the continued
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria.

In this twenty-first century, one of the most
important principles of the Charter - that of refraining
from the use of force against the territorial integrity of

a sovereign State - has been breached by a permanent
member of the Security Council even as the global
community has kept reiterating how important it
is to restore international legality. Latvia deplores
any violation of our rule-based international system
through the use of force and the annexation of part of
another country. The principles of the Charter apply to
all States Members of the United Nations, because we
are all guardians of the international system and the
Charter. We strongly support Ukraine's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence, as well
as its chosen path of democratic reform.

In conclusion, I would like to address the importance
of conflict prevention and early action by the United
Nations in situations of concern. Latvia strongly
believes that respect for human rights, the rule of law
and good governance is key to maintaining peace and
security, and that therefore it is important to act early
and effectively when serious human rights violations
take place. We are pleased to see growing support for
initiatives aimed at improving the Security Council's
response to mass atrocities. Latvia supports the code of
conduct proposed by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group for all Security Council members
that asks them not to vote against actions designed to
end or prevent mass atrocity crimes. We also support
the French proposal to voluntarily refrain from the use
of the veto in situations involving such crimes. We urge
the permanent members of the Security Council to
use their special privilege, the veto power, only in the
interests of international peace and security.

We all have an obligation to work to overcome
today's grim challenges and make the world a better
place. Seventy years on, the Charter of the United
Nations gives us a solid basis for the road ahead.

