Mr. Begec (Turkey): We thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2016/532), Special Representative
Mr. Nicholas Haysom for his briefing and Ambassador
Mahmoud Saikal for his statement.

The report ofthe Secretary-General on Afghanistan
fairly reflects our observations as well. The
achievements ofthe past years in Afghanistan, including
in the fields of security, democracy, governance,
economic development and human rights, deserve to
be acknowledged. Nevertheless, those achievements
are not irreversible. Afghanistan continues to face
challenges in all areas.

We would also like to highlight that, as observed
during the official visit of Turkish Foreign Minister
Mr. Cavusoglu to Kabul on 16 June, progress in
every field is more visible. In order to maintain those
achievements and to be able to build upon them, the
international community's continuing support to
Afghanistan during the transformation decade is of the
utmost importance.

Turkey was pleased to host the International
Contact Group for Afghanistan in Istanbul on 5 June.
The attendance by 54 delegations at the meeting
confirmed that the international community's support
for Afghanistan will continue. On the other hand,
the National Unity Government continues its reform
programme with a view to achieving self-reliance
in the economic and security areas. At the Contact
Group meeting, the participants shared the observation
that the Afghan security forces are more resilient
and performing better on the battlefield. However,
the peace and reconciliation process remains a major
challenge and should be put back on track. In that
regard, the Quadrilateral Coordination Group's work
needs to advance on the basis of the road map agreed
by the parties.

We take this opportunity also to encourage both
Afghanistan and Pakistan to continue their efforts to
build confidence between them. The recent tension at
the Afghanistan-Pakistan border, which resulted in
the loss of life, is clear testimony to the need for good
neighbourly relations.

We believe that NATO's decision to continue with
the current phase of the Resolute Support Mission is
appropriate. We hope that the NATO Warsaw Summit
and the Brussels conference on Afghanistan will show
that the international partners of Afghanistan will
maintain the level of their pledges.

I would like to stress that Turkey will continue to
support Afghanistan's security and development efforts
on bilateral levels and in multilateral platforms. We
will stand by our Afghan brothers as long as our help
is needed.

Before I conclude, let mejoin others in condemning
the terrorist attacks in Afghanistan and in expressing
our deepest condolences.

The meeting rose at 6.35 pm.
