Mr. Spinellis (Greece): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this
important debate. I also welcome the remarks made by
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Eliasson, on the
issue.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Endangering or taking the life of journalists is
an extreme form of censorship, not only because it
silences one voice, but because it aims, and usually
succeeds, at intimidating others. It therefore remains
a highly problematic issue. According to reports and
live testimonies by journalists and the representatives
of non-governmental organizations who are in the
Chamber with us today, the number of journalists
or press operatives killed, kidnapped, wounded or
threatened while carrying out their professional duties
remains alarmingly high.

In most cases, the root cause of the targeting
of journalists remains the fact that they report on
unsettling truths and expose crimes, the perpetrators
of which - whether political autocrats, criminal
organizations or terrorist groups - have something to
lose when a journalist brings their illegal actions into
the forefront. States do indeed have the instruments
necessary to protect journalists in armed conflicts.
Both resolution 1738 (2006) and the Fourth Geneva
Convention and Additional Protocol I contain
unequivocal provisions on the obligation to protect
media professionals reporting in dangerous situations.

More recently, a third tool has been added - the
United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists
and the Issue of Impunity, which is a comprehensive
and practical approach to the issues of the safety
of journalists and impunity. Strong support for the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression, as well as for the work of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, is essential
to ensuring full implementation of the principles and
objectives of the Plan of Action. And enhancing the
United Nations reporting mechanism is essential to the
effective protection of journalists.

Combating impunity will undoubtedly reduce
the unusually high numbers of deaths, abductions
and detentions. Insufficient investigation, too few
convictions and simple impunity perpetuate the
cycle of violence against journalists. The problem
of impunity is not limited to failure to investigate
murders of journalists, but also directly targets
freedom of expression. Curtailing journalists' freedom
of expression deprives society as a whole of their
contribution and damages press freedom even more,
since a climate of fear results in self-censorship. States
must ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes are
brought to justice and punished for their actions.

Beyond that of States, the role of civil society
in the protection of journalists is crucial. Several
non-governmental organizations are dedicated to
combating attacks on journalists and preventing
Violence against them. Greece attaches great importance
to the issue of the protection of journalists and the fight
against impunity. To that end, and in cooperation with
UNESCO and Costa Rica, on the occasion of World
Press Freedom Day in May we organized a side event on
the protection of journalists for the second consecutive
year. Freedom of expression is a fundamental right,
as expressed in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and one that should be universally guaranteed.
Journalists and media professionals are the main actors
in the process of the delivery of news and information.

