Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on the current situation in my country. Let me
also thank Mr. Ging for his briefing today.

My delegation would like to express its appreciation
to those who are engaged in providing assistance to
the Government of Ukraine to address humanitarian
issues in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk affected
by the activities of terrorists. We value the efforts of
the United Nations and other organizations aimed at
addressing humanitarian needs. I want to assure the
Council that the Government of Ukraine gives due
consideration to all the recommendations of the United
Nations and other international players.

As my delegation has stated previously, there
is no humanitarian crisis in Ukraine, as continually
portrayed by our Russian colleagues. It is evident,
though, that the humanitarian situation in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions remains serious. However, the
situation is manageable by the Government of Ukraine,
which remains open to cooperation with international
partners. Significant humanitarian difficulties
currently exist only in those cities that are temporarily
under the control of the terrorist groups supported by
Russia. Their actions have already led to a disruption of
work, water and electricity supply facilities, and other
utilities vital to the normal life of the population.

Meanwhile, the Government of Ukraine is ensuring
the fulfilment of all of its social obligations regarding
retirement payments, social benefits and salaries in the
public sector to the population throughout the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions, except in certain towns that
remain under the control of the terrorists.

The restoration and reconstruction of the territories
affected by the terrorists are among the top priorities
of the Ukrainian Government. As the Council might
be aware, the terrorists have now been pushed out
of the city of Slavyansk and many other towns and
villages, which are now being restored to normal life.
A few days ago, the President of Ukraine announced
the establishment of the foundation on international aid
to Donbass. We are pleased that many countries have
agreed to make significant contributions, which will
allow us to ease the burden of the recovery.

What our Russian colleagues continue to say about
the situation in Ukraine, as well as their proposal on
the so-called international humanitarian mission
in Donbass, sounds very cynical. This is Russia,
which continues to destabilize the situation in the
east of Ukraine. Russia is supporting the activities
of the terrorists and bears full responsibility for the
humanitarian problems in the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions.

In addition to the deliberate destruction of vital
infrastructure and buildings in the region and of water
and electricity supply systems, the terrorists from the
so-called Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk
People's Republic, which include a large number of
Russian citizens, are carrying out attacks on medical
units and personnel, fire on hospitals with explosive
weapons, compromise the ability of civilian patients to
receive treatment, and expropriate ambulances.

Human Rights Watch, in its report, condemned
those acts by pro-Russian fighters and called on them to
cease immediately. On the other hand, the anti-terrorist
forces, which successfully freed the cities of the
Donbass region from the terrorists, are restoring peace
to its citizens, providing for the gradual restoration of
infrastructure and helping them return to normal life.

Since June, the inter-agency coordination unit,
which includes representatives of the United Nations
system and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, has been operating successfully in Ukraine
to ensure that the urgent humanitarian needs of the
civilian population and internally displaced persons
are met.

Upon the instruction of the President of Ukraine,
humanitarian corridors have been established for
anyone who wishes to leave the anti-terrorist operation
area. Unfortunately, the corridors are not able to
operate fully today due to the activities of the illegal
armed groups.

The State service for emergencies was charged with
establishing a multi-task coordination centre in order to
transport the persons affected as well as to meet the
health-care and social needs of civilians.

The real cause of the current humanitarian
difficulties in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions is the
activities of the terrorists and illegal armed groups
supported by Russia. Those groups are intimidating the
local population, disrupting the normal functioning of
city infrastructures and normal life, and robbing and
kidnapping people. All humanitarian problems will
be eliminated as soon as Russia stops supporting the
terrorists and illegal armed groups operating in the east
of Ukraine.

We demand that Russia take under effective control
its part of the border and stop the flow of illegal armed
groups, weapons and now heavy military machinery.
Unfortunately, our calls on the Russian Federation to
fulfil its obligations under the Geneva statement have
not been heard. Russia continues to destabilize the
situation in the eastern part of Ukraine.

Let me provide you with some recent information
that reflects the reality of the situation.

I am now wrapping up.
Russia continues to shell the settlements and
positions of the armed forces of Ukraine near the State
border from Russian territory. The number of Russian
armed forces, heavy armoured vehicles and troops
positioned along the Russian-Ukrainian border has
been constantly increasing. The shelling has resulted in
casualties among civilians and soldiers, and destroyed
residential, administrative and commercial buildings.

If the Russian Federation is truly interested in the
stabilization of the humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
we propose just a few easy steps to be taken by Russia:
that it stop sending mercenaries as well as weapons
and ammunition to the territory of Ukraine; establish
effective control over its part of the border to prevent
the infiltration of illegal armed troops and weapons;
stop provoking instability; and withdraw all military
and paramilitary formations of the Russian armed
forces from Ukrainian borders. We are confident that
the sooner the aforementioned steps are taken by the
Russian Federation, the sooner the situation in my
country will stabilize and return to normal.

