Mr. Baja (Philippines): Once more, we welcome
the opportunity of a joint briefing by the Chairmen of
the three Security Council Committees on counter-
terrorism. I congratulate Ambassador Loj, Ambassador
Mayoral and Ambassador Motoc and commend the
respective teams of independent experts assisting their
Committees in the implementation of their mandates.
As Chairman of the Working Group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004), and in working
towards the Group's objectives, I draw considerably on
the experience of the three Committees.

Continuing terrorist attacks worldwide are grim
reminders of the need for the international community
to remain vigilant and further enhance the global
efforts against terrorism. The unanimous adoption of
Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) by our heads
of State or Government at last month's Security
Council summit meeting is testament to the strong
collective commitment of our Governments to counter
terrorism.

The increasing cooperation and information-
sharing among the three Committees at the formal,
informal and expert levels have proven to be very
useful and effective. Their increased interaction and
cooperation with relevant international and regional
organizations further benefit global counter-terrorism
efforts. The synergy resulting from such interaction
and cooperation will maximize the results of global
counter-terrorism efforts and, at the same time,
streamline efforts by avoiding duplication. Thus, my
delegation wishes to encourage the ongoing efforts by
the three Committees to that end.

The Secretary-General has identified elements of
a counter-terrorism strategy to promote a
comprehensive, coordinated and consistent response to
counter-terrorism at the national, regional and
international levels. Coordinated and cooperative
fulfilment of their mandates by the three committees
will greatly contribute to the achievement of a
comprehensive international counter-terrorism strategy.
And we look forward to the conclusion this year of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.

My delegation endorses the new activities being
undertaken by the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee under the leadership of Ambassador
Mayoral to improve implementation of the sanctions
measures mandated by resolution 1617 (2005). We
welcome the increased cooperation with Interpol and
encourage the Committee to benefit from the work of
relevant specialized agencies and international
organizations such as the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime. We look forward to continuing
enhanced cooperation with regional organizations,
particularly in the Asian region.

We fully support the Chairman's visits to Member
States, particularly where there are concerns about
capacity and the need for technical assistance. We
believe that the visits by the Chair provide the political
impetus for those countries to address the difficulties
they face in the implementation of the sanctions
measures and to identify their needs for assistance.
Since the 1267 Committee has no mandate to directly
handle technical assistance needs of States in the
implementation of the sanctions regime, cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
1540 Committee is vital and should be further
strengthened.

Now that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) is fully staffed and
operational, the Counter-Terrorism Committee, led by
Ambassador Loj, will now have a fully functional
CTED to support the Committee's activities, especially
the full examination of Member States' responses to
the letters of the CTC Chairman. We expect a more
vigorous identification of areas for technical assistance
so that actual assistance can be rendered by the
appropriate countries and institutions.

We welcome the appointment of the CTED's
human rights expert. In our view, that will enable the
CTC - as well as the other counter-terrorism
Committees, given the enhanced cooperation among
the three Committees - to better fulfil its additional
function, mandated under resolution 1624 (2005), of
monitoring that States' efforts against terrorism are in
accordance with international human rights and
humanitarian standards.

We also welcome the CTC's efforts to pursue
contacts and coordination with regional and
subregional organizations. This month's thematic
debate of the Security Council, chaired by Romania's
Foreign Minister, demonstrated that regional
organizations are an invaluable resource in the global
fight against terrorism, as a source of both best
practices and technical assistance.

My delegation congratulates the 1540 Committee,
under the stewardship of Ambassador Motoc, for
completing the examination of the 121 first national
reports submitted so far by Member States. We wish to
commend the invaluable contribution of the
Committee's team of independent experts in the
examination of the reports.

We consider the Committee's outreach activities
to be vital to implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), as they provide information on how States can
implement obligations under that resolution. We also
encourage remaining States that have not yet submitted
their first national reports to participate in the
Committee's outreach activities for useful guidance on
how to complete their reports. As Ambassador Motoc
indicated, while the reports are not an end in
themselves, they are the best tool the Committee has to
assess the status of States' implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and to identify capacity gaps.
That information is the basis for sharing experiences
and expertise among countries in order to increase
worldwide capacity to prevent weapons of mass
destruction from being used for terrorism purposes.

The holding of regional seminars to support the
implementation process is a useful outreach activity. In
that regard, the successful regional seminar for the
Latin American and Caribbean region, held in Buenos
Aires, has shown the value of such regional sharing of
experiences in the implementation of the resolution and
the preparation of national reports. My delegation
supports China's plan to host a similar seminar in the
Asian region, as its delegation announced in the
General Assembly's First Committee. All those
initiatives contribute to the global efforts to combat
terrorism.

