Mr. Khare: I thank you, Madame, for inviting
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
participate in this important debate. It is a great honour
for me to address the Security Council on the critical
issue of the protection of children affected by armed
conflict.

The adoption of resolution 1261 (1999) placed
the protection of children firmly on the peace and
security agenda. With a total of seven Security Council
resolutions, the issue of children and armed conflict is
undoubtedly one in which the Security Council has
invested deeply in the past decade. Nonetheless,
children continue to be victimized in conflict situations
around the world, and our sustained engagement is
required on this vital issue. In that regard, for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the inclusion
of specific child protection provisions in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and the related deployment
of child protection advisers to peacekeeping operations
have helped us to follow up on the implementation of
key aspects of Security Council resolutions on children
and armed conflict.

In collaboration with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has continued to strengthen
its activities to protect children affected by conflict in
the countries where peacekeeping missions are
deployed. Today, we have child protection advisers in
nine peacekeeping operations. In the past year, we have
established a focal point in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, and efforts are under way to
strengthen our child protection presence in Afghanistan
with the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan.

The child protection advisers have continued to
contribute directly to the missions' priority-setting and
policy formulation and are working to ensure that
concerns related to children affected by conflict are
adequately addressed throughout our activities by
promoting mainstreaming, monitoring and reporting,
training and advocacy. We believe that it is crucial to
strengthen the deployment of child protection advisers
wherever children are significantly affected by conflict.

At the political level in the field, peacekeeping
missions are engaging in dialogue with parties to
conflicts towards the preparation of action plans to end
and address the grave violations committed against
children affected by armed conflict. We are also
following up on commitments obtained by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict during her high-level visits and
advocacy missions. This priority activity is undertaken
hand in hand with UNICEF and other members of the
United Nations task forces on monitoring and reporting
at the country level.

Alongside other child protection actors, we have
registered significant progress in this regard. In April,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) reported that the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abu Gasim had issued a command order,
prohibiting the recruitment, mobilization and use of
child soldiers. This followed a meeting between
UNAMID, UNICEF and the armed group to discuss the
development of actions plans, following a commitment
issued by the group to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General during her visit to the Sudan in
November 2009.

Efforts continue to reach out to armed groups for
commitment and implementation of action plans to end
the recruitment and use of child soldiers and other
grave violations committed against children. Yesterday,
15 June, the Sudan Liberation Army/Free Will also
made commitments to end the recruitment and use of
child soldiers, and issued a command order to that
effect. In Chad last week, Governments of the region,
including those of Chad, Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Niger, Nigeria and the Sudan, signed
the N'Djamena Declaration, stressing the need to end
the recruitment and use of children by armed forces.

At the operational level, monitoring and reporting
on grave violations committed against children are an
ongoing priority. Today, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations co-chairs five monitoring and
reporting mechanisms of country-level task forces. We
attach great importance to the monitoring and reporting
mechanism process, which is pivotal to promoting
accountability for violations committed against
children and strengthening the overall response to the
needs of children in conflict situations.
With the recent adoption of resolution 1882
(2009), we are working to improve the collection of

accurate, timely and verified information by leveraging
other monitoring capacities and resources within
peacekeeping operations. Most importantly, we are
exploring ways of improving our reporting on sexual
violence committed against children, in close
collaboration with all key monitoring and reporting
mechanism partners in the light of resolution 1888
(2009) on sexual violence in armed conflict.

We are also investing heavily in providing
training on child protection and child rights for all of
our peacekeepers, as required by the Security Council.
Training is one of the most important tools for creating
awareness of the impact of armed conflict on children,
the standards that govern child protection, and the role
that each peacekeeper can play in protecting children.
Last year alone, over 8,500 peacekeeping personnel
received training on child protection in four
peacekeeping missions. Over 66 per cent of those
trained were military personnel, and another 26 per
cent were police personnel.

In the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Cote d'Ivoire and Haiti, our advisers are
reporting that the training has resulted in a heightened
awareness of key child protection issues among the
military and the police, and yielded specific
interventions for the benefit of children. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, our military
observers trained in child protection are working in
close collaboration with our child protection teams and
human rights components to provide critical
information on the situation of children in remote and
inaccessible areas. In Haiti, the military personnel of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti are
currently developing their own guidelines on child
protection with the support of our child protection
team. In Southern Sudan, the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan has provided support to the local police in
establishing specific women's and children's desks and
offering training to them, jointly with our child
protection teams.

Recognizing the importance of providing training
for all peacekeeping personnel on child protection, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is partnering
with UNICEF, with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
Affected by Armed Conflict and with Save the
Children Sweden in an initiative aimed at reviewing
and standardizing our training materials and
strengthening pre-deployment and in-mission training
to extend our overall reach and cover.

At the strategic and policy level, in June last year
the Department adopted a system-wide policy on
mainstreaming the protection of children affected by
armed conflict into the work of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. That policy underscores the
important role that the special representatives of the
Secretary-General must play in promoting the rights
and concerns of children affected by armed conflict
and in ensuring effective and systematic follow-up to
Security Council resolutions on children and armed
conflict. That policy is our highest-level commitment
to the protection of children in armed conflict, and we
are working towards the development of an
implementation plan that will provide the necessary
operational guidance for our teams on the ground.

The Department recognizes the importance of
coordinating closely with other operational actors,
especially UNICEF and the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, and
we have prioritized the strengthening and structuring
our partnerships with those key actors as part of our
delivery on child protection. At both Headquarters and
the field level, the Department will continue to develop
protection strategies with UNICEF and relevant child
protection agencies and with our partners in the United
Nations country team, building on the comparative
advantages of each actor.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
unwavering commitment to the protection of children
in conflict situations, being fully aware that it is only
by our collective and concerted engagement at all
levels that we can secure real protection for children
affected by war. As always, we continue to look to the
Security Council for specific mandates, leadership,
guidance and support.

