Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Adviser Khan for being with us in person today.
I want to begin my remarks by paying tribute to the
13 French soldiers who died overnight in a helicopter
accident in Mali. Our prayers and deepest sympathies
are with the families and loved ones as they mourn
the loss of those most precious to them. We appreciate
Mr. Khan's update on the collection of evidence by
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) of the
atrocities committed in Iraq by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS), as well as his efforts to fully staff
UNITAD's team with international experts on Iraq.

The world witnessed ISIS target innocent Iraqis,
including diverse ethnic and religious communities,
in barbaric attacks. Lest we forget, ISIS is responsible
for the deaths of thousands of innocent Iraqi civilians.
It desecrated churches, mosques and other houses of
worship; it drove millions of Iraqis from their homes; it
held hundreds of women as slaves, subjecting them to
brutal assault. Those are acts of pure evil, and, as the
Security Council is the organ dedicated to maintaining
international peace and security, it is our solemn
responsibility to speak the truth about what ISIS did,
document this truth and answer the prayer for justice
for those whose lives have been turned upside down by
ISIS. That is what makes UNITAD's work so important.
With the support of the Iraqi Government, UNITAD is
moving quickly, carefully and determinedly to create a
detailed record of ISIS' appalling criminality against
Iraqis of all faiths.

To Mr. Kachi, I say that, in this season dedicated
to gratitude and generosity, as Americans celebrate
Thanksgiving, I cannot express to him how very brave
his testimony was with us today and what a stark
reminder that we cannot waver in our pursuit of justice.
Nothing the Council does will replace his family,
but by holding criminals to account for their heinous
actions, justice can be secured for victims and their
loved ones. The work of UNITAD aims to do just that
for Mr. Kachi, his family and the many Iraqis who have
endured experiences like that.

In September, the Security Council through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2490 (2019) endorsed
UNITAD's one-year mandate renewal for the support
of the Government Iraq. The mandate will provide
accountability and, we hope, a measure for healing
for all Iraqis. A crucial step that several Member

States are taking in support of UNITAD's mandate
involves voluntary contributions. The United States
has contributed $3 million in support of UNITAD's
field-based activities over the past year, including mass
grave excavations in Sinjar, Mosel and Tikrit.

Thanks in part to that contribution, UNITAD has
assisted the Iraqi national authorities in excavating 17
mass graves near the village ofKojo, which is of special
significance to Iraq's Yazidi community. We thank our
partners from the United Kingdom, Germany, Qatar,
Cyprus, the Philippines, the United Arab Emirates,
the European Union, Denmark, Sweden, Australia
and Uganda for their voluntary contributions, and we
urge other Member States to do their part to show
the international community's support for the pursuit
of justice on behalf of all the victims in Iraq - the
Yazidis, the Christians and Shia and Sunni Muslims
and the many others who have suffered at the hands
of ISIS.

UNITAD's continued cooperation and coordination
with Iraq's political, judicial, religious and societal
leaders are essential for the successful implementation
of its mandate. For example, this past year, utilizing
existing evidence held by Iraqi authorities greatly
improved the team's ability to pursue its mandate. In
return, UNITAD is providing technical support to
Iraqi authorities for mass-grave excavations, DNA
analysis and the archiving of evidence documenting
atrocities committed by ISIS. Additionally, UNITAD
has demonstrated the value of its work by directly
supporting third-country criminal proceedings against
members of ISIS, which is an early indicator that
UNITAD will successfully use its current work in
future prosecutions, including those in Iraq.

When we witness actions that can only be described
as evil, it is our responsibility to name it for what it
is - it is hell on Earth - and we need to condemn
it. But that is not enough: we must also be clear and
forceful in stating that no perpetrator will ever be
above the law, that we will be relentless in the pursuit
ofjustice for the victims of ISIS and that we will never
fail to live up to our duty to fight for the dignity of all
people, most especially the weak and vulnerable.

As Special Adviser Khan powerfully just stated,
the Council carries a heavy responsibility to ensure that
the cries, tears and suffering of the victims, including
those in Duhok and across Iraq, are met with powerful
action. We again thank the Iraqi Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government for their support of
UNITAD's mandate, and we commit today to working
with all Council members to ensure that the mandate is
fulfilled swiftly and effectively.

