Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to once
again brief the Security Council on the situation in
Burundi. Before doing so, allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.

My briefing will focus on the main developments
in Burundi and in the region since my last briefing
(see S/PV.8408), in particular the activities that I have
carried out on behalf of the Secretary-General, as well
as the prospects for resolving the political crisis, only
16 months before the holding of general elections,
including the presidential election. Since my briefing
last November, the situation in Burundi has been
marked by the following major developments.

On the political front, on 22 December 2018,
President Pierre Nkurunziza reiterated his decision not
to seek another mandate in 2020. The new opposition
party, the Congres national pour la liberte, whose request
for official recognition was made by Mr. Agathon
Rwasa on 14 September 2018, was finally approved
by the Government on 14 February. That decision is a
step in the right direction and could help open up the
political space. I encourage the Government to continue
in that direction and urge it to be more inclusive, in
particular in the context of ongoing discussions on the
adoption ofa new electoral code for the 2020 elections.
The platform of the Conseil national pour le respect de
l'Accord d'Arusha pour la paix et la reconciliation au
Burundi et la restauration de l'etat de droit continues
to be undermined by various defections. Opposition
parties have reiterated their call for the African Union
and the United Nations to take over the inter-Burundian
dialogue process.

The Office oftheUnitedNations HighCommissioner
for Human Rights believes that the human rights
situation remains worrisome, in the light of the reports
it receives from Burundi. The humanitarian situation
has improved since 2017, except in some parts of the
country, in particular in the eastern and north-eastern
border provinces. However, approximately 1.5 million
people remain threatened by food insecurity due to
persistent socioeconomic difficulties. According to
United Nations estimates, as of 31 December 2018,
there were 140,000 displaced persons and more than
347,000 Burundian refugees still living in neighbouring
countries. It should be noted that that number is down
from the 380,000 refugees reported in November.

The Government of Burundi and the United Nations
country team signed a $784.4 million cooperation
agreement on 25 January as part of the United Nations
development assistance framework for the period 2019-
2023, of which 46 per cent is immediately available,
thereby cementing the continued support of the United
Nations for the Government's priority programmes,
which are outlined in its national development plan. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees launched a $296 million appeal on 9 February
to assist refugees in camps in Tanzania, Rwanda,
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I visited Burundi from 20 to 29 January with the
intention of discussing with President Nkurunziza
and Burundian officials the conclusions of the
Security Council meeting held on 21 November 2018
and reaffirming, on the eve of the Summit of the
East African Community (EAC) Heads of State, the
support of the United Nations for the inter-Burundian
dialogue process. Regrettably, such discussions could
not take place. However, as I was in Bujumbura, I
took the opportunity to interact with members of the
international community and the diplomatic corps.
My interlocutors welcomed the encouraging security
developments in the country, despite the recurrence
of violent border incidents reported by the media and
some neighbouring countries.

I then visited Kampala on 31 January for a
working visit with President Museveni, mediator of
the inter-Burundian dialogue. That meeting enabled
me to reiterate to President Museveni the support of
the Secretary-General, as well as that of the Security
Council, for the inter-Burundian dialogue process led
by the region. Above all, I noted his willingness and
commitment to achieve inter-Burundian dialogue at
all costs, as well as his determination to contribute to
easing the crisis in Burundi and the tensions among the
countries of the region.

The day after my visit with President Museveni, on
1 February, the Arusha Summit opened, during which
President Paul Kagame of Rwanda succeeded President
Museveni as Chair of the East African Community. In
addition to other agenda items, the Summit took note
of the facilitator's final report on the inter-Burundian
dialogue but decided that the leaders of the region
would consult each other on it later. The facilitator,
whom I met on 4 February, informed me that he had
completed his facilitation work and that it was now
up to the mediator to take over the process. He also
confirmed that consultations were ongoing among the
Heads of State of the subregion.

Since the Ordinary Summit meeting of the East
African Community Heads of State, Burundi has
renewed its confidence in the mediator, who has
already begun initial consultations with his peers
in the subregion. Council members will recall that,
in his most recent report to the Security Council
(S/2018/1028), the Secretary-General proposed various
options on the role of the United Nations in Burundi,
in close consultation with international partners, and
in particular with East African countries, including
the country concerned, Burundi, not to mention the
African Union, whose presence and participation
in today's important meeting I welcome. A new deal
was proposed by the EAC Summit and the Presidents
of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda were appointed to
conduct the mediation. I intend to contact them again to
find out the details of their new approach. The aim will
be to reassess together the ways and means of helping
the region to assist Burundi effectively in resolving the
current political crisis.

In that regard, ifit is their intention to adopt a press
statement, I would like to suggest that Council members
reiterate their encouragement for the efforts of the region
and the full support of the Secretary-General for the
mediation. It is vital that the mediation process ensure
that the facilitator receives support and assistance in
conducting his mission. Nonetheless, all such proposals
for support must have only one objective, namely, that
is for the inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue to remain
the only viable option for a lasting settlement of the
political crisis and the holding of elections in 2020, in a
peaceful environment and in the letter and spirit of the
Arusha Agreement.

