Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
public debate. I should also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing.

As is evident from today's discussion, two
months after Israel's savage assault on Gaza, the
situation remains troubling in the highest degree, both
in the Gaza Strip and throughout the Palestinian
territories. Despite the repeated appeals of the
international community to lift it, the intolerable
blockade of Gaza remains in place, illegal Israeli
practices continue with impunity throughout the
Palestinian territories, including the construction of
settlement, and the peace process is deadlocked.

Algeria firmly condemns the continued Israeli
military occupation of the Palestinian territory in
violation of international law and United Nations
resolutions. It expresses its concern with regard to the
negative repercussions on the future of the peace
process as a result of Israel's determination to scuttle
all diplomatic efforts aimed at bringing about
conditions that could restart negotiations.

In order to confront the occupying Power's
outlaw behaviour and its headlong rush to repeatedly
evade obligations placed upon it by the international
community, Algeria calls for unity in the Palestinian
ranks and calls upon the international community to
lend the support necessary to achieve this prime
objective. Algeria supports ongoing efforts at intra-
Palestinian reconciliation, with the welcome mediation
of Egypt. We welcome the support and constructive
role played here by States of the region, which have
placed within reach the formation of a government of
national unity under the Palestinian Authority for the
sole benefit of the Palestinian people and their cause.
The Israeli occupier has no illusions about the
importance of this strategic objective and continues to
add obstacles and demands aimed at undermining these
efforts, whose achievement which would mark the

beginning of the reconstruction of Gaza and the
moment of truth with regard to Israel's intentions
regarding the peace process. In this regard, the
remarkable generosity shown at the donor conference
for the reconstruction of Gaza, which Algeria joined,
clearly illustrates Israel's isolation on the international
stage.

Algeria is determined to remind the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, of
their obligation to complete all investigations of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and flagrant violations
of international law and international humanitarian law
of which Israel is guilty in Gaza, so that serious
measures may be taken to bring the perpetrators to
justice. An end must be put to the impunity that Israel
has displayed for too long at the cost of sacrificing all
efforts to achieve peace in the region.

Finally, Algeria would express its unwavering
support for Syria and Lebanon in their efforts to
recover their legitimate national rights and the territory
of which they have been despoiled by the Israeli
occupying force. We remain committed to a
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict
based on international law and the principles defined
by the Madrid Conference and by the Arab Peace
Initiative.

