Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank His Excellency Mr. Aminu Wali, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, for
organizing this open debate on a topic concerning which
Argentina has been very active since the organization
in 2009 of the seminar of Latin America and the
Caribbean on regional perspectives on the United
Nations approach to security sector reform and, since
December 2012, through our participation in the Group
of Friends of Security Sector Reform, co-chaired by
the Permanent Representatives of Slovakia and South
Africa. Your presence here today, Mr. Minister, and
that of Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon are a testament
to your country's leadership on this issue, which
Argentina recognizes and values.

Argentina attaches great importance to recent
developments on the issue of security sector reform in
the framework of the United Nations. We recognize that
the close relationship between security sector reform
and the strengthening of the rule of law contributes
to the prevention of conflicts. As the Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/480) states, reforming the
security sector depends on the political climate in
which it is carried out, and therefore such reforms are
not only related, but are part of broader transformation
processes, in particular in conflict and post-conflict
societies. In that regard, security sector reform involves
a broad range of public policies aimed at promoting
effective, democratic and accountable security policy
of the State, leading to greater economic and social
development and promoting the trust and participation
of the community. It is therefore a question of ensuring
that security institutions carry out their functions
effectively in a framework consistent with democracy
and strict respect for human rights.

Security sector reform is increasingly one of the
key elements in the multidimensional mandates of
peacekeeping missions, which have become more
complex and comprehensive, and of special political
missions, when circumstances require, in support
of national authorities in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Such support requires not only the proper
implementation of protection measures for the civilian
population, in particular those at imminent risk of
physical violence, but also the coordinated inclusion of
security sector reform with other aspects related to the
rule of law, such as cooperation in institution-building
in general; the holding of free and transparent elections;
the implementation of inclusive political processes; the
design and implementation of effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plans; and the
effective implementation of gender-based guidelines,
and sometimes even leading to the adoption of a new
constitution. However, it is clear that only dialogue and
the political commitment and involvement of rule of law
institutions on a sustained basis can lead to long-term
reforms that contribute to conflict prevention. In that
regard, in order for such reform to be sustainable, the
education and training of civil servants and members of
the security forces are needed.

Effective and coordinated security sector reform can
only benefit the national Governments of the countries
concerned, as well as local human rights groups and
institutions, in their efforts to promote and protect the
human rights of vulnerable populations, particularly
women and children, contribute to the eradication
of impunity, and ensure that those responsible for
human rights violations and violations of international
humanitarian law will be held accountable before the
law. They also provide advice and assistance to national
Governments in the investigation of such atrocities.
For that reason, security sector reform is also closely
related to the reform of the legal system.
Thus, the reform process cannot be perceived as
an imposition, as wehave often said. We must ensure
national ownership of the reform process by taking
into account the real and effective particular needs
and circumstances of those countries and structure it
according to on national decisions. The United Nations
must not impose solutions, but instead it must help the
societies that so require to rebuild, based on their own
experiences, cultures, needs, desires and expectations,
and to establish the institutional foundation for
achieving a just and peaceful development.

In developing that endeavour, we believe that there
should be greater coordination between the entities
of the Organization entrusted with reform, and we
therefore encourage the Secretary-General to establish
concrete operational ties between the inter-agency
Security Sector Reform Task Force, the Rule of Law
Unit and the "Rights up front" initiative. It is also
important to implement the instruments developed
by the Organization, such as the Secretary-General's
principles to guide activities in support of security
sector reform and human rights due diligence policy in
the context of the United Nations support of security
forces outside the Organization. We agree with the
Secretary-General's reports on the issue when it comes
to the importance of focusing on regional arrangements
in this area as well as on the primary task to be played
by the various regional and subregional organizations
in supporting security sector reform processes carried
out at the national level by individual countries.

Finally, the work of the Organization also
requires that, in order to implement new, complex
multidimensional mandates when appropriate,
peacekeeping missions increasingly depend upon
the possibility of deploying specialized personnel,
in particular related to police and civilian tasks of
varying types, such as experts in human rights, gender,
comprehensive treatment of victims of sexual and
gender-based violence, security sector reform and
institution-building for the rule of law. We have seen
positive developments in that regard with the important
potential for innovation in technical cooperation and in
strengthening South-South cooperation. We should also
underscore the importance of security sector reform
in peacebuilding processes, preventing a relapse into
conflict, and the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund in defining an inclusive
national approach to security sector reform.

In conclusion, we must move from societies
living in fear of instability towards societies free of
fear. The recent historical experience of countries in
Latin America, as well as in Africa, tells us that they
have much to offer to the international approach of
the United Nations on this issue. Important lessons
have been learned on security sector reform: from
strengthening political governance over the security
sector and ensuring effecive security for people, to the
professionalization of personnel and strict compliance
with human rights as a priority. In the particular case
of Argentina, since democracy was restored, and
since 2010, with the establishment of the Ministry of
Security, security is based on the principles, values and
public policies that underpin strict compliance with the
rule of law.

I would like to conclude by recognizing the
remarkable work done by Nigeria as President of the
Council in the month of April. We are pleased that we
will be adopting a draft resolution on the issue this
afternoon. We would have liked for that process to have
been more clearly inclusive, as we see security as part
of an overall set of reforms. In any event, we convey our
congratulations and support as well as our conviction
that we must continue to work in this area.

