Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, and Assistant Secretary-General Wane for his
important briefing. We also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Mali to today's meeting.

We condemn the terrorist attacks in Burkina
Faso on 13 August and yesterday on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), and we would like to
express our sincere condolences to the Governments
of the countries concerned and to the families of the
victims. Such attacks show that the security situation
in the Sahel remains very difficult. Terrorist and
extremist organizations' activities are spreading, and
transnational organized crime is a major problem. If
peace and security are to be restored in the Sahel, it is
important to ensure that the countries of the region and
the international community continue to step up their
efforts and take an integrated approach. The decision
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to set
up a joint force to deal with the region's problems
has been approved by the African Union and reflects
African countries' willingness to work together and
contribute significantly to peace and security in Africa
and around the world. Resolution 2359 (2017), which
the Council adopted on 21 June, commended the G-5
Sahel countries' decision to establish a joint force,
thereby demonstrating the support of the international
community. In early July, the G-5 Sahel countries
officially launched the implementation of the force.

We welcome those developments and commend the
efforts and significant contributions of the countries
of the region in combating terrorism and maintaining
peace in the Sahel. We hope that the joint force will play
an important role in the restoration ofpeace and security
in the region. The international community should
fully respect and give full play to Africa's leading role
when it comes to solving African problems, and should
support the efforts of countries in the region to defend
peace and security in the Sahel. In the current situation,
it is important for the international community to
carefully examine the circumstances under which the
force will carry out its mandate. In particular, with
regard to the difficulties faced by the force in logistics
and funding, we will have to consider practical steps
that can be taken, provide assistance that is targeted
accordingly and improve the joint force's capacity to
carry out its mandate. China hopes that the joint force
will seek synergy by coordinating its actions with those
of MINUSMA and others. We will work together with
the international community in order to continue to
play a constructive role in building peace, security and
development in the Sahel and in Africa generally.

