The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

First of all, I would like to welcome Ms. Sylvie
Vale'rie Ba'ipo-Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Central Africans Abroad of the Central African
Republic. I would also like to express my delegation's
gratitude for the briefings on the latest news from
the Central African Republic provided by Mr. Sma'il
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security; Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for
Africa, European Union External Action Service; His
Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale, Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the United Nations, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, who
is leaving his post after three years of excellent work
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea takes
this opportunity to pay well-deserved tribute to
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his unwavering commitment
in support of peace in the Central African Republic,
especially during the 2014-2016 transition period,
which culminated in the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation and the 2016 elections, as well as for
being one of the key actors that prompted the signing of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation.
His leadership, integrity, personal commitment and
tireless efforts have been crucial. We wish him success
in his future responsibilities and welcome his successor,
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye.

I would also like to express our greatjoy in coming
together in this Chamber to celebrate a major event
that until a few months ago seemed impossible. I am
referring to the peace agreement signed on 6 February
2019 in the city of Bangui. The signing of this peace
agreement between the Government of the Central
African Republic and 14 armed groups, under the
leadership of the African Union and with the support of
the United Nations within the framework of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, is undoubtedly an example of the
excellent cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations. I also commend the Government
of the Republic of the Sudan for its considerable
diplomatic efforts to promote the signing ofthis historic
joint agreement, and all other actors who, directly or
indirectly, have made it possible for a flame of hope
for peace in Central Africa to be lit, and we express
our appreciation to all parties directly involved in the
negotiation process.

In accordance with the communique of the African
Union Peace and Security Council dated 9 February
2019, Iwould like to underline the primary responsibility
of the signatory parties for the implementation of this
Agreement. In this new context, it is necessary for the
parties to exercise the same sense of responsibility in
scrupulously respecting their commitments under the
Agreement, including by complying with the deadlines
set out in the timetable for its implementation, in
particular the immediate cessation of all armed action
and violence against the civilian population. We urge
the member States of the African Union, as well as
bilateral and multilateral partners, to provide the
necessary support to the parties for its implementation,
in good faith and in accordance with their commitments
and obligations.

As emphasized in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/147), significant progress has been
made in the peace process under the auspices of the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation. Under
the leadership of President Touadera, the Central
African Government has undertaken to identify the
root causes of the current crisis and promote genuine
national reconciliation based on a social contract with
the people.

As the experiences of other countries have
shown, Central Africans must understand and
assimilate that there can be no peace without a shared
and inclusive vision, forgiveness and a process of
national reconciliation. In this regard, we welcome
the establishment of a Commission on Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation to corroborate and
advance the dynamics of reconciliation.

On the other hand, it is worth highlighting the
launch of the national programme on disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration in
December 2018, which constitutes a milestone on the
road towards the reintegration of former combatants
into society. In addition, the Government is committed
to putting in place, with the support of its partners,
appropriate mechanisms to recruit civil servants and
establish training programmes open to all.

The Government of my country - the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea - is pleased that, with the support
of MINUSCA, the Central African Government has
established several local peace processes and dialogues
to promote reconciliation among communities, reduce
violence, improve social cohesion and generate support
for the deployment of State institutions by campaigns
through local committees and joint awareness-raising
activities in order to prepare for the safe and voluntary
return of members of Muslim communities who had
been forced to flee their neighbourhoods in May 2017.

We commend the fact that the armed groups
have agreed to respect the legality of the country's
democratic institutions, the constitutional order, the
unity and territorial integrity of the Central African
State, and that they have pledged to renounce the use
of arms and violence to assert any form of claim and
to proceed, by mutual agreement between the parties
and partners, to the complete dissolution of the armed
groups throughout the national territory.

With regard to security, we note that the Central
African authorities plan to establish an efficient and
equitable management system to make transhumance,
which is essential for the harmonious economic
development of shepherds and farmers, a safe and
peaceful activity, and to that end that the signatory
parties have undertaken to establish special mixed
security units for an initial period of 24 months, under
the supervision of the Chiefs of Staff of the Defence
Forces, with technical support from MINUSCA,

The fight against impunity is a fundamental
aspect if true national reconciliation is to take place.
In this regard, several important milestones have
been noted, including trials by ordinary national
courts, the launching of investigations by the Special
Criminal Court, continued progress in the prosecution
of conflict-related crimes in the courts of appeal
in Bangui and Bouar, and the recent surrender of
two suspected criminals. This demonstrates the
determination of the Central African Government
to eradicate all that impedes the return to peace and
stability. We invite it to maintain this attitude so as to
promote the implementation of all measures necessary
to achieve its objectives, in particular through the
functioning of the local peace and reconciliation
committees. However, despite this progress, we regret
that civilians, especially women and children, continue
to suffer the consequences of the conflict and are
increasingly exposed to protection risks and urgent
humanitarian needs, and that the number of people in
need of assistance and protection has increased from
2.5 million to 2.9 million, an increase of 16 per cent
over the same period in 2017.

The path to peace is not an easy one. After having
suffered over the past six years all the horrors of a
civil armed conflict - religious, ethnic and political
violence, with devastating consequences, loss ofhuman
life, a humanitarian crisis, an economy with enormous
difficulties - the Central African Republic has
demonstrated that through various diplomatic efforts
and inclusive dialogue, events of historic dimensions
can be achieved that stand for a before and an after for
this beautiful and immensely rich country.

There is still much to be done on the fragile road
ahead that will require enormous sacrifices to achieve
reconstruction and lasting stability in the country.
It will be crucial for the Central African people to
mobilize and take ownership of the final resolution
of the conflict and for the resources required for the
implementation, monitoring and verification of the
Agreement serve to provide a renewed impetus towards
national reconciliation.

It is important that all stakeholders honour their
commitments during the implementation phase.
The international community can play a key part, in
particular in strengthening the role that the United
Nations, the African Union, subregional entities such
as the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, and neighbouring countries can play in
the process. There is no doubt that the brotherly people
of the Central African Republic long for lasting peace.
They must therefore receive assistance in the peace
process that is fully respectful of the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
country and of other States in the region, as well as
of the principle of non-interference in their internal
affairs. We hope that the peace agreement will allow
for the restoration of State authority throughout the
country, including the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of armed group members.

In conclusion, the winds of hope generated by the
successful elections held in the Democratic Republic
of Congo on 30 December 2018 seem to have reached
the Central African Republic. We therefore hope that
our Central African subregion can enjoy the stability
that peace provides and be able to maximize its
immense potential.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Central
Africans Abroad of the Central African Republic.

