The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I am here today to convey the Secretary-
General's, and my own, concerns about the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Political
tensions are increasing ahead of the constitutionally
envisaged presidential and legislative elections.
Polarization and public discontent are being fuelled by
delays in the electoral process, a debate around respect
for the Constitution and increasing restrictions on
democratic space.

The political dialogue proposed by President Kabila
Kabange is facing uncertainty. The ruling majority
and the opposition have expressed their support in
principle. However, there is no agreement on the terms
under which the dialogue should be held or who should
participate in it. President Kabila Kabange reiterated
the need for dialogue during his address to the nation
on 30 June, while also urging the Facilitator of the
African Union, former Togolese Prime Minister Edem
Kodjo, to take steps to launch the dialogue as soon as
possible. Important members of the opposition continue
to express reservations. They argue that the dialogue
proposed by President Kabila Kabange could lead to
the extension of his term in office beyond November
2016. The efforts of Facilitator Kodjo, who is supported
by Special Representative Maman Sidikou and Special
Envoy Said Djinnit, have not yet bridged that gap. In
the absence of dialogue, there is a real risk that political
actors could resort to unilateral decisions, which may
compound existing political tensions.

An inclusive and credible dialogue among
Congolese stakeholders is the only realistic way to
defuse political tensions, overcome the electoral
impasse and prevent violence. Such a dialogue should
result in an inclusive agreement that could lead to
credible presidential and legislative elections. Without
it, we face the risk of a severe crisis, with a high
probability of violence and persistent instability. This
tragic and still preventable outcome would not only
reverse the political, security and development gains
of the past few years, it would also require a response
that would go beyond the capacity of United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I therefore need
to convey the Secretary-General's serious call for all
Congolese political stakeholders to give dialogue a
chance, engage in good faith and place the interests of
their nation first.

I would like to draw attention to three elements that
could support an inclusive dialogue.

First, as proposed by the African Union, the
European Union, the International Organization of
la Francophonie and the United Nations in their joint
communique of 6 June, the International Support Group
for the facilitation efforts to Mr. Kodjo could make
an important contribution to build confidence in the
process. I welcome the Group's inaugural meeting, held
in Addis Ababa on 4 July. The Support Group reaffirmed
the crucial importance of holding a successful national
dialogue with all Congolese stakeholders, preferably by
the end of July, and agreed to undertake consultations
aimed at encouraging all stakeholders to participate
in it.

Secondly, a reliable voter register could help defuse
tensions and pave the way for transparent and credible
elections. MONUSCO is providing technical assistance
and logistical support for the revision of the register.
Thirdly, as called for by the Council, MONUSCO
has updated its plans to address security risks and to
monitor human rights violations and abuses in the
context of the elections. The protection of civilians
will, and must, remain a key priority of the Mission,
including in the context of the electoral process. I
should note, however, that in the case of a major security
crisis, it would be unrealistic to expect MONUSCO to
substitute for the State.

In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular in a number of territories in Ituri,
North Kivu and South Kivu provinces, the security
situation remains extremely serious. There is reason
to be particularly concerned about the situation in
Beni, where the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) have
carried out deadly attacks against defenceless civilians,
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique
du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO. We are also
concerned about inter-communal tensions and violence
in the Lubero and Walikale territories in North Kivu.

The resumption of active military cooperation
between the FARDC and MONUSCO in operations
against the ADF and the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda in North Kivu is encouraging.
It is helping to address the threat that armed groups
pose to the civilian population in the eastern part of
the country. Ultimately, the threat posed by armed
groups, which is exacerbated by underlying social,
economic and political problems, can be addressed
only through a combination of military pressure and
political measures.

Significant progress has been achieved in
stabilizing the Democratic Republic of the Congo. To
preserve those gains, political leaders must listen to the
aspirations of their people, who have suffered for far too
long from continued political crisis and violent conflict.
Dialogue, respect for the rule of law and human rights
and democratic participation and practices are the best
way to prevent continuing violence and suffering.

I count on the Security Council to give its full and
steadfast support to dialogue and for the strengthening
of democratic practices in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. At stake here, basically, is the long-
term stability of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - and Council members are aware of the size
and importance of that nation - and also of the entire
Great Lakes region.

The international community and the United
Nations have invested heavily in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We must preserve and build on
the progress made. There is growing recognition at the
global level of the importance of political leadership in
preventing and mitigating crisis - we discuss that all
the time. But in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
it is time to move from discussions and intentions
to action.

The international community and Member States
must now proactively engage with all parties to diffuse
tensions and point towards a path to the dialogue, which
is so vital and urgent. The leadership of the Council is
critical, and the Secretary-General and I, and all of our
colleagues, are there to do everything that we can to
prevent things from turning worse.

