Mr. McNee (Canada): I should like to join others
in thanking you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Nigeria for having convened this important debate.

Preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention
have been issues of increasing priority for the Council
over the past two decades. This makes good sense,
because the financial and human costs of trying to
quell violent conflicts far outstrip those associated with
preventing their escalation.

While the international community has made
progress in managing conflict, it continues to struggle
to prevent conflict. Africa is increasingly
demonstrating clear leadership on peace and security
challenges on the continent, including preventing
political crises. The African Union (AU) was the first
to deploy peacekeeping missions in Burundi, the
Sudan, Somalia and the Comoros. It has also
consistently intervened, in collaboration with the
regional economic communities and with the help of
African leaders, in the mediation and resolution of
political crises, such as in Madagascar, Guinea and
Niger.

The AU's Peace and Security Architecture, along
with the complementary mechanisms in the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
other local and regional approaches to preventive
diplomacy, including civil society initiatives, show
great promise for stopping violent conflicts before they
spiral out of control.

In our View, the Council must continue to support
those efforts and fulfil its own responsibility for
preventive diplomacy. In a 2009 presidential statement
(S/PRST/2009/8), the Council declared its intention to
remain engaged in all stages of the conflict cycle,
including in support of mediation as an important
means for the pacific settlement of disputes wherever
possible before they evolve into violence.

Canada believes that three areas in particular
deserve the Council's attention: preventive action,
proactive action and integrated and coherent action.

First, preventive action, in particular preventive
diplomacy, requires advanced warning that there is a
risk of violence and knowledge about the root causes
and nature of a potential conflict. Perhaps most
importantly, it requires translation of the available
information into concrete analysis and timely action.

What the international community truly lacks is a
consistent means of bridging analysis and policy - of
synthesizing data into effective analysis and rapidly
linking early warning analysis with effective policy
direction. The Security Council has sometimes filled
this niche, but it could improve its contribution to
preventive diplomacy by increasing its attention to the
relationship between analysis and policy direction.

Secondly, Canada calls on the Security Council to
be more proactive. In his report on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1625 (2005)
(S/2008/ 18), the Secretary-General outlined a
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention.
Canada fully endorses the examples of proactive action
by the Council cited in the report, including the
deployment of United Nations missions with political
mandates to conduct mediation, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding activities.

The Council is also increasingly using targeted
sanctions as a proactive measure to deter parties from
choosing violence to resolve conflicts. The Council
must use all of these powerful tools more proactively,
consistently and, we would suggest, with greater
conviction.

(spoke in French)

Thirdly, Canada is pleased to note recent marked
improvements in the United Nations system with
regard to integrated coherent action. Canada welcomes
the joint strategy on gender equality and mediation of
the Department of Political Affairs (DPA) and the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), as well as the efforts of the Secretary-
General and Member States to realize the full and
influential participation of women in peace processes.

Canada also recognizes the importance of the
collaboration between the DPA and the United Nations
Development Programme to deploy peace and
development advisers, as well as the positive role of
the Mediation Support Unit in working with United
Nations country teams. Once a situation has become
explosive, the United Nations system will be able to
achieve its full potential in the area of preventive
diplomacy only by using all its resources through a
concerted action.

Regional and subregional capacities, in particular
of the African Union and other African organizations,
must be strengthened. Increased capacity to break the
links among terrorism, drug trafficking and organized
crime is particularly critical, as well as capacity to
support the rule of law and strengthened mediation
capacities.

Canada is committed to supporting global peace
and security. Leaders at the recent summit of the Group
of Eight (G8) endorsed the Muskoka Declaration.
Canada also invited African leaders to the Summit to
discuss not only development, but also issues related to
peace and security.

The Muskoka Declaration outlines a set of three
interrelated initiatives aimed at strengthening civilian
security systems, in particular civilian reinforcements
for stabilization, peacebuilding and rule of law actions;
strengthening maritime security capacity; and
international police peace operations. These three G8
initiatives aim to reduce conflict-related instability,
protect civilians during armed conflict, counter
terrorism, combat piracy and transnational crime and
help establish an enabling environment for growth,
34
investment and democratic development. Thus they are
intended to promote peace and security, while
recognizing that solutions to problems of the African
continent are best found in Africa itself.

