Ms. Bellamy: Twice in the past year, the voices
of children were heard in this Chamber. The most
recent occasion involved three young delegates to the
Children's Forum of the special session of the General
Assembly on children. "The best thing you can do is
stop war", said Eliza Kantardzic, a 17-year-old from
Bosnia and Herzegovina. She went on to say, "You are
making decisions here that affect whole nations I
hope you will remember my words." (S/PV.4528, p. 8)

Can there be a more persuasive reason to act than
the anguish of these children? For it is they who
represent the succeeding generations that the United
Nations was founded to save - and it is we who have
the power to halt the suffering that is endured by so
many children in so many countries.

Since the Council's approval of resolution 1379
(2001), a series of global commitments have been
renewed and strengthened, notably at the special
session on children last May, when world leaders
pledged to protect children from the ravages of war.

The spirit of global commitment was also very
much in evidence at the special session on HIV/AIDS
held in 2001, when the Security Council explicitly
recognized HIV/AIDS as a threat to international
security.

Under the terms of these commitments,
Governments have pledged to ensure that children do
not grow up in displacement camps, without access to
nutrition, health care and education; that they are not
recruited into armed forces and groups; and that those
who subject children to violence and abuse are held
accountable.

In the past year, the Council has acquired a new
and important mechanism for generating public
scrutiny of those who recruit and use children in armed
conflict. I refer - as my colleague Olara Otunnu did a
moment ago - to the Secretary-General's list of
parties to armed conflict. UNICEF is convinced that
the naming and shaming of these parties to conflict will
help establish a culture of accountability - one that
can prevent such abuses from occurring in future.

That is why we urge Council members to
consider the Secretary-General's list in all their
deliberations and to update it regularly, expanding its
scope to include parties to armed conflict in situations
that are not now on the Council's agenda. For the list
can be used not only to pressure those who violate
children's rights, but also to support and encourage
progress and to measure steps forward.

For our part, UNICEF will use the list to intensify
our advocacy efforts, both globally and locally. It is a
key that can open the door to negotiations and to
dialogue - and, ultimately, to the demobilization and
the reintegration of children. We are already working
with a number of parties on the list.

UNICEF welcomes all the contributions of civil
society to this effort. For example, the report prepared
by the non-governmental organization Coalition to
Stop the Use of Child Soldiers has provided an
additional tool for advocacy work. It shows the
importance of providing information to the Council
about the impact of conflict on children - information
that comes not only from United Nations sources.

The demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers is a top priority for UNICEF and for our
partners, because it is key to breaking the cycle of
violence against children during conflict. This is
equally true after peace agreements, which must of
necessity include specific commitments to disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate children who have been
used in hostilities.

In Sri Lanka, we think that there is an opportunity
for a large-scale demobilization of child soldiers, and
we are working with the Government as well as with
non-State actors.

In the Great Lakes area of central Africa, we are
taking a regional approach with partners such as the
World Bank, other United Nations agencies, donor
Governments and regional officials to develop a Multi-
Country Demobilization and Reintegration Programme.

In Angola, there is an urgent need to provide
support to the estimated 8,000 children who were
recruited during the civil war and who have been
released without a formal demobilization effort.

At any given time, 300,000 children across the
globe are estimated to be serving as child soldiers.
They are living proof of the world's systematic failure
to protect children, and that is why our work is focused
on building a protective environment for children.

A protective environment for demobilized child
soldiers must include effective strategies to prevent
their re-recruitment, and it must help lay the
groundwork for their eventual return to their families
and to their communities. From our perspective, this
will involve long-term investment in education,
vocational training and support for families and
communities that takes into account in particular the
specific needs of girls.

Over the past year, we have heard allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse of refugee and internally
displaced children and women in West Africa by
humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel. Those
allegations served as a wake-up call for the entire
humanitarian community.

While the first reports of such outrages came
from West Africa, we know that no region or country is
immune. Make no mistake - this is an issue that poses
an ongoing challenge for the entire United Nations
community. While sexual exploitation and abuse are
always egregious, the involvement of aid workers or
peacekeepers is simply intolerable.

There is, however, some encouraging news, and
that is the swift response by the entire humanitarian
community - with strong United Nations support and
leadership. The Inter-Agency Task Force on Protection
from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, of which we are a
co-chair, has taken immediate steps to prevent and
respond to sexual exploitation and abuse. Its Plan of
Action, which has been endorsed by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee, calls for the adoption of six core
principles for a code of conduct that describes
minimum standards of behaviour for all humanitarian
and United Nations workers.

In this connection, I call on the Security Council
to follow up on its recent presidential statement on the
protection of civilians, in which it encouraged States,
in particular troop-contributing countries, to adopt the
six core principles to prevent sexual abuse and
exploitation.

It is vital that the United Nations system and
those countries that contribute troops for peacekeeping
operations be mobilized to protect children and women,
and that they develop appropriate disciplinary and
accountability mechanisms.

This meeting will soon be over, and the Council
will move on to other important issues that demand its
attention. Much has been achieved in its deliberations
over the last four years - I think they were recounted
very clearly by Olara Otunnu - and for that we also
thank the Council very much. But more is required if
we are to make the protection of children an explicit
priority in actions to build peace and to resolve
conflict.

Over the years, responsible adults the world over
have made good-faith promises to children - promises
to ease suffering and end exploitation, and to protect
children from the loss of childhood, from rape,
mutilation and recruitment as child soldiers. Yet time
after time, in places such as Rwanda, Sierra Leone, the
Sudan, Afghanistan, Kosovo, Colombia and East
Timor, cruelty and indifference have prevailed.

We need to do more about accountability; we
need to do more about impunity; we need to do more
about training. We must find effective ways to promote
peace-building and conflict prevention, and we must
recognize that, when it comes to the suffering of
children in conflict, each and every one of us is
accountable.

For now, our expectation is that the Council will
never cease to find ways to ensure that its words
become deeds - deeds that make a real difference to
the lives of children.

