Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, you spoke for all of us in
praising Ambassador Butagira of Uganda. I wish him
every success in his future endeavours.

I take this opportunity to express our gratitude
and appreciation to Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. We
also thank Ms. Susan Malcorra, Under-Secretary-
General for Field Support, for her efforts in
establishing her new Department. We thank them both
for their statements. We also thank Mr. Hedi Annabi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his valuable briefing.

The United Nations has had great success in its
peacekeeping operations. The Organization has helped
to save the lives of countless civilians, reduced
tensions and prepared proper conditions for sustainable
peace. That success reaffirms the central role of the
United Nations as a bellwether of many parts in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Of
course, peacekeeping cannot replace the definitive
settlement of conflicts, a goal we all share, which can
be met only by addressing the comprehensive political,
security, economic and humanitarian dimensions of a
given problem.

The growing number of peacekeeping operations
requires us to analyse the root causes of conflicts if we
are to resolve and end them. Conflict resolution
requires States to provide the Organization with the
necessary human, financial and logistical resources and
political support. Communication and coordination
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Department of Field Support and all agencies and
departures involved are also needed. We must make a
sustained study to prevent the recurrence of mistakes
and to assess the threats to peace. Information
regarding accidents and casualties must also be freely
communicated. In that respect, we condemn all attacks
on peacekeeping personnel, missions and property. We
fully support a policy of zero tolerance for sexual
abuse. We condemn all such violations and call for
their perpetrators to be brought to justice.

Security sector reform must be included in the
comprehensive reform process if we are to ensure
security, stability and development. The United
Nations is highly experienced in that area. The
Peacebuilding Commission has assumed the critical
role of strengthening States' post-conflict security
capacities. We therefore support the important post-
conflict security sector reform efforts of peacekeeping
operations.

We believe that the United Nations role should be
one of coordination in providing support and advice to
States in the reform process and in mobilizing
resources and enhancing their effectiveness. Reform is
multidimensional; no single solution can be applied to
all sectors. National circumstances, needs and priorities
must be taken into account if we are to help States to
achieve their own priorities. Security sector reform is
key to establishing peace and security in regions that
have been subject to conflict or are in a post-conflict
phase.

Peacekeeping mandates must be created or
renewed in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and
established criteria and guidelines, including the
consent of the State concerned, the non-use of force
except in self-defence, total neutrality, respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, and non-
interference in their internal affairs. We believe it
important for all troop-contributing countries to be
involved in every phase and dimension of a
peacekeeping operation.

In conclusion, the African Union (AU) is playing
a growing peacekeeping role in certain conflict zones
on the African continent. The AU has launched
initiatives that deserve our encouragement and support.
We believe it necessary that we continue to implement
the joint work plan between the AU and the United
Nations in order to build the short- and long-term
peacekeeping capacities of the former. We hope that
the United Nations will take specific and concrete
measures in support of the AU's peacekeeping in
Somalia, pursuant to resolution 1863 (2009).

