We meet this month as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues across the Middle East, threatening local health systems and fraying the social and economic fabric of society as we struggle to meet the challenges ahead. As the pandemic stretches on and its consequences accumulate, Palestinians and Israelis alike are feeling the effects. I remain particularly concerned about the spread of the virus in Gaza and the long-term damage to the Palestinian economy and social cohesion, including its effects on education for the next generation. Last month at the General Assembly, the Secretary-General renewed his appeal for a global ceasefire in response to COVID-19, calling for a major push to make this happen by the end of the year. In the context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, that means focusing on preventive diplomacy to avoid escalation and war in Gaza and working with all to alleviate the health and socioeconomic consequences of the pandemic. It means modernizing the economic relationship between the two sides and working towards re-establishing credible negotiations with the goal of a two-State solution, in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions. The commitment of the international community to support both sides in this process remains unwavering. What is required, however, is leadership from both Israelis and Palestinians to work together and advance the cause of peace. During the reporting period, the resurgence of COVID-19 seriously compounded the humanitarian and economic challenges on the ground, with a significant tightening of restrictions in Israel and Gaza and the extension of the State of emergency throughout the occupied Palestinian territory for 30 days, beginning on 2 October. The humanitarian community continued its efforts to address the pandemic, including by addressing critical gaps in medical supplies and equipment. Responding to a severe shortage of equipment, including COVID-19 testing kits in the occupied Palestinian territory, United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and international organizations delivered materials for more than 100,000 tests, dozens of ventilators and oxygen therapy machines. Those new supplies, along with millions of personal protective equipment items, are crucial to efforts to contain the spread of the virus. Arrangements brokered by the United Nations continue to enable the transfer of patients from Gaza for medical treatment outside the Strip and allow for importing humanitarian supplies into the occupied Palestinian territory, even as the Palestinian Authority's decision to halt coordination with Israel remains in place. I wish to reiterate, however, that the United Nations cannot replace the roles and responsibilities of the Palestinian Authority or the Government of Israel. Any increase of responsibilities for the United Nations in that regard should be limited and time-bound. I welcome the ongoing support from the donor community to the United Nations COVID-19 response efforts and urgently call for increased assistance as the crisis extends into the foreseeable future. As we remain focused on urgent health concerns, the viability of the Palestinian Authority is being severely undermined by an economic and fiscal crisis that has been exacerbated by the Palestinian decision to end civilian and security coordination with Israel. The fiscal crisis derives primarily from a collapse in domestic tax revenues during the COVID-19 emergency and from the Government's refusal to receive its clearance revenues. The United Nations stands ready to mediate solutions to the fiscal crisis and to get the Palestinian economy on a better footing. I reiterate the Secretary-General's call for both sides to re-examine the nature of their economic relationship and to improve it for the benefit of both peoples. In that context, I appeal to the Palestinian leadership to resume its coordination with Israel and accept its clearance revenues - money that belongs to the Palestinian people and cannot be replaced by donor funding. When public health conditions permit, Israel should facilitate freer movement of Palestinian workers and goods into Israel and between the occupied West Bank and the Gaza Strip. For its part, the international community should accelerate humanitarian and development initiatives in the occupied Palestinian territory, including those outlined in the humanitarian response plan and the United Nations COVID-19 Response Plan. On 14 and 15 October, Israeli authorities moved forward with some 5,000 settlement housing units. That resumption of major settlement activity, which follows an eight-month break in Area C housing advancements, is of great concern. This move by the Civil Administration High Planning Committee is one of the largest collective housing advancements to date. Approximately 85 per cent of those units are in settlements in outlying locations, deep inside the West Bank - all in areas impeding the contiguity of a future Palestinian State. While the location of those units is particularly worrisome, I reiterate that all settlements are illegal under international law and remain a substantial obstacle to peace. Settlement-related activities should cease, as they undermine the prospect for achieving a viable two-State solution in line with United Nations resolutions, international law and prior agreements. During the reporting period, Israeli authorities also demolished or seized 59 Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and three in East Jerusalem, thereby displacing 82 Palestinians, including 23 women and 40 children, and affecting 200 others. The demolitions were carried out due to the lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain. A donor-funded school in the Bedouin community of Ras Al-Tin, in the Ramallah governorate, faces imminent threat of demolition due to the lack of a building permit. If demolished, it would affect nearly 50 children. An Israeli court has issued an interim injunction halting the demolition pending further legal proceedings. There were no demolitions of residential structures in East Jerusalem in the reporting period. I urge Israel to cease demolitions and seizures of Palestinian property throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, in line with its obligations under international humanitarian law, and to allow Palestinians to develop their communities. Over the past months, Israel did not responded to visa-renewal requests for international staff members from the United Nations Human Rights Field Office in Gaza. While the Office continues to deliver on its mandate, most international staff members in the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) are now working from outside the mission area. After the release of the report to the Human Rights Council on business activities in Israeli settlements in February 2020, Israel froze its relations with OHCHR. I am deeply concerned that critical mandated work on human rights by the United Nations is obstructed in that manner. I urge Israel to facilitate the return of international staff members to the occupied Palestinian territory. On 24 September, Fatah announced that it had reached aseries of understandings with Hamas, including an agreement to hold legislative and presidential elections under a proportional representation system. Those discussions are a welcome development and represent yet another effort to organize long-overdue and much- needed Palestinian leadership elections on the basis of the Palestinian Liberation Organization platform. The Palestinian people have not been allowed to elect their leaders for too long. Democracy and elections are critical to enabling people to determine the direction of their national cause. The United Nations stands ready to support the Palestinian people in exercising their democratic rights. It is unfortunate that violent incidents continued throughout the reporting period. On | October, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) arrested two Palestinian men who had crossed into Israel through the Gaza security fence, carrying a homemade bomb. The next day, the IDF opened fire on a group of Palestinians who approached the security fence in Gaza, injuring one of them. On 5 October, militants fired one rocket from Gaza towards Israel. The rocket landed in an open area in Israel, with no injuries or damage reported. In response, Israeli Air Force aircraft fired two missiles targeting a military observation post in Gaza, also with no injuries reported. On 20 October, the IDF announced that it had located and exposed a Hamas tunnel entering Israeli territory from the southern Gaza Strip. A few hours after the discovery, Palestinian militants fired one rocket from Gaza towards Israel. The rocket was intercepted by the IDF's Iron Dome air-defence system, and no injuries or damage were reported. The Israeli Air Force responded by striking an underground structure in an agricultural field in Gaza. No injuries were reported. In total, five rockets were fired by militants in Gaza towards Israel during the reporting period. The IDF fired a total of 13 missiles into Gaza in retaliation. While calm in Gaza has largely held, the arrangements and commitments from all parties must be reinforced if they are to be sustained. Turning to the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, two Palestinians, including one child, were killed and 65 were injured in clashes and other incidents. Seven Israelis, including two soldiers and one woman, were injured during the reporting period. On 4 October, Israeli forces shot and injured a 16-year-old Palestinian with a live bullet during clashes in Beit Ummar village, north of Hebron. On the same day, a 15-year-old Palestinian boy was seriously injured in an incident in Hizma, near East Jerusalem. Also on that day, a Palestinian armed with a knife attempted to stab an Israeli security forces officer near Hebron. The attacker was arrested and no injuries were reported. On 5 October, Israeli security forces shot and killed a Palestinian man and injured two others at a checkpoint south-east of Tulkarm while they were reportedly throwing Molotov cocktails at passing vehicles. On 25 October, a 17-year-old Palestinian youth died during an encounter with the Israeli security forces near the West Bank village of Turmusaya, near Nablus. There are conflicting claims about the circumstances and cause of death. I urge a prompt and independent investigation into the events that led to the boy's death. Settlers perpetrated 34 attacks against Palestinians, resulting in 30 injuries and damage to property. Palestinians carried out 29 attacks against Israeli settlers and other civilians in the West Bank, resulting in five injuries and damage to property. The olive harvest is a key economic, social and cultural event, but each year the ability of Palestinians to harvest is compromised due to access restrictions, attacks and intimidation. Since the harvest season began, on 7 October, 23 farmers have been injured, over 1,000 olive trees have been burnt or otherwise damaged and several tons of produce have been stolen - in 19 separate incidents. Israeli authorities must ensure the easy access of farmers to their land and must protect all farmers and their property from attacks. I am also deeply concerned about the deteriorating health condition of Maher Al-Akhras, a Palestinian detainee who has been on a hunger strike for over 90 days in protest of his administrative detention. On 12 October, Al-Akhras rejected an offer by the Israeli authorities, whereby he would be released on 26 November, the original end date of his detention order, only in return for immediately ending his hunger strike. To date, there has been no agreement to end the standoff. Let me reiterate that all persons held in administrative detention should be promptly charged and tried in a court of law or released without delay. On the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), I want to acknowledge the efforts made by civil society and the Palestinian Government, in partnership with the United Nations, on advancing the women and peace and security agenda despite the challenging political and humanitarian context. This month, the Ministry of Women's Affairs in Palestine completed the development of its second-generation national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). On 18 October, at a ceremony in Manama, Israel and Bahrain established formal diplomatic relations, signing eight bilateral agreements, including a joint communique on the establishment of diplomatic, peaceful and friendly relations. The document affirms that the two parties will continue their efforts to achieve a just, comprehensive and enduring resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. On 20 October, the first official delegation from the United Arab Emirates visited Israel. The delegation signed four bilateral agreements with Israeli counterparts, including an agreement on mutual visa exemptions for Israeli and Emirati nationals. On 23 October, the leaders of the United States, Israel and the Republic of the Sudan announced that the Governments of Israel and the Sudan had agreed to end the state of belligerence between their countries and to normalize relations. I join the Secretary-General in expressing hope that this agreement will further cooperation, enhance economic and trade relations and bring about new opportunities to advance peace and economic prosperity in the wider Horn of Africa and Middle East regions. I am concerned about statements made by senior Palestinian officials saying that Muslims entering the Al-Aqsa Mosque on the basis of the recent normalization agreements are not welcome and warning of dangerous consequences for such visits. I note the delicate balance of the status quo at the holy compound. Any form of politicization that may increase the risk of an escalation within the sanctity of its grounds must be rejected. In Lebanon, Prime Minister-designate Mustapha Adib stepped down from his functions on 26 September, having been unable to form a Government. Subsequently, former Prime Minister Saad Al-Hariri was designated by the President to form a Government. The one-year anniversary of the October 2019 popular protests was marked by peaceful demonstrations across the country. On 14 October, representatives from the Governments of Israel, Lebanon and the United States met at United Nations premises in Naqoura, south Lebanon, to launch discussions aimed at reaching consensus on the delineation of the Israel- Lebanon maritime boundary. The negotiations were mediated and facilitated by the United States and hosted by the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon. In follow-up to the Beirut port explosion of 4 August, on 27 September the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) deployed an engineering unit to Beirut to assist with the clearance of debris and reconstruction, in coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces. The situation in the UNIFIL area of operations, including along the Blue Line, remained generally stable. On the Golan, while generally calm, the situation remained volatile, with continued violations of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement. On 20 October, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) observed heavy explosions in the vicinity of Al-Qunaytirah, in the area of separation. Subsequently, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had carried out a precision strike against military infrastructure in the area. UNDOF continues to liaise with both parties to remind them of their obligation to respect the terms of the agreement and prevent an escalation of the situation. In conclusion, let me say that, if the pandemic has taught us anything, it is that the virus feeds on instability and expands absent a coherent, coordinated approach to contain it. The United Nations will continue to advocate for increased cooperation in response to the health emergency, including by urging the parties to work together to mitigate risk, save lives and avoid unilateral actions that undermine those efforts. At the same time, the pandemic has heightened the urgency of exploring all avenues to make progress towards resolving the conflict and ending the occupation, in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements, in pursuit of achieving the vision of two States. Palestinian President Abbas has called for an international conference to restart the peace process with the specific goal of two States - Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and sovereign Palestinian State - within secure and recognized borders, based on the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. We have spoken often in the Council of the need to act, of the urgency to act, to prevent the collapse of the two-State paradigm and to give hope to the Palestinian people, particularly the youth. Now, a quarter century after Oslo, their right to statehood can be achieved through peaceful negotiations. That is something young Israelis want too. No one wants war and conflict. But, if leaders are unable to deliver on the hope for peace, that will only encourage radicals and extremists. I sincerely hope that new avenues of cooperation to advance Israeli-Palestinian peace will emerge. The normalization agreements between Israel and three Arab States must help create such opportunities. As we have seen in statements from Amman to Cairo, from international partners and the League of Arab States, the commitment to the two-State solution, in line with United Nations resolutions and international law, continues to be affirmed by broad regional and international consensus.
