Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I also
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
chosen the very timely subject of peacekeeping
operations as the theme of our meeting at this critical
and tragic moment in the history of peacekeeping
operations following the terrorist attack against the
Baghdad headquarters of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq. We believe that, whatever we do after
19 August, the Security Council must consider the
security of United Nations personnel and peacekeepers
when drafting mandates for peacekeeping operations.

I would also like to thank you warmly,
Mr. President, for the very dynamic and effective
Syrian presidency of the Council in the month of
August. It has been a much busier month that we
thought it would be at the beginning. Personally
speaking, I would like to tell you that I was saddened
to learn that you will be moving to Geneva, and that
working with you in the Council and in the United
Nations has been an enriching experience for me. I also
wish to tell you how impressed I have always been by
your demonstrated mastery of Bulgarian.

The issue of peacekeeping operations is
extraordinarily vast and it is impossible to cover it in
one statement. I will therefore confine myself to some
general comments on points of importance to my
country.

The Brahimi report is a very important basis for
any discussion in the Council and the Secretariat of the
evolution and future of peacekeeping operations. Its
value is inestimable and I believe that we must
continue to base our judgements on its analyses and
conclusions. What ultimately emerges in any
consideration of peacekeeping operations is the fact
that the Security Council is the body with the final say
in defining the modalities of the mandate of any
peacekeeping operation. It is the political organ that
makes political choices and takes political decisions.
Obviously, such decisions cannot be taken without
ongoing dialogue with the Secretariat. Bulgaria is
particularly grateful to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for the most valuable contribution our
colleagues in the Department make in analysing the
practice of peacekeeping operations and their
prospects.

Another issue of importance to us, at a time when
the expectations for and complexity of peacekeeping
operations are increasing, is that we must not forget the
basic principles of such operations. We must not forget
the history of the emergence of this phenomenon of
contemporary international affairs. Any peacekeeping
operation today must be based on the consent of the
parties concerned, the minimum use of force and the
perfectly neutral implementation of its mandate. The
watchword for peacekeeping operations, we believe, is
"realism" and the Council should accordingly draft any
mandate in that spirit.

Previous speakers, in particular the representative
of Germany, mentioned the importance of cooperation
between the Security Council and international,
regional and subregional organizations in what has
increasingly evolved into a division of labour. We feel
that the principle of subsidiarity is highly relevant in
that respect. The role of regional and subregional
organizations is important both before any
peacekeeping operation is deployed - we see this
happening in Liberia - and after the operation is
concluded. We often find that the role of a coalition of
countries seeking such a United Nations mandate -
Afghanistan is a case in point - can be very positive.

I have said that peacekeeping operations are
becoming increasingly complex. That is a fact. United
Nations peacekeepers are no longer merely responsible
for monitoring ceasefires, but - as we have seen in
Sierra Leone and elsewhere - are actually working as
administrative authorities. They organize and observe
elections and, increasingly, ensure access for
humanitarian organizations to stricken populations. The
increasing complexity of peacekeeping operations
requires increasingly detailed planning and complex
coordination among the various United Nations
agencies, while non-governmental organizations are
sometimes the first on the ground.

Doubtless, one critical dimension is the
increasingly significant role being played by police
contingents, since restoring the rule of law has become
ever more important to the Council. We feel that the
training of local and national police forces is a
commendable practice that should be reinforced.

Bulgaria should like to see peacekeeping
operations focus on increased respect for human rights.
The conflicts with which the Council is seized,
unfortunately, involve extremely serious violations of
human rights. The presence of a human rights
component within United Nations peacekeeping
missions, working very closely with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, is therefore
especially important.

Another key dimension is the role of women in
restoring peace and, as I said earlier, increasingly close
cooperation between the United Nations and non-
governmental organizations.

