Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate. Australia welcomes
this discussion.

We align ourselves with the Pacific Islands Forum
statement to be delivered by the representative of Nauru.

Global warming, rising sea levels and more extreme
weather events are increasing pressure on communities
and stressing food, water and energy resources. As
environmental pressures build, we need to be ready to
address climate-related security threats. Australia has
committed to spending at least $1 billion in developing
countries over five years in order to strengthen
resilience to the challenges posed by climate change,
including $300 million directly to the Pacific region.
As the largest bilateral donor to the Pacific region,
we build resilience through every sector of our aid
programme, including infrastructure, health, education
and food and water security.

In September last year, Pacific Islands Forum
leaders adopted the Boe Declaration on Regional
Security. The Declaration acknowledges that climate
change remains the single-greatest threat to the
livelihoods, security and well-being of the peoples of
the Pacific. To help implement the Boe Declaration,
Australia is working with Pacific partners to establish
a Pacific fusion centre, which will enhance regional
information-sharing and analysis and draw on climate
data and disaster analysis to inform responses to
shared security threats. Australia is also establishing
a $2 billion Australian infrastructure financing facility
for the Pacific. The facility will work with partners in
the Pacific to build key infrastructure in sectors such
as energy, water and transport. That will build on our
decades of support for high-quality climate and sea-
level monitoring across the Pacific, as well as significant
humanitarian assistance following disaster events.

Australia believes that we must take a longer-term
development perspective on reducing disaster risk, and
we are committed to helping countries in the Asia-
Pacific region to implement the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction. Our disaster risk reduction
development assistance has consistently exceeded the
target of 1 per cent of official development assistance
since it was recommended at the Global Platform
for Disaster Risk Reduction in 2009. As part of
that commitment, Australia is looking forward to
co-hosting, with the United Nations Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction, the Asian Ministerial Conference on
Disaster Risk Reduction in 2020.

Integrating disaster risk reduction into our
development assistance investments is at the heart
of Australia's approach. We do that through climate
and disaster risk screening, climate and disaster
proofing new investments and designing programmes
to ensure that development outcomes are attained,
even under changing climatic conditions. We also
implement mandatory safeguards to ensure that we
protect the environment when delivering programmes
overseas. The Sendai Framework, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change are mutually reinforcing. The
challenge is to translate the policy coherence among
those three frameworks into practice.

Australia recognizes that global and national efforts
to reduce emissions and limit warming must be at the
centre of our approach. Adopting the Paris Agreement
rulebook in Poland last year was a significant step
forward. It reaffirmed the importance of meeting global
challenges with global solutions through the rules-
based order and provides a framework to bring the Paris
Agreement to life. Other parts of the United Nations
system must complement those global and national
efforts and assist us to better understand and address
the security implications of climate change. Australia
would welcome an opportunity to help the many
valuable parts of the United Nations system to coalesce
around a collective response to these pressing issues.

