Mr. Montoya (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, and the
delegation of Panama for the excellent work in the
presidency of the Council during the month of
February. My delegation appreciates the initiative
taken in convening this open debate. My delegation
thanks, and takes note of the informative briefings by,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Executive
Director of UNICEF. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his seventh report to the Council
on this topic (S/2007/757).

Parallel to the adoption and implementation of
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005), in Colombia
there has been a process of strengthening institutions,
underlining the unequivocal commitment of my
country to the welfare of children. Since 1991
Colombia has been a State party to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. In 2005, we became a State
party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention.

The legal framework in Colombia prohibits the
recruitment of children under the age of 18.
Furthermore, national legislation defines minors who
are used by illegal armed groups as victims. One of the
main lines of action of the Colombian State concerns
the prevention of recruitment by those groups.

The Colombian Institute of Family Welfare has
developed a programme to prevent recruitment, which
operates, inter alia, through investment in areas of risk,
strengthening institutional networks, care of children,
food security promotion, prevention of family violence
and through education, health, and income generation
tools.

Since 2004, the central command of the military
forces has been conducting the campaign "Better
prevention than demobilization". Through its
permanent directive of May 2005, the highest ranks in
the military were ordered to develop activities for
preventing recruitment by illegal armed groups. In
addition, the Ministry of Defence issued in March 2007
a directive in which it prohibits all members of the
armed forces to use children for intelligence purposes.

The report of the Secretary-General describes the
positive results achieved through the demobilization
process in Colombia. More than 46,000 persons who
belonged to illegal armed groups have been
demobilized. Of the 11 self-defence groups listed in
annex II to the report of the Secretary-General
submitted in February 2005 (S/2005/72), only two
appear in the seventh report, and today they are
practically dismantled. With the disappearance of the
self-defence armed structures, the danger of forced
recruitment by them has also ceased.

On 3 December 2007, the Government created
the intersectorial commission for the prevention of
recruitment and use of children, adolescents and youth
by illegal armed groups. One of the main
responsibilities of this commission will be to make
recommendations for updating the national policy
framework to reinforce the prevention of recruitment
and use of children by those groups. The composition
of the commission, which is headed by the Vice-
President of the Republic and is composed by various
State Ministers and other high-level officials,
guarantees a comprehensive perspective of the
different aspects of this issue.

The report of the Secretary-General includes, in
paragraph 116, a reference to four criminal groups
devoted to drug trafficking as new organized illegal
armed groups. It is necessary to emphasize that since
these are criminal organizations devoted to drug-
trafficking, they are being combated as such by the
competent authorities in Colombia; thus they can only
be subject to State action and the weight of the law in
order to dismantle their structures and take them before
the justice system.

On those and other topics concerning Colombia
contained in the seventh report, the Government has
submitted and will continue to submit the pertinent
clarification to the Office of the Special
Representative, as well as to other relevant actors.

Let me now refer to some general aspects of the
report. The reasons for which the Security Council
gave priority to situations that are on its agenda are
still valid. In that regard, the Council should continue
to concentrate that priority on the situations that are in
annex I of the Secretary-General's report and maintain
a different treatment for the situations included in
annex II.

Also, the Council should continue to give
different weight and higher precedence to the essential
element that gave origin to the mechanism, that is, the
problem of the recruitment and use of children. It is
equally important that, concerning targeted measures,
the Council rigorously observe Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter.

Colombia reiterates the importance of taking into
account the central role of national Governments in the
protection of and effective assistance to children. Any
action by the United Nations should be carried out in
consultation and coordination with the respective
Governments.

Lastly, Colombia reaffirms its will to continue
working with the United Nations system in
strengthening existing national measures and
institutions for the protection and promotion of the
rights of children.

