Belgium welcomes this discussion in the Council on United Nations and European Union (EU) cooperation. I would like to thank EU High Representative Borrell for his excellent statement. The EU and the United Nations share a goal of achieving an international rules-based order with democracy, the rule of law and human rights at its core. They are therefore natural partners in the search for sustainable solutions to global challenges. Let me highlight some examples of how the United Nations and the EU have joined forces to achieve lasting impact worldwide. Turning first to the coronavirus pandemic, the EU launched Team Europe with a financial package of more than €20 billion to help partner countries in the fight against the coronavirus. The EU also strongly supports the Secretary-General's appeal for an immediate global ceasefire. With regard to Syria, a conflict that remains high on the Council's agenda, the EU is the largest donor of humanitarian aid. In that respect, I am pleased to confirm that next month we will host the fourth Brussels donor conference on Syria. We underline that it is critical to find a political solution that is fully in keeping with resolution 2254 (2015). Turning to Iran, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action constitutes a significant and unique achievement of sustained multilateral diplomacy. It is a cornerstone of the global non-proliferation architecture and an example of cooperation between the EU and the United Nations. We stress the importance of keeping this vital agreement in place through direct dialogue. We also regret the recent announcement by the United States of America that nuclear-related waivers will not be renewed. The launch of the new European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI is the EU's latest contribution to the implementation of the United Nations arms embargo on Libya. In the Sahel, the EU has a vibrant partnership with the Group of Five for the Sahel. I would like to flag the unique and innovative arrangement in which the EU reimburses actions performed by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali in support of the Joint Force, even if it is a small part of the vast support the EU is giving to the region. Furthermore, the European Union capacity-building and training missions in the Niger and Mali have been expanded to reach the entire region in order to train security forces and support the national security sector reform agendas. I would like to underline the role being played by the EU-led Operation Althea for the provision of a secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the contribution of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo to the rule of law there. Respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, including the protection of children, is an important cornerstone of the partnership between the United Nations and the EU. Currently, it is more crucial than ever for warring parties to comply with international humanitarian law and guarantee unimpeded access for humanitarian aid. I would also like to highlight the importance of upholding the women and peace and security agenda, in particular with regard to the meaningful participation of women in peace operations at all levels and in all areas of expertise. The importance the EU and its member States attach to multilateral cooperation and the United Nations is reflected by their financial backing: they are the single- largest contributor to the United Nations system, making up around 30 per cent of the peacekeeping budget. The EU is also the largest donor in terms of development and humanitarian assistance. In addition, in collaboration with the United Nations, the EU is pioneering the fight against climate change. Next to its own mitigation efforts, the EU is the largest provider of international climate financing. Looking ahead, it is important to pursue further partnerships, such as with the African Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Hopefully, the long-standing collaboration among the EU, the United Nations and the African Union can be further expanded in future.
