Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation has confidence in your leadership abilities
and expertise. I also take this opportunity to thank Her
Excellency Ambassador ngu and the Nigerian
delegation for their wise leadership of the Council's
work during the past month. I also wish to thank
Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing.
We appreciate his efforts and those of his Office to
promote the rule of law.

We would recall that, at its emergency meeting
convened in February, the Council of the League of
Arab States condemned all actions against Libyan
civilians as grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Subsequently, in
resolution 1970 (2011), the Security Council referred
the situation in Libya to the Office of the Prosecutor of
the ICC.

Lebanon therefore welcomes all measures taken
by the Office of the Prosecutor over the past few
months to address the serious crimes committed in
Libya that can be classified as crimes against humanity
following the outbreak of the revolution. We support
the continued efforts to shed light on the facts in order
to identify those criminally responsible, in particular
with respect to the numerous cases of rape referred to
in the report. We also support the efforts to arrest and
bring to justice the two fugitives - Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The task of the
International Criminal Court did not end with the
demise of Muammar Al-Qadhafi.

Tribute must be paid to the constructive
cooperation during the past few months by States,
international and regional organizations and the
National Transitional Council (NTC) with the Office of
the Prosecutor, as indicated in the report. That
cooperation has contributed to progress in the
investigations. My country stresses the need for
Libya's neighbouring countries to cooperate fully with
the Court and with the Prosecutor pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) in order to prevent their
territories from becoming safe havens for anyone who
attempts to escape from justice.

Lebanon also commends the responsible call
made by the Chair of the National Transitional
Council, Mr. Mustafa Mohammed Abdul Jalil that the
revolutionaries refrain from acts of reprisal against
those who fought on the side of Al-Qadhafi. We
commend as well the calls for Libyan authorities to
provide impartial trials for those who have been

detained. Justice alone will provide the proper terms of
reference to set the record straight and guarantee
accountability. The custodians of the revolution and the
guardians of its lofty values and image must ensure
that the practices of the former dictatorial regime
related to arbitrary detention, torture and summary
judgments are not repeated.

In conclusion, Lebanon believes that the Council
has referred the Libyan situation to the ICC in order to
prevent continued grave crimes against the Libyan
people, who seek freedom and democracy. Now that
liberty has been restored in Libya, Lebanon stresses the
need to move forward towards the trial of those who
have been responsible for grave violations.
Accountability is the way to guarantee justice for the
victims and to lessen their suffering and that of their
families. It serves as a key tool in turning the page on
an era of a culture of impunity. It also serves to deter
such actions from taking place in the future. Lebanon
congratulates sisterly Libya, which deserves a new
dawn after a long chapter of darkness, injustice and
impunity.

