Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by conveying my gratitude to Ambassador
Gary Francis Quinlan for his exhaustive periodic report
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). Today's briefing is the last we
will attend as a member ofthe Council. I would therefore
like to take this opportunity to welcome the efforts of
Ambassador Quinlan at the head of the Committee and
wish him every possible success in his upcoming work.

I would also like to thank the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution 1929
(2010) and to welcome the new members of the Panel.
We cherish the hope that the Committee will continue
to enjoy the impartiality and professional work of the
Panel of Experts. The cooperation of all Member States,
including requests for information, is crucial to enable
the Committee to fulfil the mandate with which it was
entrusted by the Council.

The report that was submitted for our consideration
today clearly demonstrates that the Committee continues
to consider all cases referred to it, including the report
of the Panel of Experts and the notifications of facts
that jeopardize the application of provisions adopted by
the Security Council. We pay tribute to the interaction
of the Committee and its Panel of Experts with the
Member States and international organizations. We
urge the Committee to continue to make available to
Member States all information and clarifications aimed
at facilitating the implementation of relevant Council
resolutions.

To that end, we take note with satisfaction of the
participation of the Chairman of the Committee in
the open information session held on 18 November
organized with the Financial Action Task Force on
the fight against the financing and proliferation of
terrorism. We note that, according to the last report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
Agency and Iran signed a joint statement in New York
on 11 November 2013 on a framework for cooperation.
The framework for cooperation constitutes, as noted
in the IAEA report, substantive progress. As the only
institution in the field of safeguards, the IAEA should
enjoy all the necessary cooperation to make substantive
progress on pending issues.

One of the main developments that the Committee's
Chairman referred to was undoubtedly the joint plan of
action signed in Geneva on 24 November between P5+1
and the Islamic Republic of Iran on the Iranian nuclear
programme. Morocco, which attaches great importance
to the commitments and international conventions
relating to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, has
noted the agreement with great interest and considers
it to be a constructive and encouraging beginning that
could lead to tangible and positive results towards
settling the Iranian nuclear issue and furthermore
towards creating a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East as one of the decisive factors for peace and
security and stability in the region as a whole.

Based on our commitment to ongoing dialogue and
the peaceful settlement of disputes regardless of their
nature or their complexity or degree of sensitivity, we
welcome the continuation of negotiations between Iran
and the P5+1. The efforts undertaken by United Nations
entities should back the IAEA's actions and work to step
up negotiations between Iran and the P5+1 to achieve a
negotiated solution,

It is of the utmost importance that we prevent
any weakening of the non-proliferation regime
and endeavour to ensure that all States fulfil their
conventional obligations with respect to guarantees. The
force and impact of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and the pursuit of the strategic
objective of nuclear disarmament depends on all States
fulfilling their obligations under that fundamental
instrument.

My country remains devoted to the goal of global
nuclear disarmament, as we recognize the inalienable
right of all States to use nuclear energy for exclusively
peaceful purposes. The non-proliferation regime rests
on a delicate balance between the rights and duties
of States that it is important to protect, preserve and
strengthen through full respect for its provisions.

