Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): I would like to begin by
commending you, Mr. President, on your initiative in
convening this meeting to consider ways and means of
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping efforts in the
area of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR). The importance of the DDR process cannot be
overemphasized, as it is key to preventing the recurrence of
conflict and to paving the way for post-conflict peace-
building.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for
preparing the thorough and inspiring report that is before
us; we fully share the concerns described in it. As one of
the financial contributors to the study conducted by the
Lessons Learned Unit, Japan is particularly gratified that
many elements contained in the Unit's report have been
incorporated into that of the Secretary-General. We are also
pleased to note that the report embraces many of the
recommendations made by the Group of Governmental
Experts on Small Arms, under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Donowaki of Japan.

Of the wide range of issues covered in the Secretary-
General's report, I would like to focus my remarks on three
of them - namely, the need for greater coordination, the
need to address the question of child soldiers and ways to
secure adequate financial resources.

The first point is the question of coordination. As
stated in the report, the process of DDR is a complex and
multidimensional one, involving various actors such as
former warring factions, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations. Coordination among the
different actors is essential to the success of the process.
From the viewpoint of ex-combatants, for example, the
decision to cooperate with the DDR process is in itself a
difficult one, and so it is up to the international community
to ensure that a well-planned, coordinated and reliable
mechanism is in place to support that decision.

In order to achieve this goal, coordination must be
improved at three levels: within the United Nations
Secretariat, between the United Nations and related
organizations - including the Bretton Woods
institutions - and in the field. Of those three levels, I
would like to stress the need for coordination in the field,
as this is the level at which all actors finally get together
and directly face ex-combatants who are to be disarmed,
demobilized and reintegrated into society.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has an especially important coordinating role to play. Past
experience has taught us that when a Special
Representative is well selected and is given appropriate
authority and resources, coordination in the field is
enhanced, making the chances for success that much
greater. We therefore wish to stress that the position of
Special Representative should be filled by a highly
qualified and capable person and that he or she should be
given sufficient authority to effectively carry out the role.

My second point relates to the issue of child
soldiers. My delegation shares the view of the
Secretary-General that this question demands particular
attention throughout the DDR process. Children are the
foundation and future of a country, and the specific
physical and psychological needs of those who have been
used as soldiers must be attended to if the country is to
achieve lasting peace.

In this context, my delegation welcomes the recent
appointment of child protection advisers to the United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Sierra Leone and to
the United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We would like to encourage the
Secretary-General to review other United Nations
peacekeeping operations in order to identify situations
where the appointment of child protection advisers may
be necessary.

Permit me on this occasion to reiterate the position
of the Government of Japan that children under the age of
18 should not, under any circumstances, be used in
hostilities. Japan strongly supports the draft Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which was adopted by a Working Group of the Human
Rights Commission in January.

My final point concerns financial resources needed
for the DDR process, although I realize that financial
matters are also dealt with in other relevant forums of the
Organization. As the Secretary-General pointed out, the
resources for disarmament activities within a
peacekeeping operation are generally provided through the
assessed contributions to the budget of that operation,
while the resources for demobilization and reintegration
activities are provided through voluntary contributions.
 

My delegation recognizes that the current practice of
utilizing resources from trust funds established with
voluntary contributions for such purposes has its merits. As
a matter of fact, Japan contributed $960,000 to the Trust
Fund to support United Nations peacekeeping-related efforts
in Sierra Leone. to be used exclusively for the purpose of
DDR. Although by virtue of its flexibility this trust fund
formula has proved to be useful. we recognize that
providing the necessary resources from the assessed budget
would enhance an operation's financial stability.

Bearing in mind these considerations, I would like to
stress that Japan, which is responsible for 20 percent of the
assessed budget of all peacekeeping operations, is willing
to consider a proposal which the Secretary-General put
forward in his report to examine how the DDR acti '
a peacekeeping operation should be financed.

 

In concluding. let me once again underscore the
importance my delegation attaches to today's debate in the
Security Council. I might add that the concerns expressed
by the Council at its previous meeting on this subject, in
July of last year, and the points made in the Secretary-
General's report are fully consonant with the position my
delegation has been advocating in other forums of the
United Nations. such as the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the First Committee and the
preparatory committee for the international Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons. You
may be assured, Mr. President, that Japan will actively
participate in the consideration of this issue and make every
effort to enhance the chances of success of the DDR
process.

