Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Peruvian
presidency for organizing today's important debate.

While fully aligning myself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union,
I would like to make the following comments in my
national capacity.

Terrorism, fuelled by the root causes of
radicalization and violent extremism, is ever-more
interlinked with organized crime and the trafficking in
people, drugs and arms, as well as corruption. Needless
to stress, further synergy among terrorist organizations
and organized crime groups can provoke more dire
consequences, not only for certain countries but at the
global level.

According to experts' assessment, the common
denominator in all such groups is that their field of
activities is not limited to a specific region or State;
instead, they have expansionary aspirations and a vast
development agenda. Up until now, the international
community has been exposed to constantly evolving
threats from the so-called crime-terror nexus, with
more sophisticated methods and tactics, including in
the financing of transnational criminal activity.

The following are some of the factors that allow
terrorist and criminal groups to remain active and
ambitious: the misuse of technological advances
and communication innovations, loosely controlled
borders, complex challenges with regard to returnees
and relocators from the conflict zones, and insufficient
prosecution and punishment measures in place for
those who provide funding or other support to terrorist
and criminal activities in any form and by any methods,
to name a few.

It remains crucial to ensure the effective
implementation of all international instruments in
combating terrorism and transnational organized
crime in force, including the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and the Financial Action Task
Force standards and recommendations. I also wish
to reaffirm the importance of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocols in combating both existing and
emerging forms of transnational organized crime. The
provisions of the Convention can target profit-oriented
transnational organized crimes by terrorist groups,
including armed robbery, kidnapping for ransom,
money-laundering, corruption and participation in an
organized criminal group involved in such activities.

Moreover, it can address the role of terrorists in
human trafficking, migrant smuggling and the illicit
trafficking in firearms. Therefore, Ukraine supports
the establishment of the mechanism for the review
of the implementation of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto. We believe that any mechanism
that might be adopted should be transparent, efficient,
non-intrusive, impartial and aimed in particular to
assist States in the effective implementation of the
Convention and its Protocols.

Besides that, we recognize the urgent need to find
additional effective measures to counter evolving trends
in both terrorism and organized crime. In particular,
having been unpunishably integrated into the State
policy of some countries, terrorism and criminal
components lead to brutal violations of international
law, including to the most hostile war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Ukraine continues to experience
such consequences while countering the Russian hybrid
aggression for more than five years now.

Switching blame, manipulation, propaganda, the
interference in the internal affairs of States, fuelling
international conflicts by supplying weapons and
financing terrorism, and killing civilians, including
medical personnel, is the modern political course of
the Russian Federation. The Russian representative
so graphically described earlier in his statement the
dangers of supplying weapons to terrorists in Syria.
Instead, I would love to hear him talk about an even more
relevant topic, namely, when Russia itself will end the
non-stop delivery of arms and munitions to terrorists,
fuelling the senseless bloodshed in occupied Donbas.

Transnational criminal activity, including
terrorism, must be not only condemned, but rather
effectively countered and punished. Regrettably, the
current situation in Ukraine clearly demonstrates
that the accommodation, or the appeasement, of an
aggressor breeds further aggression. That is why it is
critically important to firmly hold the aggressor State
to account and employ all the necessary instruments to
make it return to the tenets of international law.

