Mrs. Robinson: I am honoured to address the
Council in my last appearance as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region on
Africa. I must confess that I am actually suffering
withdrawal pains, and I am sure that they will become
even more severe over the coming weeks. I would like
to echo what Martin Kobler said and express my deep
appreciation for the close working relationship I have
with him and his colleagues in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I would also like
to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General for the
privilege of serving in this capacity, as well as to the
Council members, for the resolute support extended to
me during the past 18 months. I am pleased to note, as
evidenced from this meeting and the related discussions
this afternoon, that the Council's commitment to the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region remains unwavering.

I would also take this opportunity to thank the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing this special
meeting at a critical moment for peace and stability
in the Great Lakes region, just before the Regional
Oversight Mechanism meets in New York in September
to take stock of the progress made in the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.

Despite the tremendous human and material

resources found in the Great Lakes region, decades of
war and deep mistrust had caused great damage and
misery at the time I assumed duty, about 18 months ago.
Nevertheless, hope was not lost. The Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes Region offered a unique
opportunity for comprehensive solutions at national,
regional and international levels, with the inclusive and
active participation of civil society, including women
and youth, in order to bring durable peace with security
and development to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. While efforts to implement the
Framework have met with anticipated challenges, I
remain encouraged by the prospects and opportunities
generated by the Framework and by the significant
achievements recorded so far.

Implementing the provisions of the Framework has
provided a significant forum, the Technical Support
Committee, comprised of principal representatives of
Heads of State and Government, under my auspices
together with the African Union, to deliberate and offer
advice on the actualization of the regional commitments.
These periodic high-level interactions, supported by
my office in Nairobi, have significantly improved
communication flow and mutual understanding, and
have heightened the sense of urgency for collective
actions, as reflected in the formulation of the regional
action plan setting out priority actions, as well as
a monitoring and evaluation mechanism for the
implementation of the commitments of member States.
Those have indeed been significant preliminary steps
for a region known to have gone to war not too long ago
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Implementing the Framework in the last 18 months has
resulted in a strengthening of collective governance
and ownership in the region. My efforts have greatly
benefited from the proven determination by the
leadership in the region to take ownership and
responsibility for finding solutions for peace, security
and development. Evidence of that is the mini-summit
of Heads of State to be convened next week by President
dos Santos, as Chair of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), to address the
current issues. I therefore wish to take this opportunity
to thank, in particular, Presidents Eduardo dos Santos,
Yoweri Museveni, Joseph Kabila, Paul Kagame,
Uhuru Kenyatta, Jakaya Kikwete and Jacob Zuma for
their untiring efforts to ensure the actualization of
the goals of the Framework. Indeed, I thank all other
Heads of State and Government of signatory countries,
and the secretariats of the ICGLR and the Southern
African Development Community for the emerging
collaboration and synergy, which I have appreciated
as vital in order to support the implementation of the
Framework.

International support by key partners remains
crucial, now and in the immediate future. I would like
to thank my colleagues, members of the international
team of envoys, the International Contact Group, the
African Union Commission, the World Bank, the
Africa Development Bank, MONUSCO and the United
Nations country teams in the region, to name only a
few, for the useful collaboration and support provided
to me in the implementation of my mandate, and for
the evolving understanding of the critical need to align
respective programmes and policies in the region in
support of the Framework.

Equally central to the success of the Framework
is the full participation of civil society, particularly
women and youth, who are too often left out in critical
decision making processes, despite their significant
proportional stake in the affairs of the region. I have
worked with civil society in the region to establish a
women's platform for the Framework, not as a separate
mechanism but as a reinforcing platform to support all
regional and national efforts aimed at giving voice to
women and facilitating their active involvement in the
implementation of the Framework.

National and regional planning workshops are
currently ongoing with the support of my office,
MONUSCO and the United Nations country teams,
for the establishment of a civil society coalition in
the region, in order to ensure that Governments are
held accountable for their commitments under the
Framework. I am indeed gratified to see the emerging
galvanization of those critical segments of society
towards the achievement of the objectives set forth in
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.

My last field assignment, a short time ago, was
to attend the extraordinary summit of the ICGLR on
the fight against youth unemployment in the Great
Lakes region, a project supported by the trust fund
I established in the Office of the Special Envoy to
support the implementation of the Framework. I am
encouraged by the determination of Governments in the
region to address the looming danger of a fast-growing
youth population with stagnant, if not dwindling,
opportunities across the region.

Fast-tracking the implementation of the
development pillar of the Framework remains a key
priority of my efforts. When people have livelihoods
and the economy grows, the clouds of violence and
insecurity inevitably lift. To that end, I have worked
with the current Chair of the ICGLR, President dos
Santos and the ICGLR secretariat to ensure progress
is achieved on the planned private sector investment
conference for the Great Lakes region, endorsed by
the Regional Oversight Mechanism. On 11 June, in
conjunction with the United Nations Global Compact, I
convened a round table on responsible investment in the
Great Lakes region in Addis Ababa, which drew over
100 participants from the private and public sectors,
signatory countries, development partners and regional
and international development finance institutions. In
September, Angola will host a ministerial-level regional
consultation that will bring together the Framework
signatory countries, private sector representatives and
international development partners in order to endorse
an investment opportunity brief for the region and
finalize discussions for the investment conference.

While some progress has been achieved thus
far, much more work is required in the days ahead,
and serious challenges confront the attainment of
irreversible peace, as my friend and colleague Martin
Kobler has already indicated. If the issues are not
immediately and effectively addressed, the challenges
have the potential to undo the progress achieved and
ultimately undermine peace and security.

Those challenges include the slow implementation
of the provisions of the Nairobi declarations that
followed the conclusion of the Kampala dialogue,
the humanitarian situation, including the state of
human rights, persisting impunity, the ongoing plight
of refugees and internally displaced persons, the
restoration of State authority in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the acceleration of security
sector reform and the voluntary disarmament process
of the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR). In addition, the region faces political tensions
and general anxiety generated by transitional politics
and electoral calendars in several signatory countries
in the next couple of years, along with the prevailing
mistrust in the region.

I call on the parties, with the support of the ICGLR
Chair, to follow-up rapidly on the recent technical
visits to Uganda and Rwanda by a delegation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in order to begin
the process of repatriation of eligible former members
of the Mouvement du 23 mars and to implement
other provisions of the Nairobi declarations. There
should be a timetable and careful monitoring of the
implementation of that process. I take note of the recent
progress made by the National Oversight Mechanism
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in concluding
benchmarks and indicators of progress on national
commitments. That should be followed up by concrete
actions in order to address root causes, as stipulated in
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. My
office is currently engaged at the working level with the
relevant United Nations regional focal points in taking
stock of the refugee and IDP situation. The findings
should provide the necessary background for further
engagements at summit level in the region.

Council members will recall that on
31 May I welcomed the announcement by the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda of their
voluntary surrender. However, the process has yet to
gain sufficient traction to show that it is credible, and
Martin Kobler has again shown the very worrying lack
of progress in recent weeks. If anything, the process
has created a worrying dynamic in the region and
beyond that must be carefully observed and handled
in order to preserve the earlier consensus-building on
illegal armed groups generated within the region, and
to remain focused on the relevant Security Council
resolutions on neutralizing the FDLR in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The positions taken
have been very clear that all negative forces must be
removed, and it is hoped that the forthcoming mini
summit will give a clear signal in that regard.

Concerning electoral calendars in the region,
I note the positive steps taken in Burundi, notably
those having to do with improvements in the electoral
framework and the adoption by consensus of the
electoral code. However, the Government must do much
more to curb politically motivated armed violence. It
will be critically important to work with the authorities,
not only in Burundi but in all the other countries in
the region where elections are scheduled over the next
few years, in order to ensure adequate political space,
including individual and group freedoms, necessary for
free and fair elections.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
offers solutions to cycles of conflicts that were decades
in the making. It would not be realistic to expect
solutions to arrive overnight. We must therefore take
a long-term view if we are to ensure tangible returns
on the commitments made in this historic plan for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. We
must continue to nurture the Framework and work with
the leadership in the region for as long as it takes, in
order to reap the necessary benefits for the peoples of
the region, who continue to bear the consequences of
conflict. 1 call on the Council to extend to my successor,
Mr. Said Djinnit, all the support he will need to carry
out his mandate as Special Envoy. He will lead a fine
team in Nairobi, and will benefit, as I did, from the
support of the senior leadership at the United Nations.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Chef de
Cabinet of the Office of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Field Support and my Special Adviser, Modibo Toure,
and staff members in Nairobi, as well as Martin Kobler
and his team in MONUSCO, for their tireless efforts
to support the implementation of my mandate. I firmly
believe that through working together with the region,
and with a common approach and political will, we
have a framework of hope that will ensure that we reach
that point in Seamus Heaney's poem when "hope and
history rhyme".

