Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to thank the Chairperson-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in

12-2284]
Europe (OSCE), the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland,
Mr. Eamon Gilmore, for his statement and for his
important briefing on OSCE cooperation with the
United Nations and the security challenges they face.

The briefing should lead us to consider in-depth
the functions of the Security Council itself. Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter provides for
regional organizations to play an integral role in
promoting collective security and attaches importance
to their vision, actions and initiatives in finding
solutions in their respective regions. To this end, we
have encouraged dialogue and cooperation with
organizations in all regions of the world, because we
believe that such engagement promotes better
understanding of specific situations and comprehensive
visions of security, encompassing the human, political,
economic, environmental and military aspects of the
regional dimension.

Colombia recognizes that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe plays a very
important role in conflict resolution and the promotion
of peace, security, respect for human rights, and the
rule of law. We note that the same principles guide both
organizations, with which we share the view of liberty,
democracy and respect for human rights as essential
prerequisites of peace and security.

The interaction between the Security Council and
the OSCE has allowed both bodies to exchange frank
opinions and establish support mechanisms in areas of
common interest. We value the OSCE's support for the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo and its plans to extend its
participation in Kosovo; its participation in
Afghanistan and its cooperation with other countries of
the region; and its regional initiatives to fight
terrorism, cybercrime and the illegal arms trade, among
other transnational challenges.

In Colombia's view, it is critical that the United
Nations and the world's regional organizations
complement each other's efforts to strengthen their
institutional capacity in the framework of their
purviews to address international security challenges,
particularly conflict prevention, the establishment of
confidence-building measures, mediation, crisis
management and post-conflict stabilization. This will
allow regional organizations to complement the
Security Council's exercise of its main responsibility to
uphold peace and to focus on the priorities of their
respective agendas.

In the negotiations for the Charter for the United
Nations, one of the central issues in the discussion was
how cooperation between regional organizations and
the Security Council was to work. Some delegations
viewed it as an obligatory first step before turning to
the Security Council; others believed that it was not
necessary in all cases. Our position favoured resort to
regional efforts in the first instance with a view to
preventing disputes, situations or events from evolving
into major confrontation or conflict. At the same time,
it remains true that the Security Council's capacity to
act cannot be constrained in cases when the urgency or
severity of circumstances require.

Finally, Colombia wishes to highlight the role
that multilateralism plays in the resolution of the
complex conflicts of the world today, and the important
contribution of open communication and cooperation
between regional organizations and the United Nations
to join efforts in support of peace and prosperity. In
this regard, we welcome the detailed briefing of
Mr. Gilmore on the priorities identified by the Irish
chairmanship and the cooperation of the OSCE with
the United Nations and its contribution to international
peace and security.

