Mr. Moncada Colindres (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): 1 should like to congratulate the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam and thank him for having organized this meeting on the defence of the Charter of the United Nations. We welcome the presence of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, President of the International Court of Justice; and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, an independent group of world leaders working together for peace, justice and rights humans. Nicaragua associates itself with the statement to be made by the representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. This meeting represents an historic opportunity that allows us to reflect on, reaffirm and defend the commitment of States to the validity of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations on the eve of the seventy-fifth anniversary of its foundation. Recent world events confirm that we are on the edge of the critical limits of civilization and that the long-sought peace among States and peoples is in a state of dangerous and growing insecurity due to State terrorism, aggression to sovereignty and violations of international law. Today as yesterday, we peace-loving peoples always reject the language of aggression and war. No State can resort to the use or threat of use of force in international relations. Such exceptionalist policies in violation of international law do not help resolve conflicts peacefully; on the contrary, they aggravate and subject the international situation to further stress. The vocation of peace and respect for the sovereign equality of States and non-aggression obliges us to resolve inter-State disputes through the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. On several occasions, Nicaragua has rejected and condemned illegal actions aimed at changing democratic Governments, thereby violating the constitutional order and leading to widespread violence, and at orchestrating coups d'etat to overthrow legitimate Governments elected by the people. That reaffirms the premise of the concept note (S/2020/1, annex) prepared by the presidency of the Council, namely, that, when the purposes and the principles of the Charter are applied, humankind and peace reap the benefits, whereas, when they are violated, we put them at serious risk. As we yearn for peace and believe in the prevention and resolution of disputes through peaceful and inclusive means, we reject policies of aggressive interference and the imposition of unilateral coercive economic measures and sanctions in violation of international law. We reiterate that Latin America and the Caribbean are a zone of peace, in which Nicaragua remains an important agent for ensuring stability, peace and security. We have based and will continue to base our international relations on friendship, solidarity and reciprocity among peoples. We condemn State-sponsored terrorism and the violation of the sovereignty of other countries and international law. We recognize the principle of the peaceful settlement of international disputes through recourse to international law and the Charter. In that context, we attach particular importance to the International Court of Justice, which enjoys our full support and whose work contributes to global security in promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes. The United Nations must assume its historical role in promoting respect, understanding, security, sovereignty and territorial integrity, while working on an equal playing field on which multilateralism and the will of all men and women prevail. It is necessary to promote a culture of peace, reject aggressive and bellicose policies, war and confrontation, and reaffirm the validity of the Charter, which has helped save the world from another world war. We express our concern and consternation in the face of recent events that violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, including the selective assassination of leaders of countries that are Members of this Organization. Those illegal and unjustifiable acts deepen the very serious situation facing peace and security in the world. Nicaragua appeals to the international community to comply with the aspirations that we set out for ourselves 75 years ago to work together in solidarity, cooperation and with respect for the Charter of the United Nations to eradicate poverty and war. Those are scourges that today constitute the greatest obstacles to ensuring international peace, development and security, which is the bedrock on which our Organization was founded 75 years ago. In conclusion, as we begin 2020, we wish to convey a message from our Government of Reconciliation and National Unity, presided over by Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra and our Vice-President Rosario Murillo, "From our Nicaragua, blessed and free forever, we extend a greeting full of good will, with wishes for a world based on dialogue, reason, peace and so much more, in every respect, for all the Governments and the peoples of the world. Humankind deserves the greatest efforts and prayers to live with respect and in understanding and peace".
