Ms. Wallstriim: As members of the Security
Council know, my role as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict is a
global one. Like the scourge of sexual violence itself, it
traverses all of geography and history. Conflict-related
sexual violence is not specific to any culture or
continent, yet it still surprises people when I say that it
2
is neither cultural nor even sexual, but criminal - a
crime of international concern.

I thank you, Sir, and the Security Council for
once again having invited me to brief you on my visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to bring
the voices of Congolese women to this Council, as I
promised them to do.

"A dead rat is worth more than the body of a
woman" were the words of one distraught young
woman in Walikale. It was an expression of how
human rights violations against women are still the
lowest on a false hierarchy of wartime horrors. We
travelled the dirt road to Kampala and Nyasi villages;
there was impenetrable jungle on both sides, with
narrow paths leading into the forest. We could imagine
the dark night being split by gunshots and hordes of
soldiers moving from one hut to another to loot and
rape and threaten. A string of small villages along the
road were still deserted - testament to the lasting
terror of this attack. Families prefer to sleep in the
forest since they do not feel safe in their own homes.

"Why is this a security issue?", some may still
ask. The answer is because there is no security to go
about everyday subsistence activities; because women,
who are the mainstay of local economies, can no longer
access markets; because families are dispersed. Armed
elements assert control and dominance over the area.
The rapes of elderly women left the communities
reeling with shock. They served to shatter the social
taboos and the shared heritage that hold people
together. The women themselves insisted on one thing
above all - they want peace. But we cannot wait for
peace to bring peace to the lives of women. We must
insist that where sexual violence is planned and
orchestrated as a tactic of war, it be viewed as
preventable.

Following the mass rapes in Walikale, I called on
this Council and the international community to ensure
that the perpetrators and those who bear command
responsibility do not escape into the night. In this
regard, there is some good news. This week, Callixte
Mbarushimana, Executive Secretary of the Forces
Democratiques pour la liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) -
one of the rebel groups implicated in the atrocities -
was arrested in Paris under an International Criminal
Court (ICC) warrant. I wish to take this opportunity to
commend the French authorities who effected this
arrest, and the Prosecutor of the ICC, Mr. Luis
10-58102
Moreno-Ocampo, for actively pursuing the mass sexual
crimes committed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That arrest complements the positive action
taken earlier this year by German authorities to detain
other FDLR leaders, namely Mr. Ignace
Murwanashyaka and Straton Musoni, on war crimes
charges.

In addition, last week United Nations
peacekeepers arrested "Lieutenant Colonel" Sadoke
Kokunda Mayele, who was identified by victims as the
commander of the Mayi-Mayi Cheka rebel group
presumed to be among those responsible for the mass
rapes in Walikale. I named Mayele specifically in my
briefing to the Security Council several weeks ago, and
his arrest sends a loud and clear message that impunity
for crimes of sexual violence will not be tolerated. I
congratulate the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for the apprehension of
Mayele, particularly our Indian peacekeepers and our
Head of Office in the East, who mounted the operation.
Mayele was immediately handed over to national
authorities, and it is my hope that we will now have
further information on the ringleaders in Kibua-Mpofi
and that more arrests will follow. I urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to ensure an exemplary process of justice in the Mayele
case and a timely and comprehensive investigation into
the mass rapes.

The case of Mayele shows that it is possible to
bring pressure to bear on commanders. It is even
possible to compel them to turn over to justice
perpetrators of sexual violence from within their own
ranks. In this respect, the apprehension of Mayele
represents an important precedent and possibility. It is
a case of an armed group turning in on itself; it is a
case of having a rapist and an association with rape
become a liability for armed groups. When
commanders can no longer rest easy in the certainty of
impunity, and when it begins to cross their mind that
they may be turned in by their own for commissioning
or condoning rape, that is the moment when we open a
new front in the battle to end impunity. To do so, we
must deepen our information on armed groups, and on
this basis engage them more systematically and put
them under pressure. We must seek to penetrate their
chains of command and disrupt them from within.

It is crucial that we use all the means at our
disposal. In this regard, the leverage that we gain from
10-58102
the credible threat of Council sanctions against
perpetrators of sexual violence cannot be
underestimated. It made a difference in the Mayele
case. Therefore, I reiterate my call on this Council to
escalate the focus on crimes of sexual violence in the
work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As a start, I urge the
Committee to consider the inclusion of "Colonel"
Serafim of the FDLR on its sanctions list. This may be
done on the basis of the credible information from
witnesses on the scene that he also commanded the
mass rapes in Walikale. I remain at the disposal of the
sanctions Committee to provide information on the
issue of conflict-related sexual violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We must seize the momentum of these arrests to
begin turning the tide of impunity. The arrests must
serve as a warning to perpetrators of sexual violence
everywhere, and we cannot underestimate the
importance of such actions for the victims and their
communities. They represent a glimmer of hope for
them - a moment of solace that the world is not blind
to their plight, and a possibility that those who
brutalize them will ultimately be held to account.

Rapes will continue so long as consequences are
negligible. We must close future options and avenues
of advancement for perpetrators. They should be
excluded from any amnesty provisions. They should be
ineligible for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration benefits. The avenues for future political
roles and governance should be closed to those who
commit acts of rape.

I am gravely concerned about the ongoing
military operations by the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) in the
Walikale territory and the implications for the
protection of civilians. Thousands of FARDC troops
have now been deployed to the territory in an operation
to implement the President's moratorium on mining in
the area and to reassert Government control. There is
already some information from MONUSCO
peacekeepers on the ground that rapes, killings and
looting have been perpetrated by FARDC soldiers. The
possibility that the same communities that were
brutalized in July and August by FDLR and Mayi-Mayi
elements are now also suffering exactions at the hands
of FARDC troops is unimaginable and unacceptable.
3

I call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to swiftly investigate such
allegations and hold any perpetrators to account. The
protection of civilians must be the primary
consideration of the operations in Walikale. I urge the
deployment of the national police to Walikale
specifically to ensure security of an investigation team
which that shortly be deployed by the Auditeur
militaire of North Kivu. I also urge the deployment of a
deeper police presence in general in high-risk zones as
a visible and active protection presence.

I have requested that peacekeepers continue to
monitor and report, through their daily situation
reports, on rapes and other exactions that may be
occurring, and to share this information with relevant
MONUSCO civilian sections. It is also critical that
human rights monitors be deployed. That will require
additional resources as a matter of urgency.

The mass rapes in Walikale demonstrate a nexus
between the illicit exploitation of natural resources by
armed elements and patterns of sexual violence. It is
evident that communities in lucrative mining areas are
at particularly high risk. The mineral wealth that
should be the source of their prosperity is instead the
source of their greatest suffering. I encourage more
concerted attention on this issue. Therefore, mass rapes
that occurred in Walikale should also be investigated
from the angle of the competition over mining interests
as one of the root causes of conflict and sexual
violence.

I also encourage European countries and other
Member States to enact legislation requiring companies
to disclose whether their products contain minerals
sourced from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is not only a fundamental issue of corporate
responsibility, but also an opportunity for consumers to
make choices that make a difference.

I want to take a moment to focus on our
peacekeepers themselves. I have witnessed firsthand
their determination to do all they possibly can to
protect civilians, but the reality is that they are
overstretched and underresourced. They are
demoralized by the sheer scale of the problems and by
the constant barrage of criticism from all quarters.
These are dedicated women and men who are making
tremendous sacrifices to serve. They deserve our
empathy and support, and therefore I appeal to the
Security Council to ensure that MONUSCO's strong
protection mandate is also backed by adequate
financial resources and other critical assets for the
Mission to do its work. There seems to be a widening
gap between the expectations of MONUSCO and the
means the Mission has to execute its mandate.

It is also vital that Council members and other
influential Member States provide the requisite
political backing for MONUSCO. We have challenged
our peacekeepers to adopt a more robust and proactive
posture to protect civilians, and this must be matched
by a more robust posture at the political level.

MONUSCO's response is just one facet of the
broader United Nations system response to conflict-
related sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. This is coordinated through the
Comprehensive Strategy to Combat Sexual Violence.
The Strategy provides a platform for joint - not
merely joined up - United Nations system action.
However, I am very concerned that implementation
lags because United Nations agencies are still largely
working in silos. Even some of the most critical
services for survivors are not yet being delivered in an
effective and timely manner.

United Nations entities must show more
commitment to delivering as one and being
accountable for protection and prevention, as well as
service delivery. I call on United Nations agency heads
here at Headquarters to make it a personal priority to
ensure that the innovative and comprehensive approach
that is being implemented in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo becomes our flagship in preventing and
addressing conflict-related sexual violence.
MONUSCO's Sexual Violence Unit is charged with
coordinating and monitoring the implementation of the
Strategy and requires adequate human resources to
carry out this role.

One thing that many of our colleagues say is that
MONUSCO cannot be present behind every tree and
every stone. This is true. The role of the United
Nations in the Congo is to support national authorities,
who bear the primary responsibility to protect the
population. For no one should this be a greater priority
than for the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

I commend the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for some of the policies adopted
to combat sexual violence. These include the
announcement of the moratorium on mining in three
10-58102
provinces following the Walikale atrocities, and the
policy of zero tolerance for sexual violence within the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo. But so far, zero tolerance has been underpinned
largely by zero consequences for such crimes. This
represents a fundamental issue of credibility for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The reputation of the Congo continues to be held
hostage by those who commit crimes of sexual
violence and the perceived lack of will to address
impunity. I urge the Congolese leadership to give voice
and action to this issue and to send a signal that
combating sexual violence is a matter of the utmost
priority.

The atrocities that are committed daily against
women and children will leave a devastating imprint on
the Congo for years to come. We have seen this
elsewhere. In places where sexual violence has been
used as a tactic of war, the consequences spill over into
10-58102
the peace. Where sexual violence has been a way of
war, it can destroy a way of life.

Children accustomed to rape and violence can
grow into adults who accept such behaviour as the
norm. Rape is shattering traditions that anchor
community values, disrupting their transmission to
future generations. For the women of Walikale, peace
is not a treaty, a resolution or a conference, but simply
the peace of mind to live and work without fear. For
these women, justice delayed is more than justice
denied; it is terror continued.

