Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, permit me to thank Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno and Mr. Antonio Costa for their very
detailed introductory briefings. I would like to say how
pleased I am to see them here with us today.

There is no doubt that the subject of this meeting
is an extremely important and complex component of
the situation in Afghanistan. It requires that the United
Nations and the international community in general
continue to play a role in helping the Afghan people
strengthen their security and rebuild their country.

As Mr. Guehenno told us today, the problem of
security is one of the major challenges in the peace
process in Afghanistan because of the intense activities
of some elements in Afghanistan. However, it must be
said that drug production and drug trafficking beyond
the country's borders are important aspects of the
challenge, which must be met and overcome. Poppy
cultivation, which allows for the production of drugs
and their subsequent sale, is a source of national,
regional and global concern because the profits from
drugs make it possible to finance terrorism.

It is regrettable that, as we were told today, poppy
cultivation in Afghanistan is a major source of profit.
In 2002, 3,400 tons were produced. In other words,
production has returned to pre-2002 levels, making
Afghanistan in 2003 the world's largest opium
producer, despite the efforts being made to overcome
this scourge. Therefore, it is a main concern of the
international community. It is a potential danger to the
international community as a whole. Fighting it
requires a complete and consistent strategy to be
carried out under United Nations auspices and in
coordination with the parties concerned, including
regional parties and the Afghan Transitional
Administration.

We welcome the efforts being made by the
Transitional Administration of Afghanistan and the
measures being adopted for the cultivation of
alternative crops, thus making it possible to fight drug
traffic. We must not forget the valuable support of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

State structures in Afghanistan must be
strengthened so that they can combat the drug problem
and so that national legislation in that regard can be
improved and respect for the rule of law ensured. That
requires increased international assistance. Afghanistan
needs the assistance of the international community,
going beyond simple financial aid. Donors must fulfil
their obligations towards the country. For its part, the
Transitional Administration must redouble its efforts to
generate additional sources of revenue to ensure a
better life for farmers, making it possible for them to
develop alternative crops. This must be done with a
view to establishing a solid economy in Afghanistan
and must be accompanied by a campaign to increase
the Afghan people's awareness of the dangers of poppy
cultivation, and by a sense of responsibility on the part
of the international community.

I would like to emphasize that the struggle
against this scourge in Afghanistan must not stop at the
borders of Afghanistan, because it is the responsibility
of the international community as a whole. As I have
said, a coherent, comprehensive, well-coordinated
strategy is needed to deal with this problem seriously.
That can be achieved by strengthening safety and
security, State structures and the army, so that the
Afghan people can be well governed. Towards that end,
help is needed in the adoption of a constitution and in
holding fair elections that truly express the will of the
Afghan people. It is not possible to deal with the
problem of drug production in an isolated manner,
without strengthening State structures, improving the
security situation and strengthening the army.

