Mr. Fall (spoke in French): The interest of the
Nairobi summit with regard to United Nations and,
more specifically, Security Council action is four-fold:
historical-political, diplomatic, substantive and
forward-looking.

As to the historical-political facet, the summit
was the outcome of multisectoral and converging
efforts to turn the page on what seemed for decades to
be an ineluctable spiral of violence, conflict, war and
humanitarian and social tragedy. Turning that page of
despair and opening a new chapter of regional and
national destiny, managed by Governments and non-
governmental stakeholders from the entire region, we
find a future built on the basis of a regional vision - a
proactive future set forth in Dar es Salaam in 2004
through the declaration adopted at the first summit and
laid out in greater detail in Nairobi in December 2006
through the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region.

The countries of the region and their regional
initiatives are incontrovertibly the prime actors and
laureates of that great event. At their side was the
Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, whose
financial, technical, political and diplomatic support
was outstanding. Above all, at their side, too, was this
Council, which, since the Rwanda genocide of 1994,
has supported and promoted with an active and
ongoing policy the various attempts to settle the
conflict by negotiation. It has provided for the
deployment of a number of peacekeeping missions in
the region, and critically and attentively supported
compliance with and implementation of the peace
agreements, as well as Governments, institutions and
transitional mechanisms. The Council has also exerted
all its influence on the course of national and regional
06-67407
events through its deliberations and decisions in New
York and its various working missions to Central
Africa and the Great Lakes region.

Finally, I need hardly recall that the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region was the
Council's initiative, supported by the African Union.
The preparatory process that was recently completed
was led by the United Nations in accordance with the
Security Council's guidelines and with the active,
coordinated participation of all United Nations
agencies.

Diplomatically speaking, the Nairobi summit was
characterized, more than that in Dar es Salaam, by
what the late poet-President called the "common desire
to coexist". That was reflected in the solemn adoption
of the Pact on Security, Stability and Development and
in the two-fold commitment to ratifying it speedily and
to respecting its spirit and letter in good faith pending
its ratification.

It is also reflected in the decision to establish,
almost immediately, the political mechanism to follow
up the Pact and to establish the secretariat within three
months of the signing of the Pact. That spirit is also
reflected in the decision to establish the headquarters
of the secretariat in Burundi, the nomination of
Ambassador Liberata Mulamula as the first Executive
Secretary, the approval of the scale of assessments for
the secretariat, the institutionalization of the special
fund for reconstruction and development and the
pledges of voluntary contributions to launch the fund
and implement the projects that have been announced
both by countries that are members of the
Conference - including Tanzania, which has
committed itself to provide $500,000 to the fund, and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, whose
President has pledged $1 million to launch the fund -
and by bilateral and multilateral development partners,
to which I shall return.

That collective political will was also reflected in
the course of the preparatory process in the strict and
innovative application of the principle of inclusiveness.
That entailed the participation of non-governmental
actors alongside governmental authorities, including
young people, women, civil society organizations, the
private sector and religious organizations. Those actors
have contributed at every level of the technical and
thematic working groups, which developed the various
06-67407
elements of the Pact, namely, projects, programmes of
action, protocols and the fund.

Collective political will was also evidenced in the
regional preparatory committee, which is a regional
technical body, as well as in the inter-ministerial
regional committee, which was responsible for the
political supervision of the preparatory process leading
up to the Conference.

The participation of non-governmental actors
continued at the Dar es Salaam and Nairobi Summits.

With regard to the implementation phase of the
Pact, non-State actors have already drafted and adopted
guidelines for the participation strategy and established
autonomous follow-up committees.

The principle of inclusiveness has also been
manifested in the involvement in the preparatory work
for the Pact of relevant organizations and regional
institutions, in particular the African Accounting
Council, the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, the East African Community, the Southern
African Development Community, the Common
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, the African
Development Bank (ADB), the African Economic
Community, the New Partnership for Africa's
Development and the residual secretariat of the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes States
(CEPGL).

In addition to the contributions made by those
institutions, their involvement made it possible to
ensure consistency and complementarity between the
projects of the Conference, on the one hand, and the
projects of the regional economic communities, on the
other, during the preparatory phase. It also established
the foundation for a division of labour between the
Conference secretariat and the secretariats of regional
economic communities as regards the next phase of the
Pact's implementation.

The implementation of projects and programmes
of action on economic development and regional
integration was entrusted to the various regional
economic communities on the basis of their areas of
competence and their respective areas of operation. In
that regard, we foresee the conclusion of a
memorandum of understanding between the future
secretariat of the Conference and the secretariats of the
various regional bodies.
3

In addition to the advice and guidelines provided
by the President and the Council, as well as the
political will of the Governments and peoples of the
region, the support of development partners was
another major factor that facilitated the fulfilment of
the goals of the preparatory process leading up to the
Conference. That was made possible in particular
through the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
Region and through the application of another principle
of the preparatory process, namely, partnership. During
the Nairobi Summit in particular, development partners
welcomed the signing of the Pact. Partners believe that
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region is a forum with the potential to promote peace,
security and development in the region.

The representative of Canada, who co-chairs the
Group of Friends, reaffirmed the Group's support for
the establishment of the regional follow-up
mechanism, which will help to fund the mechanism
until June 2007. Beyond June 2007, the Group of
Friends will continue to support the process
technically, politically and diplomatically.

Germany will also continue its assistance
throughout 2007 through the German Agency for
Technical Cooperation. It will also provide about
$1 million to assist the secretariat of the Conference.
Canada, for its part, has expressed particular interest in
supporting the process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR), regional peacebuilding
efforts, the establishment of regional projects for
refugees, the fight against the proliferation of, and the
illicit trafficking in, small arms and light weapons,
demining efforts and combating the illegal exploitation
of natural resources.

The Minister for Cooperation and Development
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the other co-Chair
of the Group of Friends, has pledged €5 million to the
fund. She has also offered to provide training for
diplomats from member countries at the Netherlands
Institute of International Relations.

The European Commissioner for Development
and Humanitarian Affairs has stated that the European
Commission is prepared to support the Pact and to
assist countries of the region. She also emphasized the
need to maintain the regional momentum that emerged
from the preparatory process, so as to strengthen good
political relations between States. She also pledged
€5 million to bolster the technical and logistical
capacities of the secretariat of the ICGLR.
Furthermore, she stated that the European Union is
prepared to unfreeze €45 million to finance priority
projects as part of relaunching the ICGLR. In addition,
she stated that priority projects of the Conference in
the areas of peace and security, regional integration,
democracy and good governance and humanitarian and
social issues - in particular issues relating to
combating the proliferation of small arms, demining,
the sustainable management of natural resources,
mechanisms for the certification of natural resources,
the repatriation of refugees, the administrative reform
of the health sector, and the reform of the education,
energy and water sectors - could also be the subject
of resources allocated by the fund.

The Belgian Minister for Cooperation and
Development stated that his Government will make a
contribution to the fund as soon as the African
Development Bank begins its operations.

Lastly, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
China stated that, as part of China's cooperation with
the Great Lakes region, the Chinese Development Bank
would work with the ADB to support the
implementation of the Pact in the areas of security,
stability and development in the Great Lakes region.

With regard to substantive matters, the Pact
signed at Nairobi contains five component parts: the
Dar es Salaam Declaration, which constitutes its
foundation; the regional protocols, which are the
institutional pillars; the programmes of action, which
are the programmatic pillars; the special fund for
reconstruction and development, which is the financial
pillar; and the regional follow-up mechanism, which is
the operational instrument.

With regard to the protocols, there are 10: the
protocol on non-aggression and mutual defence, the
protocol on democracy and good governance, the
protocol on judicial cooperation, the protocol on the
prevention and suppression of the crime of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity and all forms
of discrimination, the protocol on combating the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, the protocol on the
specific zone for reconstruction and development, the
protocol on the prevention and suppression of sexual
violence against women and children, the protocol on
protection and assistance to displaced persons, the
protocol on the rights and property of returnees and,
lastly, the protocol on information management.
With regard to the programmes of action, I will
confine myself merely to the programme relating to
peace and security. This programme includes seven
priority projects: joint management of common border
security, disarmament and repatriation of armed groups
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, disarmament and the promotion of
development in Zone 3, development of border zones
and the promotion of human security in the Great
Lakes region, mine clearance and actions against
mines, the fight against the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and, finally, combating transnational
crime.

But with regard to the substantive section, one of
the major innovations of the Conference was the
interrelationship between peace and security, on the
one hand, and democracy and socio-economic
development on the other. In this respect, the protocol
on non-aggression and mutual defence, the protocol on
combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and the protocol on the special reconstruction and
development zone have to be implemented together, so
as to ensure security, stability and good governance in
the context of inter-State cooperation and of
cooperation among peoples. The same interrelationship
between peace and security issues and the other
questions can be found also in regional projects.

Accordingly, 12 common security zones on the
borders were identified in the peace and security
chapter regarding the joint management of security
along common borders. These areas cover the same
geographical areas as do the 12 development border
basins and in the border basins between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its nine neighbours.

The development objectives of these areas,
whether from the standpoint of State security or from
the standpoint of human security, are to promote
simultaneous security and cooperation among States
and security and development for the people living in
these border areas. The same approach will prevail
with regard to plans for disarmament and for the
promotion of development in Zone 3 under the topic of
peace and security. This project deals with security
problems through disarming nomads whose activities
are a permanent source of unrest and insecurity in the
common borders between Kenya, Uganda and the
Sudan. The same project also covers human security
issues of the populations through the promotion of
socio-economic alternative livelihoods to combat
poverty and the exclusive dependence on a pastoral
way of life.

The most illustrative example of this approach
that combines peace and security with socio-economic
development is the projects that cover the relationship
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi and Rwanda. These projects attack the
question of disarmament and the repatriation of armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. They also institutionalize Zone 10,
which covers the borders of these three countries, in
order to provide joint management of their common
borders.

Finally, these projects bring together the three
countries in the same trans-border development basin
in order to propose concrete measures to revitalize the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries,
consisting of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi and Rwanda. The combined implementation of
all of these projects should help create an environment
conducive to peace, stability and sustainable socio-
economic development, both for Governments and for
border populations in this area, which is the most
vulnerable part of the entire Great Lakes region.

Moreover, the implementation of these projects
limited to Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda should also benefit from the effects
of the implementation of wider regional protocols,
such as the protocol for combating the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. It is also desirable
that these projects, in particular the one that deals with
the joint management of security in the common border
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Burundi, follow the example of lessons
drawn from the implementation of Tripartite Plus One,
bringing together Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda.

Several other projects and protocols deal with
specific peace and security issues. That is the case of
the protocol on non-aggression and mutual defence. In
this context, member States have undertaken peacefully
to resolve their disputes and differences through, inter
alia, the regional follow-up mechanism, which gives a
special role both to the Summit of Heads of State and
Government and to the Troika of the Summit, which
consists of the outgoing President, the incoming
President and the future President, now consisting of
the President of the United Republic of Tanzania, the
President of Kenya and the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

This protocol has established rules and
mechanisms of cooperation to deal realistically and
constructively with the sensitive management of armed
opposition, armed groups and insurgent groups that
move from one country to another and create a climate
of suspicion, violence, insecurity and instability and,
accordingly, threaten good relations among States. If
they are implemented as they should be, several
provisions of this protocol will help to put an end to
the existence of armed groups through disarmament
and the dismantling of these groups.

The implementation of this protocol will also
ensure that each State concerned will take effective
action against rebel groups operating on its territory or
that they accept, if need be, that another country takes
such measures in its stead, or that the State that does
not take action or cannot take action will be brought
before an extraordinary summit of heads of State to
decide on what kind of collective action should be
taken in respect to that State.

Other projects relating to security questions deal
with combating the proliferation and the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, with
preventing and combating trans-border organized
crime, and with terrorism and mine clearance. These
projects are managed by existing institutions, in
particular the Regional Centre for Small Arms - the
RECSA - which is in Kenya; the International Centre
for De-mining Training, which is also in Kenya; and
the Tanzanian initiative, Apopo. The main point of
these projects is to provide for better coordination
when it comes to implementing already existing
projects in which the Conference has a special interest.

Humanitarian, social and environmental
situations created or exacerbated by conflicts have had
a tremendous impact on security, and they will have to
be handled effectively so that they can help restore
lasting peace and security.

The Pact that was signed in Nairobi deals with
several of these priority matters through the protocols
on violence against women and children, on the
protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons, and on property rights of returnees. In this
context, special attention was given to the questions of
recovering lands and property for returnees, as well as
the implementation of legal measures, for the first time

in the world, consecrating guidelines for displaced
persons, proposed by the Secretary-General several
years ago.

Looking finally to the future and dealing for the
time being only with the transitional period between
the operation of the Office of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes region and that of the Secretariat of the
Conference, it is important to observe that at the
meeting of the regional inter-ministerial committee
held in Bangui in the Central African Republic in
February 2006, the ministers decided that the transition
period should not be more than one year.

In the declaration adopted at the Nairobi summit
on 15 December, the heads of State and Government
called upon the African Union and the United Nations
to continue their assistance to the new Secretariat of
the Conference for at least one year. The most
important thing is to provide for a gradual transition
that is flexible and harmonious. In that respect, it
would be desirable for Burundi - the host-country of
the Secretariat of the Conference - to be able to make
available to the Secretariat the necessary infrastructure
as soon as possible, and that member States pay their
contributions to the budget of the Secretariat of the
Conference, and that the required staff be recruited in
good time. If those three conditions are met, that would
reflect the good will and the political commitment of
the countries concerned.

Allow me to conclude on a personal note. Major
progress has been made with regard to the internal
politics of the countries of the region and with regard
to the relationships between the countries of the region,
since the beginning of the preparatory process for the
international conference - thanks to the combined
effects of national strategies for restoring peace and the
preparatory process for the Conference. Nevertheless,
as several speakers noted at the Summit, the situation
remains extremely fragile in the region, where six of
the 11 countries have emerged from violent conflicts, a
seventh country remains confronted by a rebellion with
regional effects and an eighth country is facing the
challenge of implementing three domestic peace
agreements simultaneously.

Taking duly into account the fact that was
highlighted by the Council in the early resolutions
calling for the organization of an international
conference on the Great Lakes region, namely, that
interrelations between peoples and countries of the
region are such that an internal conflict can easily
become a regional conflict, my view is that we must be
certain the United Nations continues to play a role in
preventing conflicts and in peacemaking and
peacebuilding throughout the region. There must
continue to be close cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations at this crucial time in the
history of the region.

