Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania,
the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia, and the
European Free Trade Association country Norway,
member of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.

As we approach the tenth anniversary of the end
of the war and the start of implementation of the
Dayton General Framework Agreement, Bosnia and
Herzegovina can be proud of its achievements, as
outlined in the High Representative's report.

Since the Council last considered the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in November 2004, the
European Union's European Force (EUFOR),
Operation Althea, has taken over from the Stabilization
Force (SFOR), in what has been recognized by the
international community as a seamless transition. The
Force currently comprises some 6,500 troops from 22
European Union member States and 11 third countries.
This new European Union military operation reinforces
the Union's comprehensive approach with respect to
Bosnia and Herzegovina and supports that country's
progress towards European Union integration by its
own efforts, within the stabilization and association
process.

In synergy with other European Union actors on
the ground, EUFOR is contributing to the Union's
overall engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
supporting its assistance programmes and its ongoing
police and monitoring missions. In a first high-profile
operation, EUFOR supported local authorities in
inspecting all underground military facilities
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina, including some
suspected to be used by fugitives indicted for war
crimes, sealing those not required for official civilian
or military use. EUFOR is assisting efforts by the
European Union Police Mission and the Customs and
Financial Assistance Office in the fight against
organized crime. Weapons collection activities have
also been particularly successful and have yielded large
quantities of arms and ammunition. In the coming
months, EUFOR will continue to assist local
authorities in improving their abilities and capacities in
these areas.

The European Union welcomes the High
Representative's twenty-seventh report (S/2005/156, annex, enclosure) issued pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1031 (1995) and recognizes the good
progress already made on the 16 reform priorities
identified in the European Commission feasibility
study, especially with regard to the legislative
requirements. Implementation and enforcement of the
adopted legislation is an important next step. Despite
these encouraging developments, the European
Commission is not yet in a position to declare that
significant progress has been made across the 16
priority areas; some significant hurdles remain to be
overcome in order for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
advance towards the next stage of its relationship with
the European Union.

Today, I would like to highlight two areas more
specifically: cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the restructuring of the police forces. Full
cooperation with the ICTY, in particular by Republika
Srpska, continues to be an essential requirement for
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress towards the
European Union, to which the Union remains
committed. The European Union welcomes the recent
increase in the number of voluntary surrenders and
transfers of indictees from Bosnia and Herzegovina to
the Hague Tribunal. Continuation of this trend should
lead to all indictees who continue to evade
international justice being brought before the Tribunal.
The European Union notes with interest the launching
on 15 March of a public campaign in Republika Srpska
highlighting the advantages of intensified cooperation
with the ICTY.

Another area in which significant progress by
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be essential for further
movement towards the European Union is the
restructuring of the police forces. The European Union
welcomes the recent work of the Police Restructuring
Commission, in which the European Union Police
Mission was fully engaged, and encourages the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities to take advantage of the
conclusions of the Commission's report and those of
the High Representative concerning State competencies
and territorial structures for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
new police service. A modern, effective, financially
stable and well equipped police force is an essential
element in the fight against organized crime. To assist
the country in reaching this goal, the European Union
Police Mission has provided advice in the introduction
of new border control legislation underpinning the new
State Investigation and Protection Agency. At the local
level, the European Union Police Mission is assisting
in capacity-building to help local police achieve
financial viability.

As a potential candidate, Bosnia and Herzegovina
enjoys a special relationship with the European Union.
We have stood steadfastly by the side of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina throughout the past 10 years
by providing significant financial, military and human
resources. Today, the European Union is engaged more
than ever in a large-scale endeavour to enable the
people and the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to take their future into their own hands and to occupy
their rightful place in Europe by their own efforts.

