The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to the United Nations in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Kerim (the former Yugoslav Republic ofMacedonia) took a
seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/902, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document 8/2001/897, which contains
the text of a letter dated 21 September 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a letter dated 21 September 2001 from the
President of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution (S/2001/902) before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by Show of hands.

In favour:

Bangladesh, China, Colombia, France, Ireland,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Norway, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1371 (2001).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40p.m.

