Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix, Special Envoy Haysom and
Special Envoy Wais for their comprehensive updates
on the latest developments in South Sudan. We also
commend Grace John, civil society representative, for
her valuable insights.

My country welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/83l) and would like
concentrate on three key issues, as follows.

First of all, our delegation would like to congratulate
the people and the Government of South Sudan
for finalizing the revitalized Peace Agreement on
12 September. We highly commend the concerted work
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the African Union and the United Nations, as
well as the mediation efforts of Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed of Ethiopia, and of Presidents Omar Al-Bashir
of the Sudan and Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, which
helped to secure the peace deal. The Agreement has
become a great example of the cherished notion of
African solutions for African problems.

Secondly, we hope that this historic Agreement,
signed after five years offighting, will lay the foundation
for durable peace and stability in the country and
finally end the suffering of the South Sudanese people.
To achieve that, the Security Council needs to remain
united in support of IGAD, the African Union and the
parties in South Sudan in implementing the provisions
of the Agreement. The international community
should make every effort to build trust and confidence
among the parties and provide adequate and sustained
funding for humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding
and economic development. For their part, the South
Sudanese parties need to demonstrate genuine political
will in order to implement the Agreement, stop the
ongoing violence by bringing their forces under control
and strictly comply with international humanitarian
law. Civil society, especially women and youth
groups, also have an important role in assisting with
intercommunal reconciliation and confidence-building
among local populations.

Thirdly, we strongly condemn the recent attack on
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
in Yei and call on the Government to investigate
the attack and hold the perpetrators accountable.
Accordingly, we support the African Union's Silencing
the Guns by 2020 programme, as underlined today
by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special
Envoy Haysom. We also endorse the recommendation
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom to undertake confidence-building measures.
We thank him for his exemplary work and cordially
congratulate him on his new appointment. We wish
him all the best and look forward to dialogue and trust
being restored throughout the Horn of Africa region,
which will have been made possible by his noble and
tireless efforts.

In conclusion, we would like to thank UNMISS for
implementing its mandated tasks under very difficult
circumstances, and commend Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Shearer and Special Envoys Haysom and Wais,
as well as civil society and international, regional
and subregional organizations and other stakeholders,
for their tireless efforts and commitment to seeking a
solution to the crisis in the country.

