The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the resurgence of violence in the
eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its potential regional implications.
It is alarmed by the humanitarian consequences
of the recent fighting and urges all parties to
immediately respect a ceasefire.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern over continued threats to the safety of the
civilian population and to the conduct of
humanitarian operations. The Council strongly
condemns the continuing recruitment and use of
children by armed groups, as well as the
continued prevalence of sexual and gender-based
violence in the eastern region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It urges all parties to
comply fully with their obligations under
2

international law, including international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee
law.

"The Security Council reiterates the need to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It once
again calls on all armed groups to immediately
lay down their arms and present themselves
without any further delay or preconditions to
Congolese authorities and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC) for their disarmament,
repatriation, resettlement and/or reintegration, as
appropriate.

"The Security Council reaffirms that the
Goma and Nairobi processes constitute the
framework within which long-term stability in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo should
be pursued. The Security Council urges all the
parties to the Goma and Nairobi agreements to
implement their commitments effectively and in
good faith. In this respect, the Council strongly
condemns the recent declarations by Laurent
Nkunda calling for a national rebellion.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support to MONUC in helping restore peace in
the Kivus and encourages MONUC to reinforce
its action to ensure the protection of civilians.
The Council expresses its full support for the
disengagement plan elaborated by MONUC and
accepted by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and urges all parties to
abide by it.

"The Security Council welcomes MONUC's
intention to reconfigure its forces and optimize
their deployment so as to enhance its efficiency
within the existing mandate and troop ceiling.
The Security Council takes note of the additional
capacities for MONUC requested by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The
Council requests the Secretary-General to present
a full analysis of the situation and
recommendations in his next report to the
Council.

"The Security Council urges the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to take effective steps to ensure that there
is no cooperation between elements of the Armed
08-56234
Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda. The Council also calls upon the
Governments in the region to cease all support to
the armed groups in the eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council urges the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Government of the Republic of
Rwanda to urgently engage in efforts to settle
their differences, including through reactivating
the Joint Verification Mechanism, and calls upon
them to implement the Nairobi communique
fully. The Council encourages the Secretary-
General to step up his efforts to facilitate
dialogue between Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
the

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the recent attacks by the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA), including the abduction by the LRA of
159 schoolchildren in villages in Oriental
Province. The Council recalls the International
Criminal Court indictments against members of
the LRA leadership on charges of, among other
things, the enlistment of children through
abduction, as a war crime."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/38.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.55 17.141.

