Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to express our
satisfaction at your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June, and to wish you
and the entire delegation of Egypt success in your work.

My delegation wishes also to convey its sincere
gratitude to Ambassador Qin Huasun and to the entire
delegation of China for their work in the presidency of
the Security Council last month.

In connection with the draft resolution before us, we
wish like all other members of the Council to reaffirm our
unfailing commitment to the complete implementation of
the mandate that the Security Council has entrusted to the
United Nations Special Commission. We support the
Special Commission's efforts in that direction. The
progress made in its work has rightly been recognized in
the draft resolution.

Given that background, it is certainly regrettable that
for the first time a Special Commission inspection team
has been refused access to sites it wished to inspect, in
violation of Security Council resolutions. Such an incident
must not be repeated. The draft resolution sets out clear
demands in that regard.

At the same time, we are pleased to note that the
members of the Security Council have been able to resist
the temptation to use threatening language and an
approach based on force, which could only have
complicated the work of the Special Commission and in
the final analysis made it more difficult to achieve the
major goal set out in Security Council resolutions: a
lasting post-crisis settlement in the Persian Gulf.

In its present form, the draft resolution is clearly
balanced in nature. The text incorporates important
changes proposed by a number of delegations, including
the delegation of the Russian Federation. The draft
resolution urges Iraq further to cooperate with the United
Nations; we consider that this will be advanced by the
upcoming visit to Baghdad by the Chairman of the
Special Commission, Ambassador Ekeus, which we hope
will remove remaining problems, open the way to
finalizing the disarmament file and bring closer the time
when the Special Commission can report that it has
fulfilled its mandate. This would be in the interest of the
entire international community, in particular the countries
of the Persian Gulf. It would also be in the interest of
Iraq itself, in so far as the Special Commission's
 

completion of its mandate would trigger the mechanism for
the lifting of sanctions, as set out in paragraph 22 of
resolution 687 (1991).

In the light of what I have said, the Russian
Federation has joined the consensus that has been achieved
in the Security Council.

