Let me at the outset convey Indonesia's condolences to the Mechanism and, in particular, to the families of its staff members who recently passed away during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Our thoughts are with them. We would like to use this opportunity to express our appreciation to Judge Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz, not only for their report (S/2020/309, annex) and briefings, but also for their leadership and commitment to the implementation of their respective mandates despite these challenging times. I wish also to reiterate the commitment of Indonesia to continuing to cooperate with the Mechanism and support its activities in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions. I will focus on three issues today. My first point relates to the review process of the Mechanism. Indonesia encourages the Mechanism's continued efforts, led by Judge Agius, to ensure the effective, efficient and timely conclusion of residual judicial proceedings. We also take note of the Mechanism's observation that, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, the anticipated timelines for judicial caseload completion set to the end of 2020 have been changed. With that in mind, we encourage the Mechanism to continue making innovative adjustments to implement the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, especially with regard to presenting clear and focused projections of completion timelines. That would help to increase transparency and, at the same time, guarantee the expeditious completion of judicial proceedings while maintaining the highest standards of due process and fair trial. My second point is on the progress of Mechanism's activities. Indonesia welcomes the progress that the Mechanism has achieved - thanks to the commitment and dedication of its President, judges, Prosecutor and all staff members - in carrying out the essential residual functions of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The same applies to the work of the Mechanism during the reporting period in relation to sentence enforcement and the protection of victims and witnesses, as well as administration and archive management. We also welcome the prospect of further progress, remain confident of the positive assessment of the Mechanism's functioning in the reporting period and look forward to additional achievements despite these unprecedented difficult times. This leads to my last point: the cooperation of States. Indonesia would like to use this opportunity to applaud the efforts made by the Office of the Prosecutor and, of course, the concrete efforts of the relevant countries that continue to cooperate with the Mechanism, especially with regard to the notable progress that has been made on the indictment of fugitives by the ICTR. Mr. Kabuga's arrest is a testament to the Mechanism's ability to render justice to victims and survivors and, at the same time, to amplify the message that no one can escape justice. In that regard, we would like to call on States, particularly those where fugitives are suspected to still be at large, to strengthen and intensify cooperation with the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. To conclude, I wish to reaffirm Indonesia's commitment to strengthening the rule of law and promoting justice by supporting the work of the Mechanism as an instrument of the Security Council for putting an end to impunity and ensuring accountability.
