Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council and for presiding over this public
meeting on this important subject.

Afghanistan has suffered for 23 long years. It has
suffered at the hands of man as well as nature.
Afghanistan remains a devastated country and its
people badly in need of outside help. Today, millions of
Afghans are either sheltered abroad as refugees or face
tremendous hardship inside their own country.
Afghanistan's problems are manifold. Its people
require emergency relief assistance immediately. The
country itself needs massive recovery and
reconstruction. Although Afghanistan is turning a new
leaf, and in spite of hopes for a better tomorrow, the
process of restoring complete normalcy and stability
certainly looks to be a long and arduous one.

Pakistan has welcomed the Bonn Agreement as a
landmark event that seeks to bring about a fundamental
change in Afghanistan through peaceful means. This
Agreement forms a basis for evolving a genuinely
home-grown, broad-based and multi-ethnic political
dispensation in Afghanistan. A milestone event in this
evolution will be reached next month with the
convening of the emergency loya jirga. We hope that
this will be the first step in a process which will
ultimately lead to the establishment of a genuinely
representative Government in Afghanistan that is
acceptable to all Afghans, promotes unity and stability
internally and respects its international obligations
externally, including those to its neighbours.

Pakistan also extends its fullest support and
cooperation to the United Nations-led efforts in
Afghanistan. We have welcomed the establishment of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
We hope that, in addition to supervising relief and
recovery efforts, the United Nations will continue to
play its role as a facilitator in helping the Afghans to
find home-grown solutions to their problems.

Now that the international community has
committed itself to the peace, stability, recovery and
reconstruction of Afghanistan, it must remain steadfast
in completing the task that it has begun. We must draw
lessons from Afghanistan's tragic past. History could
have been different indeed; the suffering in
Afghanistan and the violence which exacerbated it
could have been avoided if the international
community had not walked away from Afghanistan
once success was achieved in the cold war.

We are heartened by the assurances of the major
Powers that they will not walk away from Afghanistan
this time and that they are committed to helping
Afghanistan to build peace through the Bonn political
process and to rebuilding the economy and society of
that war-ravaged land. An Afghanistan at peace with
itself and with its neighbours can play a vital role in
the promotion of peace, security and cooperation in the
region.

It is apparent that, without security inside
Afghanistan, there can be no stability, reconstruction or
recovery. That is the essential prerequisite on which the

entire future of Afghanistan and its people depends.
The implementation of the Bonn Agreement and,
indeed, the political and economic future of
Afghanistan depend on ensuring peace and security
there. The Afghan people have suffered far too long at
the hands of ambitious warlords and fratricidal
factions. The international community must therefore
ensure that the re-emergence of those trends is not
allowed to obstruct the establishment of a stable
political structure in Afghanistan, as envisaged in the
Bonn Agreement.

The Bonn Agreement stipulated the establishment
of a United Nations-mandated force for the
maintenance of security in Kabul as well as other areas
of the country. We support the deployment of the
International Security Assistance Force in Kabul and
the extension of its mandate for another six months. We
feel that its size and scope must be expanded and
extended to encompass the entire country, especially its
major urban centres.

We have joined the international community in
helping to rebuild Afghanistan's army and police.
Pakistan has offered to assist in the training of the
Afghan national army and police, as well as
cooperation in drug control and in revamping the
judicial system in Afghanistan. But this process may be
far too slow to address Afghanistan's immediate
internal security requirements and thus to keep the
implementation of the Bonn process on track.
As all know, Pakistan has been providing shelter
to millions of Afghan refugees for over two decades.
We welcome the large ongoing return of refugees to
Afghanistan. We hope that the international efforts will
provide adequate financial and operational means to
ensure their rehabilitation, resettlement and re-
integration into the emerging new Afghan society.

Pakistan has pledged $100 million worth of
assistance for Afghanistan's immediate rehabilitation
and reconstruction needs, which include the
reconstruction of its infrastructure and the
rehabilitation of its communications system and power-
generation sectors. Of this money, $10 million has
already been disbursed. Pakistan has extended its full
support and cooperation to the Afghan Interim
Authority. We appreciate the warm welcome given by
the Afghan Interim Administration to President
Musharraf when he visited Kabul in April. President
Musharraf has assured Chairman Karzai that his
agenda is our agenda. We are fully committed to
maintaining and improving fraternal ties with
Afghanistan. We will continue to work with the Afghan
authorities and the international community to work for
Afghanistan's recovery and stability.

