Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation thanks
Judge Claude Jorda for his report and for his briefing.

The International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia is an organ of the international
community, empowered to dispense justice on its
behalf. It is imperative that the Tribunal receive the
unequivocal support of the international community so
that the message is clear to those who have engaged in
egregious criminal acts against humanity that they will
not escape with impunity. That message must be
understood by all.

In that regard, we must ensure that the system of
justice we have established operates under procedures
that are fair and impartial. The Tribunal has been
criticized in the past for long pre-trial delays after an
indictee has been taken into custody. We recognize that
some of those delays may be directly related to dilatory
tactics employed by defence counsel. However, we are
also aware that the problems in the system identified
by Judge Jorda bear most of the responsibility for the
delays. As Judge Jorda is fully aware, justice delayed is
justice denied.

We hold to the view that justice must be swift and
certain. We also recognize that pre-trial release, though
a viable option for national courts, is not a practical
approach for an international criminal tribunal. The
reasons are obvious and do not need elaboration.

In that regard, my delegation believes that full
consideration of the report and recommendations
presented by Judge Jorda is timely and appropriate.
The changes in the Rules of Procedure and Evidence
that have been adopted so far by the Tribunal will
undoubtedly help improve the efficiency of the
Tribunal and move the trial process forward. We
recognize, however, that these changes in the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence, which must evolve over time
and with experience, will not be enough to achieve the
desired result. Expansion of the capacity of the
Tribunal at the pre-trial, trial chamber and appeals
chamber levels requires urgent attention.

In that regard, we believe the recommendations
that Judge Jorda has presented to us with regard to the
appointment of the ad [item judges deserve our
consideration. This proposed expansion in the capacity
of the Trial Chambers, coupled with the
recommendation for legal officers delegated to perform
pre-trial functions, should improve the Tribunal's
efficiency in its dispensation ofjustice.

As Judge Jorda has explained, these two changes
in the Tribunal will allow for additional Trial
Chambers, with the obvious desired result. The period
from arrest to trial will be reduced significantly. Both
changes are, therefore, of equal importance.

My delegation has been concerned about the
structure of the Appeals Chamber, in particular the fact
that the judges of the Trial Chamber have this dual
responsibility. We believe this creates a situation in
which the Appeals Chamber may find it difficult to
operate with impartiality and might be tainted by the
trial process. The appeals process should be fair and
impartial and should be above reproach. In this regard,
the recommendation to establish a permanent Appeals
Chamber, insulated from the trial process, is worthy of
our support.

The recommendation to appoint two judges from
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to the
Appeals Chamber also should be given serious
consideration.

The recommendations that we revisit the statute
of the Tribunal to improve the Tribunal's efficiency
must be seriously considered by the Security Council.
We will have an opportunity to evaluate the changes
that have been recommended, and my delegation looks
forward to participating in this process, while taking
into consideration the views of the international
community, and also bearing in mind the mandate of
the Tribunal.

