Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, as
your country assumes the presidency of the Council for
the month of April, and to welcome you to New York
as you preside over this open meeting. I would also like
to congratulate France on its outstanding presidency
last month. We very much appreciated the excellent
work that was accomplished. Lastly, I want to thank
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Maurer; Under-Secretary-General Lowcock;
and Professor Modirzadeh for their briefings.

At present the international and regional security
landscape remains grim. Armed conflicts persist in
various regions, with civilians bearing the brunt as the
chief victims. It is therefore very important to ensure
compliance with international humanitarian law,
especially with regard to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. In that connection, the existing
provisions of international humanitarian law, including
the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their two Additional
Protocols of 1977, are sufficient. The international
community has maintained a strong focus on them and
has abided by them. That said, the implementation of
international humanitarian law is still fraught with
multiple challenges, and today I would like to focus on
the following points.

First, we must stay committed to resolving disputes
through peaceful means and addressing the protection
of civilians at the source of the problems. The
fundamental purpose of compliance with international
humanitarian law is to ensure the protection of
civilians, and effectively preventing armed conflict
represents the best possible protection for civilians.
The Security Council should actively encourage
preventive diplomacy and political mediation in order
to promote the use of peaceful means, such as dialogue
and negotiations, to overcome differences among the
parties, with a view to seeking political solutions
while preventing and de-escalating tensions, thereby
protecting civilians from the scourge of war.

Secondly, we must abide by the purposes and
principles ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations, as well as
the guiding principles for United Nations humanitarian
assistance. No country should use humanitarian
pretexts to undermine another's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. When carrying
out humanitarian relief operations, it is crucial to
follow the principles of humanity, justice, neutrality
and independence, emphasize the humanitarian
character and professionalism of such efforts and
avoid being drawn into a conflict or interfering in the
domestic affairs of the countries concerned. China
commends the International Committee of the Red
Cross for its conduct. All humanitarian agencies should
work to observe international humanitarian law and
related principles effectively and refrain from using
the delivery of humanitarian assistance for political,
military or other purposes.

Thirdly, the international community should work
in concert to promote and strengthen international
humanitarian law. Governments bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their own civilians,
and the international community should provide
constructive assistance only at the request of the
countries concerned. All parties to a conflict should
understand and abide by international humanitarian
law, implement Council resolutions on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, fulfil their obligations
to protect civilians and ensure humanitarian access.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should make
greater efforts to promote and publicize international
humanitarian law and Security Council resolutions, and
the Council should work on preventing sanctions from
adversely affecting humanitarian relief operations.

Fourthly, the Governments of the States concerned
and the parties to a conflict have a duty to protect the
safety and security of medical personnel and facilities.
Medical personnel and humanitarian workers who risk
their lives to deliver life-saving goods and services are
the people who make humanitarian operations possible,
and the Governments concerned should take effective
measures to strengthen their protection of such
personnel and facilities. All the parties to a conflict
should abide by international humanitarian law and
fulfil their obligations to protect medical personnel
and facilities. In the event of attacks, threats or acts
of violence against medical personnel and facilities in
armed conflict, the countries concerned should conduct
investigations with a view to bringing the perpetrators
to justice in accordance with the law. The international
community should provide support and assistance on a

basis of full consultations with the countries concerned.

As an important participant in and contributor to
the international humanitarian law regime, China has
played an active role in international humanitarian
relief efforts led by the United Nations and has scaled
up its assistance every year to the extent it is able. We
have continually formulated and refined the relevant
regulations in the various mechanisms for implementing
the provisions of international humanitarian law. China's
naval escort squadrons have cooperated with many
countries in carrying out international humanitarian
relief activities. We attach importance to strengthening
cooperation on humanitarian assistance with United
Nations agencies and civil-society organizations and
stand ready to continue to play a constructive role in
that field.

