The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom,
after which I will suspend the meeting for lunch.

I, too, am very grateful for the statements of the
Deputy Secretary-General and the High Commissioner,
and to all members of the Security Council for
approaching this debate in a very practical manner. I
shall just add a few points within the context of the
general statement which the Swedish Presidency of the
European Union will be making this afternoon.

As the Secretary-General's report shows, this is a
subject which concerns us all, but one to which the
United Nations system has not yet made a real
difference on the ground. We need to examine closely
why it is that, as the Secretary-General commented in
his report (S/2001/331), so few of his recommendations
from September 1999 have been fully implemented.
There are reasons why resolution 1296 (2000) was not
able to endorse all of them. Some fell outside the
Council's competence, some outside its reach in terms
of what was practical or realistic. Others simply did not
garner consensus. But where we have found consensus
on a principle, we should have systems in place to
ensure that we follow through with coherent and
practical action. It is not sufficient simply to adopt a
thematic resolution or presidential statement. In this
area the particular challenge is to mainstream the
commitments that we make in these decisions into our
everyday work on country-specific issues such as
Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
East Timor, Afghanistan and many others.

It is also clear that the Security Council cannot
succeed on its own. Making a difference requires the
effort, cooperation and active involvement of the
parties to conflict and of the wider United Nations
system.

The primary responsibility rests with the parties
to conflict. They must change their behaviour and live
up to their moral and legal responsibilities. If they will
not do so themselves, the international community
should help them to do so. We must take further strides
to combat the culture of impunity. All States should
sign and ratify the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, and the proposed special court for
Sierra Leone must now be established. Special
representatives of the Secretary-General and special
envoys should be asked to report on responsibilities
ignored or abused, including by non-State actors.

The wider United Nations system -
Governments, the Secretariat, agencies, funds and
programmes - must also examine how best to make
their contribution. This means a clear-sighted
examination of which organ or body is best placed to
take action, for example, and how Member States can
help that happen. The report before us says that the
Security Council should engage the parties to conflict
in negotiations on access for humanitarian actors and
undertake fact-finding missions. But in practice, these
actions are those which are most likely to be taken up
by actors that are represented in the field. Although the
Council can put its political weight behind them, we
must be clear about the most effective avenue of
approach.

We therefore need clear arrangements for
coordination within the United Nations - an improved
system-wide approach that will consolidate the
expertise of all relevant bodies without stifling the
capacity of any to do the work that it does best. I hope
that we will be able to discuss this further at the
Council's meeting with the Economic and Social
Council on Friday, and I take note with interest of
Ukraine's proposal that the Economic and Social
Council should join in fact-finding missions when it is
relevant for the Council to institute them.

All of this will be without value, however, if we
do not also make real strides to close the gap between
ambition and capability. The practical commitments
that we make must lead to a real difference in the
protection of civilians on the ground. Our next steps,
therefore, need careful consideration. I would counsel
against a resolution or presidential statement taking
action on the Secretary-General's report at this stage.
They are too easy to agree in the language of political
compromise and then to ignore the next time a crisis
comes along. Instead, we should be thinking carefully
about how to meet the challenge the Secretary-General
has given us in our everyday work.

I hope that in this context the Secretary-General
will not limit himself to making recommendations on
the protection of civilians once a year. Instead, he
should do so every time he reports on an individual
country situation where civilians are at risk, with clear
and practical proposals for realistic and sustainable
action in that case. One useful outcome of this debate
would be for us to ask him to do that. Another might be
to ask for reinforced structures on the ground 4 for
instance, the establishment of automatic reporting
procedures on abuses of human rights and the
appointment of deputy special representatives with
responsibility for coordination on the humanitarian
implications of conflict, along the lines of the role
played by Alan Doss in Sierra Leone.

We also need to accept that the success of our
decision-making will in large part depend on the
information and analysis that is placed at our disposal.
We should consider what role there might be for the
Executive Committee on Peace and Security, and
whether there is need for a permanent capacity in the
Secretariat - perhaps a cross-cutting team in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations - to
address the protection of civilians.

Finally, there is the all-important regional
context. We agree that it is time to forge operational
links with the regional and subregional organizations
that can bear the weight of the work that we
collectively have to do. Here I entirely agree with the
proposals made by the representative of Mali on the
capacity of the Economic Community of West African
States and the need for the Security Council and the
United Nations system to look at the capacity-building
aspects of our link with regional and subregional
organizations. We have to analyse carefully the
obstacles to the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations and put in place sensible solutions to them.
The Secretary-General's proposal on media monitoring
mechanisms is a good example. We must also
recognize that civilians, so often the victims of
conflict, are individuals in specific circumstances with
particular protection needs. Whether they are children,
women or other vulnerable groups, their needs must be
properly identified and met. As we mainstream the
Secretary-General's recommendations on civilians in
our everyday work, we should be sure to do the same in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security.

In short, there is no need for further
recommendations of a general nature. We have them
already. The Council and its United Nations partners
now have to assess themselves for their success in
achieving results.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I should like to thank members of the Council for
their contributions this morning. I shall now suspend
the meeting. We will resume at 3 pm. with a
contribution from the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Kenzo Oshima, and then
move on to the list of speakers under rule 37.

The meeting was suspended at 1.30pm.
