Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): A week
ago, the regime perpetrated another chemical-weapons
attack. At least 86 people died from asphyxiation near
Idlib; hundreds were injured. The symptoms observed,
as well as the dramatic number of deaths, are indicative
of the use of a neurotoxic agent, probably a mixture
based on sarin. The decision of the United States to
strike the Al-Shayrat air base was a response to the
gravity of the act and the threat. It sent the Syrian
regime a message it should have heard long ago - its
time of impunity has now passed.

Together with the United States and the United
Kingdom, France has proposed a draft resolution which
will be put to a vote in the Security Council shortly. Its
simple and balanced text condemns the 4 April attack and
reaffirms United Nations support for the investigation
of the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
into the circumstances of this attack and the nature of
the substance used. It is a matter ofbringing the Council
together around a fundamental objective: the protection
of the international non-proliferation regime, which has
been flouted in Syria, and the fight against the impunity
of the perpetrators of chemical attacks.

Beyond the tragedy of Khan Shaykhun, all of
Syria offers a landscape of devastation and desolation
today. The cessation of hostilities, as guaranteed by
the 30 December agreement and the Astana process,
no longer exists. The regime's supporters never acted
seriously to respect it. The humanitarian situation is
deteriorating day by day. Throughout the country, the
regime is tightening its grip around civilian populations
by refusing to grant the authorizations needed to carry
out the monthly plan of humanitarian convoys. Let us
not deceive ourselves. We are seeing here a deliberate
policy of obstruction and siege designed to compel
opponents to surrender and people to flee, in violation
of Security Council resolutions and the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law.

The Syrian regime's allies are responsible for
applying all appropriate pressure to force the regime
to finally live up to its obligations. In particular,
Russia, as the guarantor of the regime of cessation of
hostilities announced last December, needs to turn its
commitments into action. The immediate urgency must
be to force the Syrian regime to finally respect the
cessation of hostilities and finally provide access to the
necessary humanitarian assistance to all those in need.

Furthermore, the cessation-of-hostilities system
needs to be completely revised. We have to avoid the
flaws of the previous versions and put in place a more
inclusive, coherent, and robust monitoring mechanism.
Since last September, France has called for the
establishment of such a mechanism for monitoring the
cessation of hostilities. Some deny the evidence, but
no matter what happens, we can no longer act as if the
4 April attack had not taken place. We can no longer
act as if this track record of desolation and chaos is
not primarily the track record of the Bashar Al-Assad
regime. The attack on Khan Shaykhun is just a reminder
of a sinister reality about which France, since August
2013, has never ceased to alert the members of the
Security Council.

We must come to an understanding today about the
obvious: a political solution leading to a real transition
is now more urgent and necessary than ever. As long
as the regime keeps itself in power through terror and
destruction, with the complicity of its supporters, there
will never be peace and reconstruction in Syria. The
millions of refugees forced onto roads of exile will
have no hope of returning to their homes nor will they
ever overcome a terrorist threat that will continue to
feed on the violence and desolation that gave rise to
it and made it prosper in the first place. The absolute
urgency, the priority of the priorities, is therefore the
resumption of the negotiations to craft - together - a
political solution.

It is therefore incumbent on all of us to exert the
necessary pressure on the leading stakeholders so that
they can engage in good faith negotiations without
delay. In that connection, France renews its fullest
support and confidence in Special Envoy De Mistura,
whose commitment is exemplary. We commend his
announcement of resolutionesumed negotiations under
the auspices of the United Nations in mid-May. France
supports the start of the next cycle of negotiations on an
accelerated timeline with a view to reaching a speedy
agreement on a political transition based on the Geneva

communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution
2254 (2015). We must all rise above our political
choices, national interests and moral considerations,
and shoulder our responsibilities in order to support
this solution. That is an imperative that concerns our
collective security. It is at the heart of our mandate
and a responsibility shared by all members of the
Security Council.

In conclusion, recent developments have realigned
the situation and highlighted the urgency of the need
for a political transition in Syria. We hope that the
recent developments have created the conditions for
re-engagement of the leading stakeholders with a view
to a political solution. Given the tragedy in Syria,
which continues to spiral downwards into the deepest
of abysses, we are more bound to our duty than ever.
We are also faced with the opportunity ofinjecting new,
decisive life into a political solution. Let us make sure
that we seize the opportunity. This is a time of truth.
Let us make sure that we shoulder our responsibilities
at this historical moment.

