Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, I would like to congratulate
President Compaore and the delegation of Burkina
Faso on highlighting the importance of mediation and
the settlement of disputes. Burkina Faso has played a
vital role in helping to bring peace to conflicts
throughout Africa. And, as others have noted, President
Compaore personally has been active as a mediator in
regional conflicts. In 2006, the President served as
mediator of the inter-Togolese dialogue, which resulted
in an agreement between the Government and
opposition parties. He also served as mediator in the
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire, brokering the peace agreement
that was signed in March 2007. We thank President
Compaore for his many contributions.

Furthermore, the appointment of former
Burkinabe Foreign Minister Bassole as the new joint
United Nations-African Union Chief Mediator for the
Darfur conflict is the most recent contribution by
Burkina Faso in assisting in negotiating peace.
Minister Bassole's mission has the potential to
re-energize the peace process, and we support his
efforts.

The United States has favoured the strengthening
of mechanisms of the international community for
mediation and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The
United States has strongly supported the role of the
Security Council in helping to prevent disputes from
escalating into dangerous conflict. Over the past
several years, the United States has been pressing in
the Security Council for action to deal with threats to
international peace and security that have emerged,
including supporting the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1625 (2005), a declaration on the need to
strengthen the effectiveness of the Security Council's
role in conflict prevention, particularly in Africa.

The United States welcomes the statement of the
Secretary-General and his report of January 2008
(S/2008/18), stating that a culture of conflict
prevention is taking hold at the United Nations, and
that "the commitment to building and mainstreaming
its tools has taken root" (para. 2).

The United States has invested heavily in
supporting conflict prevention through early warning,

conflict assessment and efforts to promote early
response. These investments have strengthened the
conflict prevention capabilities of the United States and
have resulted in increased coordination with the efforts
of regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
African Union.

The international community must continue to
work to strengthen and deepen the pool of potential
international mediators and facilitators. For example,
ECOWAS has established a Council of the Wise.
Members of that group of experienced statesmen and
diplomats from the region have already had successes
in mediating in member countries. The United States
believes that there is even greater potential for that
organization to work within the region, and is
developing training programmes and other forms of
support for the group.

We believe that successful dispute resolution
requires that States be active and politically engaged in
seeking a settlement. It is not enough to turn a problem
over to international organizations and hope that after a
time a solution will emerge. Such formal resolution
mechanisms have a vital role to play and can be a
decisive factor in resolving disputes, but in the most
serious crises there is no substitute for the application
of political will and energy by States. Sometimes,
States may find that an ad hoc mechanism is the most
effective way forward. We believe that formal
negotiations and mediation, where States must engage
fully and inclusively and real political effort must be
expended, are often the best way to address the most
serious international disputes.

We have wholeheartedly embraced the
perspective of Article 33 of the United Nations Charter,
which suggests an array of resolution mechanisms to
disputing parties. The United States also strongly
supports the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
it embodies all aspects of the work of the United
Nations - peace, development and human rights. By
integrating them into one coherent approach, the
United Nations helps to close gaps in the international
response to countries emerging from conflict. The
work of the Peacebuilding Commission will help keep
countries from falling back into conflict. The
Peacebuilding Fund has provided catalytic support not
only to Burundi and Sierra Leone, but also to the
Central African Republic, Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea.
In closing, I wish to reiterate that the United
States is firmly committed to United Nations Charter
principles for resolving international disputes
peacefully, including the importance of mediation. We
are not wedded to any particular theory of how that
should be done. Instead, we believe in a pragmatic
approach and believe in the need to rely upon those
mechanisms and mediators that can best reduce,
manage or resolve disputes.

