Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the delegation of my country, I
have pleasure in extending to you, Mr. President,
congratulations on your conduct of the work of the
Security Council during the month of February.

Once again the Council is obliged to consider a most
sensitive question that has a great impact on the future of
peace in the Middle East. I refer to the question of
creating Israeli settlements in occupied Arab territories.
The long-hoped-for peace - and my country has
associated itself with this peace process within the
framework of the Madrid Conference - now faces a
serious threat because of the intransigence of the Israeli
Government, its categorical refusal to implement the
relevant United Nations resolutions concerning that
region, notably in particular, those relating to the
settlements, and its flouting of the provisions of
international law and relevant international conventions,
including the Geneva Conventions of 1949.

The Fourth Geneva Convention forbids occupying
forces to violate the demographic integrity of occupied
territories. The Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Commission on Human Rights have on numerous
occasions emphasized Israel's duty to implement and
respect the Geneva Conventions, but Israel has not
recognized the relevant resolutions and has defied the will
of the international community. It is up to its old tricks
and is intensifying its practice of expanding and
establishing new settlements, particularly around the city
of Jerusalem, which highlights the fact that Israel in no
way intends to implement a genuine, comprehensive and
lasting peace in accordance with the Madrid framework.

The Israeli settlement policy in the occupied
territories is not new, but is an integral part of an already
established policy based on the fact that Israel does not
recognize itself as an occupying Power. It is continuing
the annexationist policy proclaimed by past Israeli
Governments. This policy is in flat contradiction to the
 

concept of peace and the will of the international
community to stop the settlement policy.

Reality has proven that what is put out on television
and through the media is nothing but propaganda, and that
settlements have now become extremely numerous: their
number as increased by 5-10 per cent since the beginning
of the peace process, while the settler population has gone
up by about 15 per cent. The Israeli Government has
proclaimed that the city of Jerusalem is exempt from any
limits on the number of settlements, and has extended the
city limits until they take in about a quarter of the West
Bank which, for practical purposes, reaffirms the
continuation of the settlement policy.

A governmental commission has adopted
recommendations requesting an intensification of settlement
activity. The Government has rejected all attempts to move
a limited number of settlers, no more than 400, from the
Hebron area - which now has more than 80,000
inhabitants - although their presence gives rise to security
risks and human rights violations are proliferating from one
day to the next. The most striking example of this was the
massacre at the Al-Ibrahimi Mosque, which claimed many
innocent victims who had gone to that holy place to pray.

Lebanon has on many occasions reaffirmed its respect
for the Madrid framework for establishing peace in the
Middle East, but we have always emphasized that any
settlement not based on Israel's withdrawal from the
occupied Arab territories will never lead to a just and
lasting peace in the region.

There can be no doubt that the crisis in which the
peace process now finds itself derives from the fact that
Israel is insisting on acting within the framework of a
policy aimed at maintaining its hold over the territories and
maintaining peace at the same time. The difficulties being
put forward by Israel over its withdrawal from the occupied
Arab territories, the continuation of its campaign of arrests
and the intransigent policies it is pursuing - whether in the
Palestinian territories lying to the south of Lebanon or in
the indiscriminate bombing of cities and villages within
Lebanon itself and the blockade of Lebanese ports - all
reaffirm this policy, which we categorically reject.

For two weeks now, Israel has been imposing a sea
blockade against the ports of Tyre, Sarafund, Sidon and Al-
Darnour and is terrorizing citizens, particularly fishermen,
who have been deprived of their sole source of income.
Israeli sea patrols operate daily in Lebanese ports and Israel
is engaged in continuing aggression against the region also
 

through the use of heavy weapons and air power. Such
acts of aggression have caused a great deal of damage
and claimed a great number of innocent victims among
civilians, as well as causing considerable economic
damage.

The continuation of these violations of Lebanese
territorial integrity is part of an Israeli practice aimed at
imposing Israeli hegemony over its neighbours and at
totally rejecting resolution 425 (1978), which demanded
that Israel withdraw to its internationally recognized
boundaries. This resolution has not yet been implemented.
The Israeli rejection of this resolution on various pretexts
has led to a situation in southern Lebanon that was tense
then and continues to be so now. Citizens in the occupied
areas suffer under constant daily bombardment and as a
result of types of activity that are becoming characteristic
of Israeli practices in the countries of the region, and will
never lead to the peaceful coexistence to which the
peoples of the region aspire.

The continuation of the Israeli settlement policy in
the Palestinian territories and the explosive situation in
southern Lebanon confirm the presence of a major threat
to the peace process. We hope to see the Security Council
play a decisive role by taking the necessary measures to
put an end to Israel's settlement policy, and to the
intransigent Israeli measures aimed against Lebanon so
that the peace process can be resumed and all Members
of the United Nations can reaffirm their commitment to
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the principles of the Madrid Conference.

