Mr. Sahovic' (Serbia and Montenegro): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2003/996) on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), which is before the Council.

Allow me to join Council members in thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his briefing and, even more, for
the outstanding commitment to tackling the serious
issues in Kosovo and Metohija that he has
demonstrated in the short period since taking office.

We regret that at the very outset of his work Mr.
Holkeri was confronted with the full extent of the
violence, primarily ethnically motivated crimes, as well
as attacks on UNMIK personnel. As the Secretary-
General's report notes, the security situation in Kosovo
and Metohija remains a cause for grave concern. The
increased insecurity for minorities is undermining
efforts to improve freedom of movement and to
accelerate the return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and threatens the process of normalization and
the prospects for reconciliation in Kosovo and
Metohija. The fact that no perpetrators have been
identified in the recent crimes against the Serb
community or - to the best of our knowledge -
against UNMIK personnel further demonstrates the
difficulties in the province. My Government therefore
fully supports the priorities of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in establishing
the rule of law; improving the security situation,
particularly for non-Albanians; promoting returns and
minority rights; and strengthening economic
development.

We appreciate the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as the
support of the Contact Group and the broader
international community, to launch a direct dialogue on
practical matters between Belgrade and Pristina.
Discussing practical issues to improve the daily lives
of all inhabitants of Kosovo and Metohija and
achieving measurable success in that respect would be
the best means to foster confidence among the
communities.

My Government regrets the fact that the
representatives of the Government of Kosovo and
Metohija did not participate in the meeting in Vienna
on 14 October. Therefore, the Pristina delegation was
not representative of all communities of the Province.
Their representation at that meeting would have offered
evidence of political will within the Government in
Pristina to build functioning multi-ethnic institutions,
which are the best hope for achieving the goal of a
democratic society in the province. Hence, we expect
the issue of multi-ethnic representation in the
delegation of Kosovo and Metohija to be resolved with
the commencement of the dialogue at the level of
working groups. We also believe that the participation
of authorized representatives on both sides, with the
necessary authority to discuss and implement the
agreed decisions, constitutes an essential prerequisite
for the success of the working groups. Serbia and
Montenegro stands ready to participate in the working
groups as soon as their meetings are scheduled.

The report before the Council states that direct
dialogue is one of the benchmarks that has to be met
before addressing the status of Kosovo and Metohija.
Along with the Security Council, we reiterate our
support for the "standards before status" policy. It is of
vital importance to clearly and measurably define the
criteria for achieving the standards of a democratic,
multi-ethnic Kosovo and Metohija. A lack of clarity in
that respect could easily lead to differing
interpretations of the level of attainment of standards,
which in turn could pave the way for future
misunderstandings and disagreements. We therefore
welcome the announcement of the UNMIK mission
performance action plan for the implementation of
benchmarks and look forward to learning of its details
in the near future.

The transfer of responsibilities to the Provisional
Institutions is an issue closely related to the principle
of "standards before status". We concur with the
report's assessment that the ongoing transfer of non-
reserved responsibilities listed in chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework provides the Provisional
Institutions with the possibility to demonstrate their
ability to ensure efficient and effective administration
and their capacity to assume additional responsibilities.
However, we note with concern that the Government of
Kosovo and Metohija conditions its participation in the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue upon the transfer of the
responsibilities reserved for the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. That has led to an initiative
by the Provisional Institutions to revise the
Constitutional Framework, with the aim of annulling
the reserved competencies of the Special
Representative listed in chapter 8 of the Framework.
Such a move would obviously represent a completely
unacceptable prejudgement of the final status of
Kosovo and Metohija. It would defy the clear and
repeated stance of the international community that the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue is to address practical
matters only, leaving talks on the political future of
Kosovo for a later stage.
In the report of the Secretary-General, some
concerns were raised over the existence of so-called
parallel structures. The statements we have just heard
from Mr. Holkeri and several members of the Council
echoed those concerns. Indeed, earlier this month, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Mission in Kosovo and Metohija issued a
rather lengthy report on the subject, as mentioned by
the representative of Mexico. While stating that
parallel structures can be detrimental to the rule of law
in Kosovo and Metohija, the OSCE report also
emphasizes that

"A more pragmatic approach is needed by
UNMIK, which might have to recognize the fact
that some Kosovans, in the past, did not have any
other reasonable choice than to approach Serb-
run structures. Recourse to an UNMIK court or
administrative body would have meant, among
other things, risking their personal security."

Further on, the OSCE Mission report points out
that the practice of arresting and convicting people for
possession of forged documents, simply because they
are issued by Serbian authorities operating in Kosovo,
must cease. Also, the report is clear that the Serb-run
hospitals and other health care facilities have proven
necessary. The OSCE concludes that the Provisional
Institutions, for example the Ministry of Education,
Science and Technology, has to create conditions in the
Kosovan schools that accommodate the needs of all
communities, including Kosovo Serbs. I think that
those conclusions of the OSCE provide some
explanations regarding parallel structures.

Finally, we support the Secretary-General's
assessment that the development of effective
institutions of self-government in Kosovo and Metohija
needs to take place in a context of improving contacts
and cooperation with my Government. We share the
view that relations between UNMIK and Belgrade have
improved since the arrival of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We are firmly
committed to strengthening that cooperation.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the
commitment of Serbia and Montenegro to Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the Common
Document signed between my Government and
UNMIK on 5 November 2001. In the framework of
those documents and other agreements between our
authorities and UNMIK, the Special Representative can
rely on our full assistance and support.

