Mrs. Lima da Veiga (Cape Verde): At the outset,
I wish to congratulate Burkina Faso, President of the
Security Council for the month of December, on
having selected the issue of drug trafficking as a threat
to international security as the topic of today's debate.

This debate has a particular meaning for the West
African region, which is becoming a hub for the
trafficking of drugs, in particular cocaine. The risks
and emerging challenges associated with this problem
are huge for that region, which is already struggling
with social, economic and political vulnerabilities.
Among those risks and challenges are new illicit
businesses in the region whose impact extends to other
regions of the continent and beyond, increasing drug
abuse and related health and security problems, human
trafficking, the destruction of human capital and the
financing of illegal armed activities and terrorism.

Because of its transboundary nature and the
serious threats it poses to regional stability and
international security, drug trafficking has attracted the
growing attention of the international community. It is
on the agendas of the United Nations, the European
Union, the African Union and other international
organizations. It is also the drive behind the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Political Declaration on the Prevention of Drug Abuse,
Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crimes in West
Africa and the Regional Response Action Plan to
address the growing problem of illicit drug trafficking.

In adopting the Action Plan, we members of
ECOWAS have committed ourselves to mobilizing our
political leadership and ensuring the necessary
resources to prevent and combat illicit drug trafficking,
related organized crime and drug abuse in a strategic
and durable way. In several of our States, the Regional
Response Action Plan has been translated into national
plans, although the rhythm of implementation and
results may differ from State to State due to
endogenous circumstances and constraints.

Referring to the particular case of Cape Verde,
our geographical situation at the crossroads of three
continents - Africa, Europe and the Americas ~ is a
source of both opportunity and risk. Building upon the
opportunities and reducing the risk factors are
therefore at the core of our transformational
development policies.

To reduce the risk factors and effectively combat
new threats, we have adopted a comprehensive security
policy and strategy that clearly represent a break with
the past in terms of concept, implementation tools and
articulation with national stakeholders and
international partners. At the legislative level, new
laws to counter narcotics, money-laundering and
corruption have been adopted. Cooperation has been
developed with strategic partners to enhance
institutional capacity, law enforcement, surveillance of
our waters, control of illicit maritime activities and
intelligence-sharing.

Law enforcement and drug control entities and
institutions mandated to prevent and deal with financial
crimes linked to money-laundering and the financing
of terrorism have been put in place. Controls in ports
and airports have been tightened. Furthermore, Cape
Verde has ratified the pertinent international
conventions and adapted its national legislation to the
international legal framework. Drug supply and
demand have been reduced. Preventive education,
treatment, rehabilitation and reinsertion activities have
been implemented in close cooperation with civil
society organizations.

Despite the positive results achieved, the struggle
is not yet over. Many challenges remain. Strengthening
justice administration and continuing to provide law
enforcement entities with the necessary legal
frameworks is essential to reducing the potential
infiltration of Cape Verde's society and economy by
corrupt practices. Therefore, Cape Verde is focusing
attention on the need to intensify actions to prevent
drug abuse and urban violence, in particular among
young people; to strengthen treatment options for drug-
abusers and their social reintegration; to reduce the
possibility of the use of the national territory for the
illicit drug trade; and to enhance national, regional and
international cooperation.

We have been always aware that our fight cannot
be effective and durable while our region continues to
be used as a safe haven by drug traffickers and
organized criminal groups due to weak legislation and
enforcement institutions. Without constant and firm
action by our neighbouring countries, we would be
unable to make further progress. That knowledge
moved us to actively participate in the efforts of
ECOWAS to develop a regional legal framework to
tackle drug trafficking and harmonize the domestic
laws of member States against drug trafficking.

That same reasoning moved us to host in October
2008 in our capital, Praia, the ECOWAS High-level
Conference on Drug Trafficking as a Security Threat in
West Africa, which led to the adoption of the Political
Declaration and the Regional Response Action Plan.
Given our track record on cooperation and our modest
success at curbing drug trafficking from Latin America,
we stand ready to continue to share information and
best practices and to engage with other ECOWAS
member States. That will be important to improve drug
control and to strengthen prevention, treatment and
rehabilitation efforts, while curbing the impact of the
drug trade on national economies and political stability.

While Cape Verde applauds the international
community for its growing concern and attention to the
problem, it is of the view that international responses
should better reflect the seriousness of the situation.
They should be comprehensive, strategic and more
coordinated. In this context, Cape Verde salutes the
recent roundtable of ECOWAS partners organized in
Vienna with the support of the Austrian Government
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We
salute the various commitments made at the roundtable
and urge their rapid translation into concrete actions to
accelerate the implementation of the Regional
Response Action Plan. Indeed, what has been achieved
so far is very positive, but much remains to be done.

In line with its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, the Security Council
should continue to monitor the situation and take
measures to assist other United Nations bodies to
deliver a more coordinated response. The extraordinary
work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
should be duly supported.

We also urge the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole to strengthen their actions against
drug producing and purchasing markets and transit
countries, and to increase awareness about the harmful
potential of the drug trade. Efforts to effectively hold
accountable all of those involved in this illegal activity
should also be scaled up, in compliance with
obligations set out in the various legal instruments on
combating international crimes. Member States should
unequivocally join these efforts. Regional and
subregional organizations, civil society and other
stakeholders should be encouraged to build resilience
to drug trafficking and to prevent the emergence of
drug conflicts.

The recent reaffirmation in Vienna of the
fundamentals of the ECOWAS Political Declaration
and Regional Response Action Plan and, more
important, the programmes and plans already in motion
are a clear signal of the political will and commitment
of the countries of our subregion to assume their share
of responsibility in the process.

