Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
join my colleagues in thanking the Secretariat, in
particular Mr. Prendergast, for the introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau.

France appreciates the energetic activities in that
country of the Representative of the Secretary-General in
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Nana-Sinkam, and the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS). We feel that the presence of the United
Nations there since June 1999 has allowed its transition
from a state of war to one of peace and the gradual re-
establishment of constitutional order. The courageous
stances taken by Mr. Nana-Sinkam, as well as his close
contacts with the authorities and the judiciary, have
heightened respect for human rights and the rule of law.
As Mr. Prendergast rightly noted, this is an excellent
example of the essential role of the United Nations.

France welcomes the successful holding of the recent
legislative and presidential elections in Guinea-Bissau.
The first objectives set by President Kumba Yala seem to
point in the right direction and deserve the international
community's support. We feel that the President's
concern to consult civil society on a regular basis with
regard to the various programmes that have been
undertaken is also well directed. France will, of course,
be participating in a constructive and positive in the
forthcoming round table to be organized by the United
Nations Development Programme.

In view of the successful convening of the elections,
we consider it important that civilian power be endowed
with all authority necessary to implementing its action.
We believe that full respect for the Abuja Accord of 1
November 1998 negotiated under the auspices of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
will require the dissolution of the junta. The full return to
constitutional normality is a genuine priority. The armed
forces must henceforth obey unequivocally the
instructions of the civilian power.

At this point, I wish to pay tribute to the very
positive role played by the Gambia, in particular by

 

Foreign Minister Jobe. We hope that the agreement reached
on 22 March will be put into effect. We support all
initiatives to promote the demobilization and reintegration
of the military into civilian life and, like others, look
forward to learning the results of the World Bank mission
to take place in early April.

France encourages Mr. Nana-Sinkam, the Secretary-
General's Representative, to pursue his consultations with
the countries of the region so as to resolve the border
security issues. The adoption of the confidence-building
measures proposed by President Konare of Mali, as current
Chairman of ECOWAS, would also seem appropriate.

The loss of peace in Guinea-Bissau posed a threat to
the peace and stability of the entire subregion. Undoubted
progress has been made, but the information contained in
the Secretary-General's report, indicating the continuing
circulation of large quantities of small arms in civilian
communities, is a genuine cause of concern to my
delegation. I associate myself with Ambassador Hasmy's
statement highlighting the importance of a vigorous
implementation of the arms-recovery programme. This is an
essential matter for the future of Guinea-Bissau and the
stability of the entire region.

