Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council meets today against the backdrop of an
unprecedented and very serious Israeli escalation of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. It is a
blatant violation of international law that undermines
the ability of the Security Council and the international
community to achieve a just and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East.

Despite repeated international appeals to Israel,
the occupying Power, to respect its obligations under
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, Israel continues to
disregard them. It pursues its policy of entrenching
the occupation and undermining the prospects of the
Palestinian people establishing its independent State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in a useless attempt
to eliminate the concept of the two-State solution,
which is the essence of the peace process.

Israel continues its illegal settlement policy in clear
and grave violation of resolution 2334 (2016). This
policy poses a serious threat to the peace process, as
Israel is relentless in its attempts to remove 46 Bedouin
groups, totalling more than 10,000 Palestinians, in
order to prevent them from returning to their land in
southern Israel. The forced displacement of Abu Nuwar
and Khan Al-Ahmar Bedouins - with their houses,
schools and health centres demolished, despite the
fact that 53 per cent of them are children and 95 per
cent are registered as refugees with the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) - is yet another Israeli attempt
to create an illusion of Greater Israel by preventing
refugees from returning to their land, seizing the land
of Bedouin Palestinians and demolishing their homes
in order to expand the illegal settlements of Ma'ale
Adumim and Kfar Adumim, make them contiguous
to occupied East Jerusalem and end the desirable
contiguity for the West Bank.

Furthermore, the Israeli settlement expansion is not
only overwhelming, but has been extended to include
a campaign of ethnic cleansing against the Palestinian
people. Since the events of Land Day, on 30 March,
and according to the Israeli authorities, the Israeli
army has killed more than 150 defenceless Palestinian
demonstrators, including at least 22 children, and
injured more than 15,300, some of them critically. This
has occurred despite resolution ES-10/20, which was
adopted by the General Assembly at its resumed tenth
emergency special session on 13 June, calling on Israeli
forces to stop their use of live ammunition against the
defenceless Palestinian people and to protect the right of
Palestinians to peaceful demonstration, in accordance
with their commitments as an occupying Power, under
the Geneva Conventions.

The Israeli aerial bombardment of Gaza on 13 July,
which targeted women and defenceless children, only
strengthens our conviction that we need an effective
international mechanism to protect the Palestinian
people against barbaric Israeli aggression, in
accordance with the aforementioned General Assembly
resolution. The League of Arab States expects the
Council to support the establishment of this mechanism
by upholding important humanitarian principles, at the
top of which is the responsibility to protect and human
security, which are applied effectively by the Council
in other parts of the world but not enforced in Palestine.

Israel's continued closure of the Karm Abu Salem
crossing and the prevention of basic needs from
entering the Gaza Strip are yet further humanitarian
obstacles that have led to enormous suffering and a
massive spike in the prices of basic goods, in particular
as 49 per cent of Palestinians in Gaza are unemployed.
The United States decided to stop financing UNRWA
and froze its economic aid for the Palestinian Authority.
Israel refuses to transfer taxes and custom fees to the
Palestinian Authority, as it must pursuant to the Paris
Protocol. Despite the pledges made at the UNRWA
conference held on 25 June, and given the international
community's belief that supporting UNRWA is one way
to help resolve the refugee issue, the United States and
Israel have a moral and financial responsibility for the
Palestinian people until the refugee problem has been
settled as one of the final-status issues.

I would like to reply to certain comments made
today by saying that Arab and Islamic Governments
and peoples are no less generous than the Governments
and peoples of the United States and other donor
countries, to which we express our deep appreciation.
Arab and Islamic countries have contributed billions
of dollars to support UNRWA over the years to ease
the humanitarian suffering of Palestinian refugees.
Allow me to correct false information. Since the United
States stopped supporting UNRWA and in accordance
with confirmed 2018 pledges of $716.88 million, as
published by UNRWA, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the United
Arab Emirates and Kuwait alone have pledged more
than $200 million, in addition to smaller contributions
made by other Arab countries. Those donations were
made despite the fact that none of those countries
contributed to the Palestinian refugee crisis.

Lastly, Israel's defiance of the international
community reached its peak when the Israeli Knesset
recently adopted its nation-State law, stipulating that
the State of Israel is for Jewish people alone, not for
Palestinians. Hebrew is the official language, not
Arabic. Immigration into Israel is permitted to Jews,
not to Christians, Muslims or others. It encourages
settlement-building in a new step to annex the West
Bank, consecrate racism, legitimize the apartheid
exercised by the Israeli Government on ethnic,
religious and linguistic grounds, and entrench the
ethnic cleansing of Palestinians within the Green Line
as a way to maintain the Jewish identity of the State.

The League of Arab States strongly condemns this
law enacted by the Knesset, which denies the right ofthe
Palestinian people to their historic land and perpetuates
horrendous colonialism and racist Israeli practices
against the Palestinians by means of using force to
impose a de facto situation on the ground, expropriate
land, demolish buildings and build settlements.

In conclusion, the League ofArab States affirms that
this ugly racist law and all similar laws imposed forcibly
by the Israeli occupation are null and void. They are not
legitimate, as declared by the international community.
We call on the international community itself, with all of
its States and organizations, to assume its responsibility
and force Israel to respect international law and
recognize the rights of the Palestinian people. This
will not happen without establishing a clear mechanism
to protect the defenceless Palestinian people from the
tyranny of the Israeli occupation. In that context, we
look forward to the proposals of the Secretary-General
and the support of the Security Council and the General
Assembly for those recommendations.

