Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Egeland for his briefing on the humanitarian situation
in several African regions. In listening to his briefings
on many occasions, we have noted a common thread
running through his presentations: his great sympathy
and concern for suffering people and his willingness to
fully carry out the role of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in order to
alleviate that suffering.

As the Under-Secretary-General has told us, the
humanitarian situation in certain parts of Africa is very
serious. People are experiencing great suffering on a
daily basis - including hunger, poverty, death and
pandemics. China is very sympathetic to their plight
and is concerned about the difficulties facing affected
countries and peoples. We call on the international
community to make a common effort to provide
intensified humanitarian assistance to help those
countries through these difficult times.

We should also realize that there are numerous
reasons for humanitarian crises. Armed conflicts,
natural disasters, epidemics and other factors all play a
role. In providing material assistance, the international
community should pay greater attention to the actual
situations in the countries concerned, take the
necessary steps to address the problems and emphasize
the elimination of the root causes of humanitarian
crises.

The alleviation of the humanitarian crises
throughout Africa should rely mainly on the efforts of
the countries concerned, while respecting their
opinions and leadership and allowing their respective
initiatives to be fully carried out. The international
community should support and cooperate with the
efforts of the Governments of the countries concerned.
At the same time, we should also fully involve regional
and subregional organizations, such as the African
Union. We must also avoid politicizing humanitarian
issues. Not only is that not conducive to resolving
problems, it can also further complicate them. It is
therefore not desirable.

