Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to thank
Ms. Angela Kane for her briefing on developments in
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.

As if the complete air, land and naval blockade
on Gaza was not enough, as if it were not enough that
last summer's so-called Israeli withdrawal from the
Gaza Strip was a mere pretext to turn the entire Gaza
Strip into a prison for the Palestinian people, as if the
ongoing daily acts of aggression against innocent
Palestinians were not enough, as if the daily scenes on
Western television of Palestinian deaths and blood
were not enough - as if all of that and Israel's other
daily actions against the Palestinian people were not
enough, Israel yesterday launched a new military
operation to shed the blood of more Palestinian
women, children and elderly persons, destroying all
hope for peace and a life of dignity for an entire
people.

Words of condemnation no longer rise to the
magnitude of Israel's actions. The international
community, and the Security Council in particular, can
no longer stand by as spectators watching this unjust
and protracted tragedy. Israel's acts of aggression,
killing of dozens of innocent Palestinian victims, firing
on peaceful women demonstrators and the massacre at
Beit Hanoun, as well as its use of internationally
banned weapons and its destruction of Palestinian
civilian infrastructure, require invoking the vast wealth
of civilized human laws and rules, agreements and
moral precepts to end such acts of aggression.

In the light of what is taking place, we wish to
underscore the fact that there is an urgent need to put
an end to Israeli aggression. The Council must adopt a
resolution that demands that Israel end its military
activities, that puts in place a mechanism to ensure that
it in fact does end those activities, and that establishes
a commission to investigate the Beit Hanoun massacre.
Such a resolution would not contradict the work of the
Quartet; rather it will complement it and lend it
momentum while increasing the credibility of the
efforts of the international community to put an end to
daily Israeli massacres. It may also serve to open a
window that would make it possible to adopt a serious
approach to peace in Palestine and the entire Middle
East region.

The positive developments taking place in
southern Lebanon following the adoption of resolution
1701 (2006) have been first and foremost due to the
support of the international community and the full
commitment of the Government of Lebanon to honour
its obligations and responsibilities. The Lebanese army
has now been deployed in the south of the country. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
described our cooperation with UNIFIL as excellent.
The Government of Lebanon has deployed 8,600
troops along the Lebanese border to strengthen the
observation mechanisms. The Government has
repeatedly denied all allegations by Israel that arms are
being smuggled into the country.

It is unacceptable that resolution 1701 (2006) be
reduced to meaning solely the release of the two Israeli
soldiers. The resolution aims primarily at ending all
acts of aggression against Lebanon. It also seeks to
assist the Government of Lebanon to exercise its
sovereignty and power over all of its territory. Israel is
daily violating our sovereignty by violating Lebanese
airspace.

As if that were not enough, Israeli military planes
fly at high and low altitudes over German and French

naval vessels, in total violation of Israel's commitment
to abide by the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006)
and the role and authority of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon. It is the joint responsibility
of both parties to implement resolution 1701 (2006),
and we therefore call in this forum on the Israeli party
to abide by its commitments and to assume its
responsibilities vis-a-vis the international community.

We commend the steadfastness of the Palestinian
people and their tenacity in clinging to their land in the
face of the Israeli military machine, which is daily
endeavouring to wipe them out. The time for peace has
come. The Madrid Conference, the relevant resolutions
of the international community and the Arab Peace
Initiative adopted at Beirut in 2002 all are good bases
for bringing about the just, lasting and comprehensive
peace to which the peoples of the region aspire. It is
our hope that the Council will seek to relaunch that
initiative in enhancement of international peace and
security and as a contribution to building a prosperous
future without extremism for coming generations in the
region.

