Ms. Dlamini-Zuma (South Africa): It is an honour for
me to address this important meeting of the Security
Council on the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I would like to thank the presidency of the United
States for devoting this month to African issues. I am
particularly glad to be here, representing President Mbeki,
in the presence of many heads of State from our region.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is a most complex problem, involving six States and
various rebel movements in our region. It is indeed a tribute
to the leaders of our region, under the leadership of
President Chiluba, that the Lusaka Agreement was reached,
providing the best opportunity for a lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We still believe that there is no option for resolving of
the conflict other than working within the framework which
the parties, the United Nations, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the leaders of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) decided upon when they
signed the Lusaka Agreement.

The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement must be successfully
implemented by all concerned. It is a tribute to the
signatories that, although the Ceasefire Agreement has not
been fully implemented in terms of all the provisions, and
there have been some breaches of it, total war has not
continued in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This
demonstrates the commitment to the ceasefire and to peace
in the region of the Great Lakes.

South Africa would like to reaffirm its neutral role in
the search for lasting peace in the Congo and in the Great
Lakes area. We believe that it is important for our country
to communicate equally with all parties involved in the
Congo conflict. Furthermore, my Government is committed
to assisting the Joint Military Commission (JMC) by
providing whatever support is needed, including logistical
support.

We strongly urge an immediate and complete
deployment of the JMC to enable it to undertake the tasks
prescribed by the Agreement as soon as possible. We
would like to take this opportunity to request the
international community to give its full support to the
J MC in the implementation of its tasks in accordance with
the Ceasefire Agreement. We appreciate the assistance
given by many countries so far, but more needs to be
done.

Further, my delegation would like to reiterate the
call, made by the SADC heads of State and Government
in Maputo, that the Security Council should without delay
authorize the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in the context of the implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. South Africa believes that the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force is
critical to a successful implementation of the Agreement
and needs the support of the international community. In
this connection, States members of the Security Council
need not be reminded of the provisions contained in
Article 24 of the United Nations Charter, which states that
the United Nations Member States confer on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. A delay by the Security
Council in carrying out its fundamental duty may lead to
the worsening of the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

South Africa finds unacceptable the delay in the
involvement of the United Nations in bringing about
security, lasting peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Let us recall that, on 10 July
1999, all parties to the conflict demonstrated their desire
for peace by signing the Agreement. Therefore, the
Security Council must, on its part, fulfil its historic
mandate, as set out in the United Nations Charter, by
assisting the parties to the Agreement to enforce the
ceasefire.

We do hope that the United Nations will be able to
play the role envisaged in chapter 8 of the Agreement,
which includes all peacekeeping and peace enforcement.
In this regard, we welcome the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but we must state that
we see the deployment recommended in that report as
only the beginning.

 

We believe it is important to implement the ceasefire
as it is envisaged in the Agreement, including disarming
and resettling the armed groups that further compromise the
security of the countries in the region. It is for this reason
that we believe that, as a minimum requirement, the
Security Council should conclude this week devoted to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by adopting a resolution
in support of the peace process in that country, as detailed
in the Lusaka Agreement.

My Government also welcomes the appointment by
the Congolese parties of the former President of Botswana,
Sir Ketumile Masire, as the Facilitator for the internal
political national dialogue between the political forces in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in accordance with
chapter 5 of the Agreement.

In this regard, we call on all the Congolese political
and other interest groups to give their full support to Sir
Ketumile Masire in his endeavour to assist in the creation
of a more democratic political system in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In the long run, it is only the
Congolese themselves who can determine their future, while
the international community can assist in creating a
conducive atmosphere to underpin the Congolese
commitment. We also join the heads of State in appealing
to the international community to support the Congolese
dialogue both financially and politically.

In this regard, we wish to reaffirm the importance of
the collective involvement of the United Nations, the OAU,
SADC and the international community in the search for a
lasting solution in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the Great Lakes region. We strongly believe that the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, a product of the African
countries, will make a meaningful contribution towards
resolving the conflict and place the Great Lakes region on
the road to recovery.

We would like to appeal to the international
community for urgent humanitarian support to alleviate the
suffering of hundreds of thousands of Congolese. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo will also need extensive
resources for its process of reconstruction and development.
Planning in this regard should commence as soon as
possible.

The people of the Congo have suffered for over a
century. This process provides them with a glimmer of
hope towards a democratic, peaceful and prosperous Congo.
Should this process fail, we shall all stand indicted. We
owe it to the people of the Congo and we dare not fail
them.

