Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
your presence here today, Sir, thank you for convening
this meeting and commend the excellent work of the
Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom to the
United Nations in conducting its presidency of the
Council this month. We also thank Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Ms. Michele Coninsx and Ms. Joana Cook
for their briefings.

We note with concern that the so-called Islamic
State, although weakened, nonetheless continues to
become a covert global organization with a strong
presence in Iraq and Syria and, through affiliated
organizations, other areas of the Middle East and Asia
as well as on the continent of Africa. In that context,
we would like to highlight the focus the United Nations
has placed on the counter-terrorism agenda over the
past six months, as reflected in both the sixth Biennial
Review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the successful holding of the first High-
level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism
Agencies of Member States, in late June.

Despite the military setbacks the international
community has inflicted on Da'esh, the terrorist
organization is seeking to maintain its influence by
using the Internet and social networks to instigate,
mobilize and direct its followers to perpetrate attacks
in their countries of origin as well as to raise funds
and attract new followers. I underscore the need to
continue strengthening policies aimed at counteracting
such manifestations of global terrorism. That includes
promoting the development of critical thinking in
the digital realm among the target audiences for such
propaganda, especially young people.

Moreover, as stated in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/770), the return or relocation of foreign
terrorist fighters, as well as the growing number
of "frustrated travelers", also represent significant
threats, albeit to a lesser extent than anticipated. We
therefore underscore the need to pursue comprehensive
criminal justice strategies that incorporate full respect
for human rights and due process. Such strategies must
also take gender into account and integrate an approach
aimed at safeguarding the rights of children, especially
when it comes to the families of returning or relocating
fighters.

I must draw particular attention to the role of
prisons when foreign terrorist fighters enter national
criminal justice systems: it is essential to ensure that
prisons do not serve as venues for further radicalization
and recruitment.

Da'esh financing is further cause for particular
concern, especially as the organization operates in
a covert manner and no longer tries to administer
larger territories, although it maintains some sources
of income from oil wells in eastern Syria, forced
expropriations and kidnappings. Against that backdrop,
it is crucial for Member States to bear in mind that,
in addition to strengthening financial intelligence
systems, it is important to take measures to monitor
cash used by terrorists.

In connection with this problem, we must
draw attention to the increasingly clear links
between transnational organized crime and terrorist
organizations - a reality reflected in the report,
especially the links between terrorist financing and
money laundering, as well as other sources, including
trafficking in people, drugs and weapons. In that regard,
we deem it essential to gain a deeper understanding of
these dynamics, as stressed in the Security Council
presidential statement of 8 May 2018 (S/PRST/20l8/9).

We reiterate that the crimes must not go unpunished.
We must ensure accountability. To do so, the collection
of evidence in conflict zones and of digital evidence
represent a principal challenge. We therefore welcome
the progress made by the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, as well as
the operationalization of the Investigative Team into
crimes committed in Iraq.

We also welcome the appointment of the
Ombudsperson to the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, which will allow that important
subsidiary body to function in accordance with rules
guaranteeing due process.

Our Organization, and the Security Council in
particular, has a fundamental role to play in tackling
terrorist threats, fostering cooperation among all
Member States and among regional and subregional
organizations, and it can count on the fullest
commitment of my delegation in that regard.

