Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In accordance with
paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have
the honour to brief the Security Council on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, covering the period
from 15 June to 3 October. During that period, the
Committee worked on my recommendations following
the trip to the Sudan. The Committee also met once
in informal consultations to discuss the interim report
of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan, and received the
second quarterly update from the Panel.

On 25 June, the Committee issued a press release
(SC/13391) providing a summary of our discussion
during the 13 June informal consultations on my visit
to the Sudan. In my letters dated 14 August, addressed
to the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the
United Nations and the Joint African Union-United
Nations Special Representative for Darfur, Head of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and Joint Chief Mediator, I expressed my
appreciation for the cooperation and support I enjoyed
during my Visit and encouraged the Government of the
Sudan to continue to build on the existing cooperation
with the Committee and the Panel of Experts.

In line with my recommendations, I sent letters
to the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, suggesting continued
cooperation and joint consultations with a view to
monitoring the presence and activities of Darfuri rebel
groups in Libya and South Sudan, and to develop a
common approach on how to best prevent them from
engaging in activities that threaten regional peace
and security.

I also sent a letter to the Coordinator of the Panel of
Experts and requested that the Panel prepare and submit
for the consideration of the Committee statements of
case for the possible listing of individuals and entities
that the Panel deems to meet the listing criteria
delineated in paragraph 3 of resolution 1591 (2005)
and encouraged the Panel's cooperation and exchange
of information, as appropriate, with the Panels of
Experts on Libya and the South Sudan with regard to
the activities of Darfuri rebel groups in Libya and in
South Sudan.

During the informal consultations of 17 August,
the Coordinator presented the Panel's interim report.
The Panel reported that there had been no major
breakthrough in the Darfur peace process. The Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) continued to
refuse to negotiate with the Government of the Sudan.
Regarding Darfuri armed groups, the Panel considered
that a split in the SLA/AW military force in Jebel
Marra would likely diminish the group's long-term
effectiveness. While the presence of Darfuri armed
groups in South Sudan had declined due to diminishing
support from the South Sudanese authorities, their
presence in Libya continued to grow. The Government
of the Sudan continued to transfer weapons to Darfur
without obtaining the required approval of the
Committee. The Government cited Security Council
resolutions stipulating that the primary responsibility
for protecting civilians rested with the Sudanese
authorities, which required military equipment. The
Panel also noted the further investigation of several
cases of potential Violations of the arms embargo by the
rebel groups and their supporters in the region.

According to the Panel's interim report, ongoing
clashes between the Government of the Sudan and
pro-Government militia groups and members of the
SLA/AW in the Jebel Marra area, as well as ongoing
intercommunal conflicts, have had a negative impact
on the civilian population, including various human
rights violations and abuses. Human rights violations
and sexual and gender-based violence against returnees
took place across Darfur. The Panel was of the view
that the Government of the Sudan needed to take
immediate and concrete steps to protect the civilian
population against continuing attacks and to employ
more concrete measures to produce sustainable results,
including setting up a local administrative structure,
fully functioning police and courts.
On 21 September, the Committee received the
second quarterly update of the Panel of Experts,
which focused largely on ongoing political efforts and
peace talks. The Panel also reported that a significant
number of internally displaced persons remain in
different camps across Darfur, including in areas that
have enjoyed relative peace and overall improvement
in the security situation. The Panel also informed the
Committee that a significant number of displaced
communities continued to express grave concerns over
the lack of access to economic and social services in an
increasingly limited environment for the provision of
humanitarian aid and other support, and that threats,
harassment and intimidation remain an almost daily
occurrence for some.

Lastly, during the report period, the Committee
received an implementation report from a Member
State and the Secretariat informed the Committee
about the transfer of Committee files from e-rooms to
the e-deleGATE secure portal on 30 August.

