The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

At the outset, let me thank Special Representative
Zahir Tanin for his briefing. I would also like to thank
Deputy Prime Minister Dacie and Ambassador Citaku
for their statements before the Security Council.

I would like to join my European colleagues in
saying that we believe that the situation in Kosovo
allows for a substantial reduction of the current
reporting cycle. We furthermore believe that the
Security Council must refocus the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) so that the means deployed by the United
Nations are tailored fully to the situation on the
ground. In that light, Poland also reiterates the need
for a strategic review of UNMIK. Twenty years have
passed since the Mission's establishment and, in our
view, it is time to reassess its relevance.

Poland has recognized Kosovo as an independent
State and we have confidence in Kosovo's ability
to resolve its problems. I will now briefly focus on
three points.

First, I would like to stress the importance of
the continuation of the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, which should
lead to a legally binding agreement on a comprehensive
normalization of relations. Moreover, I would like
to highlight that the decisions already made within
the dialogue should be swiftly implemented. That
is a prerequisite for both countries on their path to
European integration.

The second point that I would like to make is on the
importance of the rule of law. We stress the need for
the Kosovo authorities to respect their obligations to
support the work of the Specialist Chambers. We trust
that they will continue to do so. We also note Kosovo's
efforts to bring the justice system up to international
and European Union standards. The law on courts and
the law on the disciplinary responsibilities of judges
and prosecutors, which were recently adopted, are
important steps in that direction. The support in the
area of the rule of law delivered in recent years by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo was of
the utmost importance.

Thirdly, and finally, let me welcome the ratification
of the demarcation agreement with Montenegro. It
is a crucial step towards visa liberalization with the
European Union and towards further stabilization
of the region. Let me conclude by saying that Poland
regards Kosovo as being fully capable of managing
its own future and exploiting its potential within the
shared framework of European values.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Mr. Daeic' has asked for the floor to make a further

statement. I now give him the floor.

