Mr. Cem (Turkey): I wish to thank the Security
Council, and more particularly its presidency for
having organized this open debate at a time when the
situation in Afghanistan is experiencing significant
developments.

Today, we all face a common challenge. This
challenge is twofold: to combat the terrorist network
which, by exploiting the plight of Afghanistan's
people, has taken root within its borders; and to
support the revival of an Afghan identity and the
reconstruction of Afghanistan by ensuring peace,
stability and economic development. We believe that
concerted international action, with sound principles
and effective methods, is of crucial importance, and
that we, as Members of the United Nations, should try
to elaborate some of the main approaches which might
help Afghanistan develop its own future.

First, in our view, it is the Afghan people who
will rebuild their identity and their country. Our task
will consist mainly of supporting their efforts to do so.
We are not here to dictate who will run their country
and in what way.
We also believe that certain cultural elements and
regional and tribal allegiances should be encouraged to
merge into a single Afghan identity and assume a
secondary role as subcultures. It will be very difficult
for Afghanistan to maintain its old social fabric and
social particularities and emerge as an assertive nation.

Secondly, all countries neighbouring Afghanistan
or involved in Afghanistan - indeed, all countries
Members of the United Nations - should refrain from
having particular Afghan groups as primary allies, and
from pursuing particular interests through such allies,
which we might be tempted to do. Of course, we are all
engaged in a fight - a justifiable, correct fight against
terrorism. As the fight continues, we should all be
especially careful to ensure that innocent civilians are
kept out of harm's way. As countries Members of the
United Nations, United Nations agencies and other aid
organizations, we should continue to provide
comprehensive humanitarian support and continue to
try to organize and facilitate such support.

It seems to me that we should, within as limited a
time-frame as possible, organize ourselves, provide for
basic needs and safeguard the lives and goods of the
people in the regions and cities of Afghanistan which
are being freed from terrorist oppression. It is very
important that we show people that they can have a
better future through the positive changes that we can
bring about.

Again, it is of capital importance that the Afghan
people who have been freed from terrorist oppression
see that a concrete change has been brought about and
that the new environment provides them with
opportunities - although such opportunities may not,
of course, be enormous - through concrete, speedy
assistance which changes their lives and their
environment. It is obvious that such cases will provide
a very valuable example to other parts of Afghanistan
which are not yet free from oppression. Setting a
successful precedent in that respect will serve as the
best catalyst for change.

Everyone seems to agree that the future
administration and Government of Afghanistan should
include all ethnic groups. The new Government should
also encompass all political trends whose
representatives have not resorted to terrorism. In this
process, overemphasizing or undermining the role of
any particular group in the country would be
counterproductive.

In the reconstruction of Afghanistan we must
move quickly. So far, from the cities and regions that
are freeing themselves from oppression, we have
received encouraging news that the liberators of those
cities are behaving well, and that there is no recurrence
of the difficulties that were encountered in Afghanistan
some 12 years ago during experiences of a similar
nature. But if this goes on and we, as the members of
the international community acting in solidarity, do not
take prompt action, and if we are not present in
Afghanistan, it may be that by the end of the week, or
after 10 days or two weeks, we will see negative
developments that might jeopardize the future of
Afghanistan. We have to act promptly. Turkey is ready
to play a significant role in the international effort to
build a new Afghanistan. As a friend of the people of
Afghanistan, we are ready to take part in every group
that will work for Afghanistan's reconstruction and
rehabilitation.

It is evident that in the process of rebuilding
Afghanistan and the Afghan identity the United
Nations must play a leading role, and it is the duty of
each and every Member of the United Nations to
contribute to that gigantic task.

