Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like first of all to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima
Fall, for his briefing. We would like to express our
gratitude to him for his tireless efforts over the past
few years to assist the Great Lakes region. I would also
like to express my best wishes to him.

We are pleased to note the recent important
progress in the peace process in the region. Countries
there have gradually emerged from the shadow of
conflict and are actively carrying out post-conflict
reconstruction. The second summit of the International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region and the
meeting of regional parliamentarians were successfully
completed. The signing of the Stability, Security and
Development Pact for the region is an indication of the
new important progress by the countries to resolve
conflicts themselves and to make joint efforts towards
economic development.

We believe that through dialogue and
consultation, the countries of the region can seek
appropriate solutions to the issues and make further
efforts to consolidate good-neighbourly relations. We
hope that the International Conference can continue to
provide a platform for the countries of the region to
carry out constructive dialogue and cooperation, so as
bring about lasting peace and stability in the region
soon as possible.

Peacebuilding efforts in the region cannot be
carried out without the support of the international
community. The international community should
continue to monitor the countries in the region
emerging from conflict, as well as to increase its
economic assistance to them and help them in capacity-
building. As a friend of all the countries of the region,
China will, in the framework of the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation, continue to strengthen its
multidimensional cooperation with those countries in
order to make an active contribution to the
achievement of lasting peace, stability, and
development in the region.

Finally, China would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the African
Union and the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
Region for their contributions to peace and stability in
the region.

