Mr. Ould Abdallah: I will be brief. I wish first to
offer a point of information. It is my understanding that
the conference for the mobilization of resources for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
Somali security forces, about which we have been
talking, will be held on 22 April in Brussels, subject to
confirmation with all members. That is because of
logistical and a number of other considerations.
Secondly, I thank the Council for its renewed
interest and concern with respect to the tragedy of
Somalia, especially its rejection of permanent
blackmail by a number of Somalis who know how
eager we in New York are to look at the headlines and
websites: one grenade makes a huge difference; one
mortar shell makes a huge difference. I do not like to
compare today's world hot spots with Somalia, but if
we look at the statistics of the number of deaths, which
are terrible, Somalia is in a difficult position, but the
situation is not as bad as it might be. It is permanent
blackmail that I am talking about, and we should free
ourselves from that permanent blackmail.

We are talking about people, and they need peace.
They are ready for peace. We will look to the April
report to provide accurate figures. We will be in the
field; my deputy was in Mogadishu last week.

Before concluding, I would like to thank the
delegation of the United States of America for
09-27495
mentioning the negative role of Eritrea. Somalia has no
border with Eritrea. I am a civil servant, but, like
members of the Council, I have seen the report with a
call by a Government which is normally friendly - the
two countries are members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and they have no common
border - inviting the destabilization of this country.
That needed to be noted, and I am grateful to the
United States delegation for having spoken of it. Many
members of the Council have told me the same thing,
and I hope that it will be raised next time. I do not
want it to be made into an issue, but it has to be raised.

