Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Developments in the situation in Macedonia and
the region, particularly after the successful handling of the
acute political crisis and the stabilization of the situation in
Albania, confirm how relevant and timely is restructuring
of the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP), with the withdrawal of a military
component from the operation. Clearly, the mandate
established in 1991 and already successfully
implemented - the mandate given to the Blue Helmets and
their continued presence in Macedonia -- cannot be an
effective instrument ' for neutralizing today's risks to
stability within and around the country. Therefore, on the
question of the United Nations presence in Macedonia,
the centre of gravity should now shift to the civilian area,
bringing into play non-military international structures,
primarily the civilian police.

The Russian Federation consistently supports this
approach, noting the importance of strengthening the
positive experience of UNPREDEP, as the United
Nations first preventive peacemaking operation.
However, while taking into account the position of
interested parties, primarily that of Macedonia, and the
recommendation by the Secretary-General, the Russian
Federation has demonstrated maximum constructive
flexibility and has agreed to the final - there is no doubt
about that -« extension of the mandate of UNPREDEP,
until 31 August 1998, with the withdrawal of the military
component immediately thereafter. There will be no
artificial delays.

The resolution we have just adopted is relevant and
clear; the wording permits no different interpretations.
Like all decisions of the Security Council, it must be
implemented unconditionally and clearly. A guarantee to
that effect is the resolution's request to the Secretary-
General to submit by 1 June 1998 a report containing
concrete information on the modalities of the termination
of UNPREDEP, including practical steps for the
complete withdrawal of the military component
immediately after 31 August 1998, since such a
withdrawal will take a couple of days, as is confirmed by
our recent experience in the withdrawal of United
Nations military contingents from Haiti.

We also expect that the Secretary-Genera] will make
recommendations in his report on the optimum format for
a further international presence in Macedonia.

