Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to extend a
warm welcome to Deputy Prime Minister Jose Luis
Guterres and thank him for his statement. Through
him, I wish to congratulate the Timorese Government
and people on the progress achieved in many different
areas in the past year, including in the economic,
social, political and security domains.

10-2486]
I also welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, and wish her
success in her new functions. I thank the members of
the technical assessment mission to Timor-Leste, in
particular its chief, Mr. Ian Martin, for their diligent
work and valuable recommendations.

The Brazilian Government has done its best to
cooperate with the Timorese people, the people of a
fellow Portuguese-speaking country, and did so even
before the formal creation of the country. A common
language, however, is not the only connection between
our two countries. Even though we are geographically
distant, similarities in history and culture bring us
together as partners and friends. Currently, we have
ongoing cooperation projects with Timor-Leste in
fields such as food security, education, health and
security. We also cooperate on the strengthening of the
judiciary and on legal and diplomatic training.

We are pleased at the positive developments in
Timor-Leste. The successful elections held last October
for chiefs and councils are a sign of growing
democratic maturity. The establishment of the Anti-
Corruption Commission in parliament and the
appointment of its first Commissioner are also
significant. The closure of all camps for internally
displaced persons is an important development. The
challenge ahead is to continue to implement measures
that enable all those who returned to their original
homes to make a living in a safe environment.

Livelihood and employment opportunities have
also increased in the country, including in rural areas
and for vulnerable groups and youth, as described in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/85).
Improvements are noted in terms of job creation and
the qualification of human resources, as thousands of
teachers have received intensive training and many
hundreds of youngsters have had access to technical
education. Brazil pays particular attention to these
matters and has assisted the Timorese Government in
capacity-building by providing teachers and experts, as
well as infrastructure.
Despite the overall progress, it must be noted that
poverty and unemployment remain a formidable
challenge, as underlined by Ms. Ameerah Haq. The
international community should continue to cooperate
with the efforts of the Timorese authorities to generate
employment and income, as this constitutes an
important path to ensuring stability and growth.

We welcome the progress made in the security
situation in Timor-Leste and commend the efforts
undertaken by the Timorese national police to carry out
its duties. We welcome the positive results achieved so
far in the districts and units already handed over to the
Timorese police. We also support the resolve of the
Government and the United Nations to intensify police
training so as to ensure the sustainable resumption of
primary policing responsibilities throughout the
country as soon as possible.

The cautious approach taken by the Secretary-
General for a gradual drawdown of United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) police,
conditioned upon progress in the development of the
national police force and measured against the
fulfilment of objective criteria and an assessment of the
evolving situation on the ground, is one that we fully
support.

In our view, it is important to clearly delineate
the roles and responsibilities of the security sector
institutions, in particular between the police and the
military and to establish an appropriate civilian
oversight mechanism. In this regard as well, progress
has been made. The Timorese authorities have taken
significant steps in the development of a legal
framework for the security sector, including a national
security law. We support their efforts and encourage
them to proceed with determination.

Timor-Leste has been able to move forward and
address some of the most pressing issues and
challenges faced by any young country. The
international community has provided assistance and
should continue to offer its support to the Timorese.

Brazil supports the extension of the mandate of
UNMIT in line with the desire of the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste and as proposed by the
Secretary-General. We believe the United Nations
presence remains indispensable to assist the
Government in consolidating the gains of the past and
in ensuring a smooth transition to recovery and
development. Taking into account the planning for
possible future adjustments in the United Nations
presence, Brazil supports the proposal that the Council
include Timor-Leste in the schedule of visits to be
made in the current year.

