Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam, for organizing this
open debate and for the excellent discussion paper on
which we will base this debate.

I will focus my statement on three of the topics
you raised in your paper: the promotion of the rule of
law, ending impunity for international crimes, and the
United Nations sanctions regimes.

According to the United Nations Charter, the
General Assembly is responsible for the codification
and progressive development of international law. We
therefore support the recent initiative of Liechtenstein
and Mexico requesting the inclusion on the agenda of
the General Assembly of an item on the rule of law at
the national and international levels. Switzerland
intends to contribute in a substantive manner to the
discussion of that topic within the Sixth Committee.
We expect this discussion to help clarify the notion of
rule of law and to lead to concrete measures for
promoting that concept at the national and international
levels, without being limited solely to conflict and
post-conflict situations.

As one of the principal organs of the United
Nations, the Security Council has important
responsibilities with regard to the promotion of the rule
of law. On the one hand, the Council must respect the
rule of law in its own actions at all times, and on the
other, we expect the Council to promote the rule of law
in all areas of its activities. I would like to mention just
two areas in which the Council can contribute
practically to promoting international law.

First, it can adopt a set of principles on the issue
of authorizing the use of force, as suggested in the
Secretary-General's report "In larger freedom" of
March 2005. Secondly, it can recognize the
responsibility of each individual State to protect its
populations against genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

With regard to the question of human and
financial resources available within the United Nations
for the promotion of the rule of law, Switzerland
strongly advocates increasing the resources allocated to
the Office of Legal Affairs, whose current capacities
are no longer commensurate with the importance now
attached to the notion of the rule of law and do not
meet the needs of activities to promote the rule of law,
in particular at the operational level.

Concerning the second area of today's debate, the
fight against impunity, I would like to stress first of all
that most of us have come a long way over the past few
years towards understanding the essential fact that
ending impunity for international crimes is a major
factor in post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding. Nevertheless, unfortunately, there still
are times when we create false dilemmas in that we
continue to see justice and peace in opposition to each
other, with the result that the national and international
institutions of criminal justice do not yet receive all the
necessary support on the ground.

As one concrete measure to improve that
situation, we suggest compiling a set of rules and best
practices in the area of fighting impunity and making
them available to mediators involved in peace
processes. That would help to avoid the occurrence of
unnecessary tensions between peace negotiations and
the fight against impunity.

Concerning the question of sanctions regimes, in
late May we had the opportunity, on behalf of
Germany, Sweden and Switzerland, to submit to the
Security Council the conclusions and recommendations
of a study on strengthening targeted sanctions through
the creation of clear and equitable procedures. In the
interests of time, I shall not repeat what we have
already stated before the Council. Greater detail can be
found in the written text of my statement.

06-4010]
I shall limit myself here to repeating that various
improvements must be undertaken and that, in the
opinion of the Swiss Government, the right to an
effective remedy requires a review system with an
independent and impartial authority that would at least
be able to issue recommendations to the relevant
sanctions committees.

