Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): The Italian
delegation fully endorses the statement made by the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union, and would
like to add some comments on particular aspects of this
issue.

Afghanistan is a country that in its long history has
been afflicted by recurring tensions, heightened at times
by the interference of foreign countries. But this
interference has always been repelled by the deeply
independent character of the Afghan people. This is both
ancient and modern history. Events of the past 15 years
have left Afghanistan torn asunder by clashes between the
various factions and prey to a civil war to which no end
is in sight. Sadly, all available indications point to a
probable resumption of hostilities in the coming days and
weeks, with the arrival of spring making the mountain
passes that dot the countryside once again viable. But if
there is a lesson that can be learned from recent history,
it is that a lasting solution to the Afghan crisis cannot be
found on the military level but must instead be the fruit
of a consultation process and of political mediation, not
only between the main faction leaders, but also among the
various components of Afghan society.
For many years the neighbouring countries have
born the burden of millions of Afghan refugees in their
territories, at a high cost. The number of refugees has
gone down recently but still poses considerable problems
for the host countries. We must appreciate the efforts
made by these countries and be grateful for the welcome
they have extended to the refugees. These countries are
indeed the most interested in finding a stable and lasting
solution to the Afghan crisis, as a political settlement
would also allow the return of the refugees to their
homes.

In recent months the Taliban movement has gained
control over an ever wider swath of the country, including
the capital. The decisions made thus far by the Taliban

 

leaders in Kabul have certainly been cause for alarm in the
international community, especially in terms of respect for
the human rights of women. It is worthwhile to repeat
forcefully that these rights are the common heritage of all
humanity, and must always be respected. We also note that
the international community knows very little about the
structure of that movement, and can only base its judgment
on the decisions and behaviour that have raised such alarm.

Italy fully supports the mediation activities of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, and is also
convinced that close coordination between all the
negotiating efforts is needed. We hope that these initiatives
can bring about significant improvements and register
concrete results. In this perspective we believe that the
Secretary-General's useful initiative to convene a new
meeting on Afghanistan of the countries most directly
interested in the Afghan crisis can help lead to innovative
proposals and to indications of ways to find a solution to
the crisis.

In view of its traditional friendly relations with
Afghanistan, Italy has continued over these years to provide
an uninterrupted flow of humanitarian assistance to the
country through contributions to the specialized agencies
and other United Nations structures. We look forward to the
conference on coordinating humanitarian assistance
activities to be held in Geneva on 21 April. It is of the
utmost importance that this coordination be implemented in
a way that allows the assistance to be equitably distributed
to the entire Afghan population.

Italy is particularly concerned by the growing
dimensions of drug production in Afghanistan. This is not
a new phenomenon, but the disintegration of any semblance
of central power and the economic ruin of the country have
led larger segments of the population to undertake this
harmful activity. The action that the factions take to cut
back on the cultivation of drug crops is a litmus test of
their will to participate constructively in the rebuilding of
a new State that is fully entitled to be part of the
international community.

In closing, let me reiterate Italy's determination to
participate in the search for a compromise solution that will
allow a gradual stabilization of the country, a greater flow
of humanitarian assistance, and a much-needed
improvement in the living conditions of the people.

