Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like first to thank the
Secretary-General, President-elect Gusmao and Chief
Minister Alkatiri for their important statements this
morning. Ireland warmly congratulates the President-
elect on his election. We also wish to congratulate the
people of East Timor for the way in which they have
taken ownership of democratic structures, substance
and spirit.

I would also wish to join other colleagues in
expressing warm thanks to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
the Secretary-General's Special Representative, for the
very special work he is about to complete. We welcome
the decision to appoint Ambassador Sharma as the next
Special Representative for East Timor and look
forward to working with him. Ireland is also grateful to
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
comprehensive introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General this morning.

Ireland associates itself fully with the statement

which will be delivered shortly by the representative of
Spain on behalf of the European Union.
It is only a matter of weeks before East Timor
becomes an independent State. This will be an occasion
of real joy for the friends of East Timor around the
world, including in my country. The principle of self-
determination is one to which we attach great
importance. This, combined with strong support in
Ireland for the people of East Timor, has ensured that
developments there have been followed closely in my
country for many years.

The main task before us today is the
consideration of the Secretary-General's recent report
on the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET). In particular, we need to
address the plan for the successor mission, the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). My delegation welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General's approach to future United Nations
involvement in East Timor remains fully consistent
with the strong proposals he first outlined last October.
We believe that the Secretary-General justifies these
proposals well in his most recent report. We agree that
the continued United Nations presence should be a
robust one.

The report is clear in pointing out the very real
needs of East Timor in the area of public
administration, internal security and law enforcement,
and external security and border control. There is an
enormous capacity-building challenge - the
construction of institutions of State from the very
foundation up - which can be met only by strong and
sustained international support.

In this respect, Ireland is generally content with
the phased timetable of the United Nations follow-on
operation. This is not the occasion to enter into detail.
However, the timetable recognizes that there is still
plenty of work to do, and we believe that it provides
for measured assessments to be made along the way.
We further believe that, in its approach to the United
Nations post-independence presence, the Council
should err on the side of caution and demonstrate
generous amounts of patience.

The development of East Timor's relationship
with Indonesia is of great importance to it, including to
its economic well-being. We wish to see both countries
working to improve links and to resolve outstanding
bilateral issues, including the delineation of the border
and cooperation on bringing to justice those
responsible for serious crimes. Ireland has welcomed
the steps taken by the Government of Indonesia to
bring to justice the perpetrators of gross human rights
violations in East Timor. However, we can only echo
the Secretary-General's regret that the jurisdiction of
the Ad Hoc Human Rights Tribunal has not been
expanded to include several significant cases that
occurred in 1999.

Also of great importance is the need for the East
Timorese people to address the internal differences that
peaked during the violence of September 1999. The
establishment of the Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation is a very positive step in this regard,
although it will require financial and personnel support
if it is to have a substantial impact.

We are watching in great admiration as the people
of East Timor progress towards independence. The
latest report of the Secretary-General gives a strong
sense of the real advances being made. It has to be
borne in mind, though, that many hard tests lie ahead.
East Timor is one of the least developed countries in
the region. It needs support, as the President-elect and
Chief Minister emphasized this morning, and it must
receive that support.

In this regard, Ireland is one of those already
involved in a range of development cooperation
programmes in East Timor. This has been the case
since 1999, and last year we opened a representative
office in Dili. Our experience there has shown us that
bilateral aid is crucial to the future development of East
Timor. East Timor has already been identified by
Ireland's development aid programme as a priority for
reconstruction and rehabilitation activity. That
cooperation aims to alleviate the material consequences
of the recent conflict and contribute towards the
immediate needs of political development and
institutional capacity-building, while also helping to
create the conditions for an appropriate longer-term
engagement by Ireland Aid in East Timor.

As we move towards East Timor's independence,
we should also dwell today, as others have, a little on
the honourable role played by the United Nations. The
exceptional work carried out by United Nations
personnel before and since September 1999, together
with the determination of the people of East Timor,
have brought us to the point where the Secretary-
General can now propose that we move to a new stage.
Today is, therefore, also a time to pay warm tribute to
all involved over the years in United Nations efforts.

I also want to express the gratitude of my
authorities to the United Nations and Member States
for the expressions of sympathy we have received
following the recent death in East Timor of Private
Peadar O Flatharta, a member of the Irish contingent of
UNTAET. The tragic loss reminds us of the risks that
United Nations peacekeepers assume in the service of
the United Nations.

Ireland will continue its support for East Timor
on a bilateral basis and through the multinational
organizations of which we will soon both be members.
Before then, though, we wish to reiterate our support
for the Secretary-General's observations and
recommendations for the United Nations continued
engagement with East Timor. We believe and hope that
the Council will do likewise. In doing so, we can allow
the President-elect and the Chief Minister to leave here
today with confidence that the international community
will continue to stand by and support East Timor and
her people.

