Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to thank you, Sir, and
your delegation for organizing this seminal and timely
debate. We thank you, especially, for the concept note
(S/2015/543, annex) that you have provided to guide our
discussion.

We are greatly indebted to the Secretary-General,
the Prime Minister of Jamaica, the Prime Minister of
Samoa and the Minister of Finance of Seychelles for
sharing their profound and insightful perspectives on
the peace and security challenges confronting small
island developing States (SIDS). These challenges are
aggravated by the inherent geographical circumstances
of SIDS, including their relatively small size,
remoteness, narrow resource base and exposure to
environmental degradation. In turn, these factors
conspire to impede not only their socioeconomic and
security aspirations, but especially their capacity to
fulfil some of their international obligations.

Over the years, SIDS have consistently demonstrated
their resolve to address their problems. However,
due to the transnational nature of those problems,
the imperative of forging creative partnerships for
effective redress at both the regional and international
levels, is crucial. What we believe is indicated is that
strengthening regional cooperation mechanisms among
SIDS is pivotal in addressing their unique difficulties
and bridging their capacity gaps. The Caribbean
Community, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Indian
Ocean Commission are notable institutions that can
fill those important roles. We acknowledge their
achievements in functional cooperation in various
sectors, including education, health, culture, sports and
security. They have also recorded an appreciable level
of coordination in foreign trade and economic policies.

At the international level, the significant role
played by the Alliance of Small Island States, as an
all-encompassing representative group, provides
the necessary impetus for protecting the interests of
SIDS. Through the activities of the Alliance of Small
Island States, United Nations Member States have
been regularly updated on the growing threats to the
peace and security of those States. That effort led to
the convening of three United Nations conferences on
SIDS, with significant outcomes: the 1994 Barbados
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States, the 2005 Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States and the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway of 2014.
We welcome those outcomes and urge Member States
and all stakeholders to work assiduously towards
implementation of the commitments made at the
conferences. We must also emphasize the imperative
for a more integrated approach to the sustainable
development goals of SIDS, especially an increase in
foreign direct investment.

The unique challenges facing SIDS in our time
deserve the special attention of the Council, as many
speakers before me have noted. Those challenges in
some cases clearly constitute threats to international
peace and security. The first step in that direction,
in our view, is to strengthen the partnership between
the Council and the small island developing States.
A mechanism for regular reporting to the Council on
developments that could impact the peace and security
of small island developing States could be instituted.
That, we believe, would facilitate the Council's
strategic responsiveness to the security concerns of
the small island developing States and determine the
level of assistance required to enhance their peace and
security needs.

Ultimately, we believe that broad-based support that

includes predictable financing from the international

community is essential for the development of SIDS.

We reiterate the need for increased multi-stakeholder

partnerships and a pragmatic approach towards

addressing the security challenges of SIDS. The

urgency of the threat to SIDS requires focus, deliberate
multilateral action. The unique mandate of the Security
Council places it in an undisputed position to lead that
great effort.

