Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
which forms part of the ongoing effort of the
international community and the Council to promote
the protection of civilians in conflict areas, in
particular the protection of vulnerable groups,
including women and children. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for participating in this
important debate, and to thank Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his important
briefing to the Council.

Despite the repeated condemnations of the
deliberate targeting of civilians, acts of violence and
attacks against them, forced displacement of civilians
and the deliberate denial of humanitarian access, the
world continues to witness an increase in the tragic
daily suffering of civilians in areas of armed conflict
and areas under foreign occupation. That suffering
includes displacement, which has become one of the
most prominent features of contemporary armed
conflict. Its effects last for years, causing decades of
suffering and deprivation and a daily struggle for
survival. It also includes the collateral killing of
civilians in areas of conflict or of military operations.
Innocent people are killed simply because they happen
to be near areas affected by armed conflict. All parties
in such areas must be called upon to take all necessary
measures to prevent harming civilians in accordance
with the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949.
The principle of the responsibility to protect, as
set out in the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document
(General Assembly resolution 60/ 1) essentially stresses
that each State has the responsibility to protect its

citizens and individuals subject to its jurisdiction from
acts of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. While the principle of the
responsibility to protect reflects a noble human value,
it is easily exploited and abused; this prompts us to be
cautious in dealing with this principle. Our objectives
must therefore not be politicized; they must transcend
individual interests and reflect pure humanitarian
motives.

The report of the Secretary-General notes
progress in the promotion of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. In this regard, we commend United
Nations peacekeeping operations in areas of armed
conflict for their continuous efforts to protect civilians,
despite the serious lack of capacity and security that
has resulted in the death of many peacekeepers in areas
affected by conflict.

Here, we recall the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, with which we fully agree, on
strengthening the role of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in the field of providing humanitarian
assistance, and on the importance of creating the
security conditions that would allow them to provide
such assistance. We also commend regional
organizations for the role they play in the protection of
civilians in areas of armed conflict and urge them to
continue their important role in mediation, conflict
resolution and peacekeeping, including intervention to
prevent innocent civilians in areas of armed conflict
from being deprived of humanitarian assistance.

The report of the Secretary-General depicts
worrying trends, such as the frequent targeting of
civilians, which has become tantamount to a tool of
intimidation, and the collateral killing that claims the
lives of many innocent civilians due to inaccurate
targeting and mistaken identity. Such trends prompt us
to call upon the parties to conflicts and international
troops to abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

Another cause for concern is the risks posed by
armed conflict mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General that especially affect the elderly and
people with disabilities, since they have less access to
assistance. A vivid example of this was the fate of the
elderly and the disabled in southern Lebanon who were
unable to flee the fighting in 2006 and faced the risk of
getting wounded or killed. At this juncture, we would
like to stress the need for the elderly and people with
disabilities to receive the attention they require as part
of the efforts of national authorities and humanitarian
actors who provide protection and assistance to
civilians.

Ensuring access to humanitarian assistance is the
greatest challenge facing us today. As expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report, such access is a
prerequisite for action and protection in the
humanitarian field and is a means of escape for
civilians in areas of armed conflict, including areas
under foreign occupation. Despite the fact that
international humanitarian law requires the parties to
the conflict to authorize the rapid passage of
humanitarian assistance and facilitate its access to
civilians in need, a clear breach of those international
obligations is taking place today.

Our world today bears witness to the arbitrary
denial of access to humanitarian assistance. This can
take multiple forms, such as the internal checkpoints
set up in the occupied Palestinian territories that
restrict access to vital humanitarian assistance, in
addition to other examples that we see daily.

Another cause for concern is the growing
phenomenon of impunity in cases of sexual violence
against women and children in areas of conflict, be
they crimes committed by the parties to the conflict or
by United Nations peacekeepers. Reports indicate that
States experiencing cases of impunity suffer from
inefficient and weak investigative processes and
prosecution. That fact confirms the need to provide the
financial and technical support necessary to strengthen
national capacities in the administration of justice in
States within whose jurisdictions those acts of sexual
violence take place.

The humanitarian consequences of the use of
cluster munitions in armed conflicts have become a
major challenge before us today. The impact from their
killing, maiming and destruction of livelihood lasts for
years. Such weapons also destroy fields, crops and
sources of income for a whole generation. This
situation calls for concerted efforts to put an end to
their use once and for all.

What we need is not new mechanisms, for that
would be a waste of time and effort. To improve the
condition of civilians in areas of armed conflict and
areas under foreign occupation, we need effective,
on-the-ground implementation of actions and measures
contained in relevant Security Council resolutions. We

stress, in this regard, that parties to armed conflicts,
State and non-State actors alike, bear the responsibility
to fully comply with their obligations under
international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions, as the responsibility to protect civilians
rests first and foremost with the States concerned.

Finally, we would like to reaffirm our full
commitment to promoting and strengthening the
protection of civilians in areas of conflict in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions.

