Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Today's meeting on the
situation in the Central African Republic affords the
Security Council another opportunity to focus on the
challenges of post-conflict peace-building and how the
international community can become constructively
involved in the process of sustaining peace in the
aftermath of a conflict. The Jamaican delegation
welcomes this positive trend of open meetings which
seek to focus on the specific needs of post-conflict
societies. These meetings should serve as pointers in
refining an effective strategy to be adopted by the
United Nations in peacekeeping operations.

We are pleased to welcome Mr. Cheikh Tidiane
Sy, the Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mats Karlsson, Vice-President of the World Bank,
and Mr. Frederick Lyons, Acting Deputy Director of
the African Bureau of the United Nations Development
Programme. We also look forward to hearing from the
Minister for Reconciliation of the Central African
Republic.

We are very pleased to have in our midst the
Foreign Minister of Mauritius. We thank him for his
remarks, which addressed the situation in the Central
African Republic in a wider African context.

My delegation supports the elements of the
presidential statement which is to be issued at the
conclusion of this debate. I will therefore confine my
remarks to a few pertinent issues.

The commitment to peace does not end with the
cessation of hostilities in a conflict. Rather, the true
measure of long-term peace involves the building of
democratic, social and economic institutions and
practices in order to consolidate and maintain peace. It
involves national efforts for reconciliation, tolerance
and the peaceful management of differences. Coupled
with this, there must be a strong political will to effect
change on the part of political leaders, as well as the
requisite financial backing to put into effect sustainable
programmes which will ensure that the gains of peace
are not eroded.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
Central African Republic, as well as the presentations
made earlier in this debate, clearly attest to the critical
need for paying concerted and focused attention to the
deep-seated root causes of conflict in the Central
African Republic. While my delegation recognizes the
undoubted progress that has been made in recent years,
we remain deeply concerned about the political
tensions between the ruling party and the opposition,
which no doubt have had a negative impact on the
political landscape in the country. The reports have
demonstrated just how tenuous the political situation
is, and that this poses an obstacle to the fledgling
democratic institutions. We therefore join in calling for
a return to dialogue, as the continuing tensions can
only serve to compromise the progress made towards
the consolidation of peace in the country.

For its part, the Security Council cannot sit idly
by as the situation deteriorates. As we have noted on
previous occasions, the successful outcome ofthe post-
conflict transition in the Central African Republic will
stand as a test of the international community's resolve
to enable formerly war-torn countries to establish the
institutions necessary to prevent a return of conflict. A
partnership between the Security Council, the
Secretariat, United Nations funds, programmes and
agencies and the Bretton Woods institutions is
therefore of critical importance.

We appreciate the tremendous strides made by the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in the
Central African Republic (BONUCA) in fulfilling its
mandate, despite the limited resources. We commend in
particular the Office's efforts to strengthen national
capacities through training in human rights and
humanitarian law. It is clear from the Secretary-
General's report, however, that much remains to be
done in institutionalizing the administration ofjustice.
It is also worrying to learn that, owing to the lack of
the necessary resources, there has been little progress
in critical programmes such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. We urge the
international partners to honour the commitments that
have been made so that BONUCA's efforts can be more
effective.

Jamaica welcomes the steps already undertaken
by the World Bank in funding post-conflict peace-
building projects in the Central African Republic. This
includes the decision to approve a partial waiver of the
conditions attached to the release of the $5 million
second tranche of the fiscal consolidation credit.
External debt, however, remains a serious challenge for
the Central African Republic, and the initiatives
undertaken by the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund to help the Government to address this
and other related issues are steps in the right direction.

It will be recalled that in May of last year several
Governments, in collaboration with the World Bank,
convened a donors meeting to sensitize the
international community and lead it to make tangible
contributions to fund post-conflict peace-building
efforts in the Central African Republic. It is
regrettable, however, that so far the objective of that
meeting has not been achieved. We urge the
international community to fulfil the pledges made, in
order to bring the transition to peace closer to a reality.

The impact of conflicts in the region on the
situation in the Central African Republic is also one of
great concern, as it is evident that the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has added to the
general instability in the region. Indeed, the Secretary-
General in his report has noted the negative economic
and social impact of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and noted that this is
compromising the progress that has been made towards
the consolidation of the fragile peace and security in
the Central African Republic. This has been
exacerbated by the flow of refugees across the porous
borders between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic. As the Secretary-
General's report clearly illustrates, the conditions of
refugees on the southern border of the Central African
Republic are indeed dire.

It is clear that only a comprehensive approach to
the conflicts in the region will effectively stem the
spill-over effects of those conflicts. We also concur
with the Secretary-General that a solution to the crisis
in the subregion depends on the restoration of peace in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Amara Essy
as Special Envoy to assess the situation, and we look
forward to a full report on his recommendations. We
also commend the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
humanitarian agencies that have sought to bring relief
to the refugees and internally displaced persons.

Finally, my delegation continues to believe that
the path to peace in the Central African Republic,
though a challenging one, can be reached. Let us view
the deliberations of today's meeting as a demonstration
of our resolve to ensure that the gains achieved so far
will not be fruitless. Let us not become complacent or
lax in our efforts to bring hope to the people of the
Central African Republic.

