The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In this regard the Security
Council recognizes that the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects has
hampered the peaceful settlement of disputes,
fuelled such disputes into armed conflict and
contributed to the prolongation of such armed
conflicts.

"The Security Council notes with grave
concern that the destabilizing accumulation and
illicit manufacture, trade and circulation of small
arms and light weapons in many regions of the
world increase the intensity and duration of
armed conflicts, undermine the sustainability of
peace agreements, impede the success of
peacebuilding, frustrate efforts aimed at the
prevention of armed conflict, hinder considerably
the provision of humanitarian assistance and
compromise the effectiveness of the Security
Council in discharging its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

"The Council reaffirms the inherent right to
individual or collective self-defence consistent
with Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations.

"The Security Council notes the report of
the Secretary-General to the Council entitled
'Small Arms' (S/2006/109) of 17 February 2006,
and recalls the statements of its President of
17 February 2005 (S/PRST/2005/7), of
19 January 2004 (S/PRTS/2004/1), of 31 October
2002 (S/PRST/2002/30), of 31 August 2001
(S/PRST/200l/2l) and of 24 September 1999
(S/PRST/l999/28).

"The Security Council underlines the need
to address this issue regularly and in this regard
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Council on a biennial basis beginning in 2008 a
report on small arms containing his analysis,
observations and recommendations as well as his
observations on the implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All its Aspects, to facilitate its
further consideration of the matter.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
implement the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and the International Instrument
to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms
and Light Weapons, in order to make real
progress in preventing, combating and eradicating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
In particular, States are encouraged to strengthen
physical security and stockpile management,
destroy surplus and obsolete small arms and light
weapons, ensure that all small arms and light
weapons are marked at the time of manufacture
and import, and strengthen export and border
controls and control brokering activities.

"The Security Council encourages increased
efforts to end the illicit trade of small arms and
light weapons at the national, regional and
international level.

"The Security Council calls on all Member
States to abide by their obligations to observe the
arms embargoes established under relevant
Security Council resolutions."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/24.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
07-4046]
