Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun for his briefing, which
has made clear that sanctions are a Vital part of the
Security Council's arsenal. As Article 41 of the United
Nations Charter makes clear, they give real effect to
our decisions, turning words spoken in this Chamber
into tangible actions against those who threaten
international peace and security.

They are not our first resort, nor are they a
measure that we can ever take lightly, but we know that
sanctions work. They helped bring peace and security
to countries like Liberia and Sierra Leone. They helped
bring Iran to the negotiating table, which led in turn to
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. And sanctions
continue to play a Vital role in the fight against Da'esh
and Al-Qaida in Iraq, Syria and beyond. All of these
examples illustrate not just the efficacy of sanctions but
the importance of using them together with the other
tools at our disposal.

The Iran deal was not forged from sanctions alone.
Our victory over Da'esh will not be secured through the
hard work of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, alone.
Sanctions must sit alongside all our other tools: direct
political dialogue, mediation, peacekeeping and special
political missions. And just as with all other tools of
the Council, it is important that sanctions remain fit
for purpose.

So I want to thank you, Mr. President, for bringing
this issue before the Council again so that we can consider
if there are further ways to improve our collective work
on sanctions. All future work on sanctions should build
on the great deal of valuable work that has already been

carried out by States and stakeholders on this issue.
In particular, I want to highlight both the work of the
United Nations informal working group from 2006 and
also the high-level review of United Nations sanctions
led by Sweden and other sponsors. They have produced
good recommendations.

But as we all know, building the political
commitment required for effective follow-up has been
challenging. This issue of political will applies above
all when it comes to the serious implementation of
sanctions. For such measures to be truly effective, it is
absolutely essential that all States implement them fully.
It is not good enough just for the majority of countries
to do so. A chain is only as strong as its weakest link.

All Member States must recognize and respect
the fact that there can be no ifs, no buts: sanctions
agreed in the Council are legally binding Chapter VII
obligations. I recognize that even when there is strong
political will, implementation can be challenging, not
just for States but also for businesses. There is already
much good work in this area: outreach from sanctions
committees, the development of networks and capacity-
building, the sharing of information and best practices
among States. But a great deal more can still be done,
especially on the most important of sanctions dossiers,
such as North Korea, where the number of States
reporting on implementation still falls far short of what
it needs to be.

That is why, Mr. President, we welcome further
consideration of your delegation's recent suggestion
for a Secretary-General's report on cross-cutting
issues related to sanctions. If this report builds on the
existing work I have referred to, draws lessons from
current sanctions regimes and offers concrete practical
suggestions on how to improve implementation and
effectiveness, then we think that this could be a valuable
addition to our sanctions work, one that will help set a
clear agenda for further improvements, building on the
high-level review and other efforts.

There is, quite simply, no clearer reminder of
the need to strengthen our sanctions capability that
the current situation that we confront in relation to
North Korea. Here we face a State that continues to
act in flagrant violation of multiple Security Council
resolutions, a State that continues to threaten not just
its region but the whole world in its reckless pursuit
of nuclear weapons and illegal missiles. Their latest
ICBM. launch last week suggests a capability that puts
most Security Council members, including the United
Kingdom, within range.

I have said before in this Chamber, but it bears
repeating today, that we as the Security Council must
act and must be prepared to use sanctions to raise the
cost to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of
pursuing these illegal actions.

