Mr. Hume (United States of America): First, I
would like to join colleagues in welcoming the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr.
Okidundu, to this meeting of the Council. We would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Affairs, Mr. Guehenno, for his report to
the Council.

We are also pleased to welcome the Under-
Secretary-General in the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Otunnu, back to the Security
Council; he is a friend and an asset to every Member of
the United Nations. More important, he is a friend and
an asset to children in armed conflicts throughout the
world. We are grateful that he undertook his mission to
Central Africa, and we are grateful for his briefing this
morning. I would like to echo his comments, and those
of my colleagues, on the depravity of using children as
soldiers in the Great Lakes conflict. We cannot separate
that issue from the wider pursuit of peace in the region,
and we must recognize that, even in a climate in which
human rights are routinely violated, the cynical use of
children to fight the wars of adults merits special
opprobrium.

The overall strategy adopted by the Security
Council has been to support the commitments made by
the parties as expressed in the Lusaka Agreement and
in subsequent statements. The United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) is the embodiment of the
Council's support. The success of our actions depends
directly on the commitments made by the parties and
on the performance by the parties of those
commitments. They have all made promises that must
be kept for peace and progress to be restored.

That overall strategy includes three inter-locking
parts. First, peace in the Congo needs the democratic
legitimacy that can come from the proposed national
dialogue aiming at national elections. Cooperation and
compromise by all concerned parties will be required
in order to achieve this essential goal. We must
redouble our efforts in support of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, for this is the exercise that will lead to the
rebuilding of the Congolese State. In our view, there
can be no State without a working justice system, and
there will be no justice in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo without legitimate State authority.

The second inter-locking part is that peace
depends on the end of the threats posed by the so-
called negative forces. The United States shares the
concern of the Security Council at recent reports that
elements of the former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex- FAR)/Interahamwe, the Front pour la defense de la
democratie (FDD) and the Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL) are moving eastward towards
Rwanda, Burundi and Tanzania. Nothing could be more
destabilizing than renewed incursions by these groups
into their countries of origin. It is, in our view, morally
indefensible to aid or to abet the movement of these
forces back to Rwanda or Burundi. Beyond that, it is
dangerous to the entire peace process. The only answer
lies in cooperation between regional States on
cessation of arming, followed by the disarming and
disbanding of these groups, with individual members
demobilized and repatriated or resettled.

There are United Nations Security Council
prohibitions on the provision of arms to the ex-
FAR/Interahamwe, resolutions that, in our view, should
be strengthened. The draft resolution currently under
negotiation among Council members calls on all
Governments to halt the provision of arms to the FDD
and the FNL. It may be that those measures alone will
not bring peace to the region, but history suggests that
absent those measures, the peace we desire will be
even harder to attain.

Thirdly, peace requires the withdrawal of all
foreign forces. We welcome the recent progress in this
direction, but, frankly, it is not enough. Those parties
that have not made detailed commitments to withdraw
their forces need to do so now. There must be no
backsliding. While this process cannot be completed
without security cooperation among the State parties,
each individually has a duty to make that cooperation
effective.

I want to raise a point emphasized by the recent
Security Council mission: the need to end impunity for
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We all agree that impunity should no
longer be acceptable in this crisis, but now we need to
enter into a discussion of how we go about ending it.
As in the case of our wider involvement in resolving
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
our first response should be to turn to our partners in
the peace process. We must remind all of their
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
we must work to ensure that those obligations are met.

As already raised by Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and Special Representative Otunnu in the
most eloquent terms, the parties have obligations under
the decisions of the Council and under international
humanitarian law to respect civilian rights. Kisangani
must be demilitarized, and the Congo River must be
reopened for commerce. Most profoundly, these duties
owed by the parties are owed to the Congolese people.
We require that these actions be taken now.

Finally, we all recognize the extraordinary
performance of the United Nations Mission in the
Congo. With limited resources to cover a vast and
undeveloped country, MONUC has done a superb job.
We believe the Secretary-General has given us an
excellent report that balances the need for United
Nations action with the need for action on the part of
the Lusaka signatories. The Secretary-General's
recommendations keep MONUC within achievable
tasks and set realistic benchmarks for future
commitments. We are pleased to support the report and
the current draft resolution.

