Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Before beginning my
presentation I too would like personally to thank Grace
Akallo for being with us today and sharing her
touching story. I assure her that her moving words and
her personal history will further guide us in our
deliberations.

At the outset, allow me to thank the Security
Council presidency, the delegation of Mexico, for
organizing this open debate. Croatia welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/158) and
commends the important work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
of the many non-governmental organizations working
in the field. Their contribution is of tremendous
importance, since it gives voice to the individual
children who are or will become victims of these grave
violations.

As a member of the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
Croatia has had the opportunity to witness the
importance of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. The mechanism requires the Council to
react to situations where recruitment and use of
children take place. By listing in the annexes of his
reports parties to armed conflict that recruit and use
children, the Secretary-General gives the Security
Council and its Working Group an opportunity to use a
variety of tools in response to those violations.

However, this mechanism is triggered only if the
recruitment and use of child soldiers occurs. In other
words, if parties to a conflict commit one of the five
grave violations against children other than the
recruitment or use of children, they will not be listed in
the report and the Security Council will not have the
opportunity to act. In practice, that means that the
Security Council will not request anything from those
parties in a conflict area where children are being
raped, where schools and hospitals are being attacked,
where children are being deliberately killed or maimed
and where the abduction of children is ongoing.

Croatia therefore welcomes the recommendation
of the Secretary-General that the Security Council
expand the criteria for the annexes of his reports to
include parties that commit rape and other grave sexual
violence against children in armed conflict, without
prejudice to the possibility of further expanding the
criteria in the future to include other violations.

An atmosphere of impunity and lack of
accountability will allow perpetrators to continue
hurting children in various ways. Without any real
repercussions or the threat of targeted measures from
the Security Council, perpetrators have no reason to
stop their acts.

Croatia understands that all grave violations need
equal attention in the Council. We would, however,
like to emphasize that children in situations of armed
conflict are particularly vulnerable, and that intentional
acts of rape and sexual violence carry with them long-
term repercussions both for the individual children and
for the societies they live in. Croatia is appalled by the
fact that children represent one third of those
brutalized by rape. Croatia is also deeply concerned
about UNESCO's finding that the number of attacks on
schools, students and teachers increased sixfold
between 2003 and 2006. These deliberate acts, together
with many reported incidents involving the throwing of
acid on girl's faces, aim to strip children of their
education, leaving them even more vulnerable to future
violations.

We are alarmed about the numerous incidents
where humanitarian workers have been killed,
abducted, beaten or threatened. Such acts, as well as
the looting of aid convoys, deny children life-saving
humanitarian assistance and must be stopped.

In order to ensure the protection of children in
armed conflict, the Security Council can show its
commitment through the possible adoption of a new
resolution on children and armed conflict. This new
resolution could give the Council an opportunity to
expand the trigger of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism to include rape and other grave sexual
violence against children. It could also authorize
relevant United Nations personnel to enter into a
dialogue with armed forces and groups in order to
verify the implementation of time-bound action plans
and could request the Secretary-General to include
information on the implementation of all requests made
in the conclusions of the Security Council Working
Group.

Moreover, Croatia believes that the Security
Council should consider referring individual cases of
grave violations against children in armed conflict to
the International Criminal Court, especially where
national systems fail to address these cases.

Finally, allow me to express our gratitude to all
stakeholders who have been working on the protection
of children. Only by combining our efforts can we
hope to reach the common goal of a world where
children are neither victims nor targets in armed
conflict.

