Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): My delegation
congratulates you, Mr. President, on your successful
presidency for the month of June. As you are about to
conclude your tenure at the Security Council, we would
like to thank you for the cooperation and friendship
that you and your Mission have extended to us during
the past two years. I would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome and thank Ambassador David
Shearer, Mr. Andrew Gilmour and Ms. Minagano for
their interventions and their reporting on the situation
in South Sudan.

On behalf of the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan, we welcome the report of the Secretary
General (S/2019/49l), which covers the period from
February to May 2019. We want to reiterate that
confidence-building measures between the signatories
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan are improving
steadily and that, as the Secretary-General reported,
the revitalized peace agreement mechanisms and
committees are meeting in Juba as scheduled.

While Mr. Riek Machar is not in Juba, I can assure
the Council that close contact is being maintained
between him and President Salva Kiir. We were all,
of course, disappointed, as we were hoping that they
would fly together from Rome to Juba. Nevertheless,
we think that he will be in Juba before November.

As the Council is aware, the implementation
needs major funding. As reported, the Government of
the Republic of South Sudan has pledged to allocate
$100 million to jump start the implementation of
the peace agreement. Already some $2 million has
been spent towards food and cantonment preparation
activities in greater Upper Nile and Bahr el-Ghazal.
Challenges exist, however. The peace implementation
needs technical assistance and experts, which we hope
the international community will provide.

In conclusion, we would like to thank the region and
those international donors who have been supporting
the revitalized peace agreement in terms of money,
humanitarian support and personnel.

