Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, Chair of the
Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their presentations to the Council and
for their efforts and concern. We welcome the presence
of Mr. Samura Kamara, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone.

Sierra Leone has almost become a successful
pioneer in multilateralism. It has brought together the
will of a people and its authorities in order to build
a unified society in peace through the cooperation
and assistance of various regional and subregional
actors and the United Nations system, in particualr
the Peacebuilding Commission. A common strategic
vision identified the priority areas for assistance,
which, together with international cooperation, made
it possible to build national capacity and enabled the
people of Sierra Leone again to find the path of peace
and development. UNIPSIL leaves Sierra Leone with
the satisfaction ofhaving accomplished its mandate and
in the hope that the lessons learned and good practices
can be of benefit to other situations under the Council's
consideration.

A crucial stage has come to an end. However, the
task is not complete. Sierra Leone still faces challenges
and outstanding issues to resolve. In order to cooperate
with the authorities in such areas, Sierra Leone will
continue to enjoy the support of the United Nations
country team. In particular, the timetable outlined
for constitutional reform, security sector reform, the
conflict-prevention and human rights and rule of law
programmes and the implementation of the property
schedule must be maintained. Likewise, we must
continue to address the issues of poverty, corruption
and accountability. Such efforts must be completed so
that what has so painstakingly been achieved becomes
irreversible. The international financial institutions
and the international community will be a fundamental
pillar of this new stage.

I would like to conclude by thanking all the staff
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone and of United Nations funds and
programmes, as well as regional and international
actors, for their dedication and work. We truly
congratulate the people and Government of Sierra
Leone on their readiness for and commitment to peace
and development. My country welcomes the draft
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of the
meeting.

