Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the holding of this
meeting on Yemen, which allows the Security Council
once again to discuss the serious crisis that has been
raging in the country over the past several years.
First of all, my country thanks Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, and Mr. John Ging, Director of
the Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), for their excellent briefings, as well as
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, in his capacity as
Chair of the Sanctions Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014) for the work that he is doing.

I will centre my statement on two points: the
political process and the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. As we can see, the political process in Yemen
is currently at an impasse that has been the source of
concern and a call to action for the entire international
community for more than a year. The parties to the
conflict continue to clash, and the prospects for a
political settlement are becoming increasingly remote,
thereby running the risk that Yemen will become a
failed State, to the detriment of its people, who ask only
to live in peace and in the pursuit of happiness, like
other peoples throughout the world. Concerning that
escalation, which is jeopardizing the stability of the
entire region, Cote d'Ivoire calls on all parties to reach
an immediate cessation of hostilities and commit in a
meaningful way to a political settlement of the crisis.

It is up to the Yemeni parties to realize the tragedy
that their country is undergoing and take ownership of
the political process through an inclusive and sincere
dialogue, with the support of the United Nations
and the international community, with a view to
peacefully resolving the crisis. In that regard, Cote
d'Ivoire commends the work of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to Yemen in the framework of
consultations with the Yemeni parties, aimed at giving
new impetus to the political dialogue in that country.
C6te d'Ivoire welcomes the commitment of the parties
to the conflict to taking part in the forthcoming
peace talks in Muscat, and urges them to participate
meaningfully and in good faith in those talks.

C6te d'Ivoire also remains concerned about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. Indeed,
with more than 22 million people in need of emergency
humanitarian assistance, the situation in the country
appears to be one ofthe worst humanitarian crises in the
world, and the number of internally displaced persons
continues to rise. We are being told that approximately
2 million children - and, I might add, women - are
suffering from malnutrition. The dramatic worsening
of the humanitarian situation is a direct result of the
political, security and economic instability that Yemen
has experienced for more than three years. C6te
d'Ivoire calls on the parties to the conflict to reach
a ceasefire that would ensure the unhindered flow
of humanitarian assistance pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

My country urges the international community
to take appropriate measures to prevent the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. Cote
d'Ivoire accordingly welcomes the reopening by the
Arab coalition of the various ports, thereby allowing
for the delivery of food and enabling all forms of
humanitarian activity. My country requests that the
coalition do more insofar as it remains possible.
Moreover, the Ivorian delegation also welcomes the
United Nations launch of the Yemen 2018 humanitarian
response plan, to which the generous contributions of
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates are to be
commended, and calls on other donors to contribute to
funding the programme so as to meet the needs of the
Yemeni people.

Concerning violations and abuses committed by
the parties to the conflict, the gravity of which the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General underscored
earlier, my country calls for an immediate halt to such
violations and urges the parties present to facilitate the
mission of the Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen,
established by the United Nations Human Rights
Council in September 2017 under the provisions of
international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire thanks Special Envoy
of the Secretary General Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed
for his tireless efforts to resolve the crisis in Yemen
and commends him for the outstanding work that he has
been able to accomplish. At the same time, it welcomes
the appointment of the new Special Envoy, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, to whom it wishes him every success in the
accomplishment of his mission and assures him of its
full cooperation.

In order for all the good we wish for Yemen to
occur, the Council will have to work as one with a
single objective in mind: to put an end to the conflict
in that country.

