Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like briefly to explain the reasons that prompted my
delegation to abstain in the voting on resolution 2317
(2016), concerning extending the sanctions regime on
Somalia and Eritrea and on prolonging the mandate of
the Monitoring Group.

We would have liked the wording used in the
resolution to be more balanced in the light of the
information contained in the Monitoring Group's report,
namely, the lack of any evidence of Eritrea's support
to Al-Shabaab, as well as the positive developments
with regard to Djibouti prisoners. We think that clearer
criteria should be used when the Security Council takes
the necessary steps to review the sanctions imposed
against Eritrea - criteria that could encourage the
country to cooperate with the Council by showing
a clear commitment to uphold its various obligations
under Council resolutions. That should be done with a
View to promoting peace and security and stability in
the Horn ofAfrica, as well as to resolve all the concerns
of the countries of the region, in particular with regard
to the humanitarian aspect. In that regard, priority
should be accorded to providing information on the
fate of the Djibouti soldiers who disappeared during
military operations.

Allow me to state that our abstaining in the voting
is fully in line with our constant position on the issue of
sanctions. Sanctions must be used not as an end in and
of themselves, but as a necessary temporary measure
with clear limits used to achieve a political goal. It is
unacceptable for sanctions to continue endlessly and
without any time-bound criteria. It is also important
that we deal with sanctions in a sufficiently flexible
manner so that they can be reviewed in line with new
information on the ground.

Despite the efforts made and the flexibility we
demonstrated to achieve the compromise we wanted,
the resolution presented to the Council today did
not include the proposals of some Council members,
including my delegation. They included ideas reflecting
the trends to which I have just referred. That is why we
were unable to vote in favour of the resolution.

With regard to Somalia, my delegation underscores
yet again the importance of accepting the provisions set
out in the resolution with a view to ending the provision
of weapons to terrorist groups and cut off their sources
of funding, so as to allow for effective counter-terrorism
efforts and restore peace and security in the country.

