Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for collaborating with Angola and
Senegal in organizing today's open debate on piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, which
my delegation views as an important and timely topic
relevant to the development and security of Africa.

Piracy and armed robbery have a negative impact on
the social, economic and humanitarian situations in the
States affected in the Gulf of Guinea. They also affect
the hinterland and landlocked countries that depend on
the sea for exports and imports. Piracy is estimated to
result in an annual loss of $2 billion to the economy
of the West African subregion. We commend the
determination exhibited by the countries of the region,
including through the planning of regional coordination
centres designed to implement the integrated maritime
security strategy adopted in 2013. We also commend
the outcome of the extraordinary high-level meeting,
held in February, of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
aimed at facilitating the launch of the operations of the
Interregional Coordination Centre as soon as possible.

It is important to take note of the adoption by
the African Union (AU) in 2014 of the 2050 AU
Integrated Maritime Strategy, which seeks to move
Africa's maritime security practices and initiatives
from a subregional level, as represented by the 2009
Djibouti Code of Conduct in East Africa, the 2013
Yaounde Declaration in West Africa and the Southern
African Development Community's Maritime Security
Strategy, to a continental level. It thus recognizes AU
member States' common maritime challenges and
opportunities and addresses threats that negatively
affect social and economic development in African
States in an integrated manner. It sees the challenges of
maritime security as linked to development challenges
and calls for a broad approach to addressing them.
That is significant, given the fact that between them 38
African countries have a combined coastline of 26,000
nautical miles, that sea fishing contributes to the food
security of 200 million Africans and that more than
90 per cent of Africa's trade is seaborne, highlighting
the importance of addressing the threats that piracy and
armed robbery at sea pose for the continent.

My delegation wishes to recall the decision of
the AU Assembly of January 2014, which stressed
the need for strategic partnerships in support of
initiatives aimed at implementing Africa's Integrated
Maritime Strategy. It allows for the vital role played
by the international community in supporting national
and regional mechanisms for dealing with maritime
security challenges. In strengthening a meaningful
partnership between Africa and the international
community, we need substantial assistance from the
international community and intensified engagement
on the part of the United Nations in order to build on
Africa's efforts to deal in an integrated manner with the
problem of piracy on a basis of national and regional
ownership. Recent experiences in the Gulf of Aden
have shown how devastating the economic and security
consequences to the international community can be if
the challenge of piracy, including its root causes, is not
addressed in a determined and collaborative manner.

In that regard, my delegation wishes to emphasize
the importance of focusing on the root causes of piracy,
such as high levels of youth unemployment, poverty
and underdevelopment, and the consequent need for
strengthening development interventions, in line with
the African Union Agenda 2063, which identifies the
maritime economy as a major contributor to growth and
development in Africa.

South Africa strongly believes that it is urgent that
the Security Council send a strong and unequivocal
message to the end users of pirated goods. In that
regard, it is also important to start exploring the nexus
between the illicit pirate economy and formal global
stakeholders, including in the area of hydrocarbons.

