Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this very
important debate. We are very much aware of the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru.

Of course my delegation fully associates itself
with the statement to be made by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.

Today, I shall limit myself to several remarks.
First I shall speak on the context, and then I shall make
three proposals.

Regarding the context, I would say that at the
beginning of the 1990s, following the Ottawa
Convention on Anti-personnel Mines, we began to
think about small arms. We owe that primarily to the
initiative of African countries; I am thinking in
particular of Mali. Since then, very fortunately, the
international community has developed a number of
measures or instruments. The Economic Community of
West African States is playing an important role; the
European Union supports it and has adopted its own
strategy. I was interested in what Peru's Minister for
Foreign Affairs said about what is happening in Latin
America.

I believe that these regional initiatives
complement or support what we are doing at the global
level. In that regard, the United Nations Programme of
Action is obviously playing a fundamental role. I thank
Ms. Hannelore Hoppe for her report on this subject.
The International Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace Small Arms and Light Weapons was
a very important step. In short, there is a collective
effort, a regime that is being established. It cannot fail
to be very complex, because this is a very complex
problem.

My last observation on the context is that in
parallel, day by day, in the issues before the Security
Council, we see the importance - and, I would say,
the growing importance - of the issue of small arms

in the crises that we are dealing with. Some of our
African colleagues have already mentioned this.
Ambassador Wolcott Sanders also referred to it when
she mentioned the case of Darfur.

What is to be done? Permit me to make three
proposals to the Council.

The first is in keeping with the international
regime that is being gradually put in place. We believe
it is now time to go further in controlling small arms
and light weapons. In that regard, we support the
proposal of a treaty on the weapons trade, which is
based on a proposal from the non-governmental
organization Oxfam. We believe that the Programme of
Action review conference to be held in a few weeks'
time could be an opportunity to revisit this issue.
Indeed, we should take the opportunity of the First
Committee meeting in the autumn to begin a
negotiating process for such a convention.

I now turn to my second proposal. When we
consider in very specific terms what is happening in
the Security Council on each of the crises we are
addressing - particularly when we consider the work
of the sanctions monitoring committees - we realize
that there is a crucial problem, a practical problem, that
arises every time: the problem of the transport,
including aerial transport, of small arms and light
weapons. That is a very difficult problem to deal with,
because there is, of course, a legal trade and because
sometimes there is a lack of regulations, or regulations
that differ from State to State. There are also
inequalities in the capacities of States to manage their
airspace. In short, in legal and technical terms, it is a
very difficult problem to address. But at the same time,
our experience has shown that now is time to deal with
it. We propose, within the framework of the European
Union and in other contexts, to launch a process of
reflection on the various dimensions of this problem.
However, political will is also required, and I believe
that in this respect we need to make use of the practical
experience of our committees, for example those on
Liberia and on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which have made very useful comments on the issue.

Finally, let me turn to the third proposal. Here
once again the Security Council's experience has
demonstrated that, in our approach to the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons, we can no longer make

a clear distinction between the trade itself and the
environment in which it takes place, particularly with
respect to its financing.

How were small arms and light weapons funded
in Liberia and in Sierra Leone? Clearly, that took place
through the trade in diamonds and in other natural
resources. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it
is the plundering of natural resources that is fuelling
that illicit trade. We believe, therefore, that we need to
draw lessons here, and that, in the forthcoming stages
of our efforts to combat the scourge of small arms and
light weapons, we must - as was stated earlier by the
representative of the Congo - make increasingly clear
the link between the illegal trade in small arms and
light weapons and the broader issue of the plundering
of natural resources and the funding of such trade.

