Mr. Tesch (Australia): Australia joins with others
in thanking you, Mr. President, for this welcome
opportunity to discuss the future of peacekeeping,
particularly in the light of the recent increases in the
number of peacekeeping operations and of further
anticipated deployments of peacekeepers in the year
ahead. Time constraints prevent me from commenting
on more than a few fundamental principles that should
underpin peacekeeping operations.

Australia has been a core contributor to these
operations since they were first undertaken. Our
contribution in East Timor has been highly regarded
and serves to demonstrate that we remain committed to
carrying our share of the international peacekeeping
burden. We are conscious, though, of the growing
difficulties we all face as demands for new
peacekeeping resources increase. In this situation,
different models of burden sharing have become more
important - coalitions of the willing, for example,
which do what Blue Helmet peacekeepers may not be
able to do.

In this respect, it could be instructive, as many
delegations have noted today, to look closely at the
efforts of regional countries in maintaining peace and
security in their neighbourhoods. The Australian-led
mission in the Solomon Islands, to which most Pacific
Islands Forum countries have contributed, is an
example of what can be achieved on a regional basis.
The demand for more peacekeepers underlines the
urgency of resolving long-standing disputes. Much
more needs to be done on conflict prevention. And, as
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) suggested, early
intervention remains crucial if we are to avoid conflicts
and to prevent them from escalating. In all these areas
we need to ask if we are doing enough.

It goes without saying that efficient and cost-
effective management of peacekeeping operations is
crucial. Solid gains have been made under Mr.
Guehenno's leadership since the Brahimi report was
released, but we cannot rest on our laurels. We must
create a culture of continuous improvement. We must
also hold peacekeepers to the highest standards of
accountability, and we need to spare no effort to ensure
the safety and security of peacekeepers and United
Nations personnel. Real cooperation, including in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly, is
needed if we are to make progress in these areas.

The Security Council itself also bears a heavy
burden and must ensure that new missions have clear,
well-designed mandates, adequate resources and
credible success and exit strategies. Genuine
consultation with interested countries and with troop-
contributing countries will help the Council get its
strategies right, and governance issues need to be given
careful thought. We have regularly advocated that
justice and rule-of-law considerations be treated as
core components of United Nations missions. Australia
has done more than just advocate that. To help build
effective rule-of-law institutions, we are developing an
International Deployment Group of 500 Australian
police, available to participate in peacekeeping and
law-enforcement missions. We urge other Member
States to consider similar mechanisms.

The bottom line is that we have achieved much
since the Brahimi report was issued, though the
challenges before us have multiplied. We need,
therefore, to look beyond the Brahimi report. We must
continue to find smarter ways to address threats to our
security. Debates such as this can help. So too can an
open-minded attitude to new ideas and solutions, such
as, for example, any that may emerge from the
Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change.

