Mr. Li Junhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, Sir, I would like to thank you for personally
presiding over this meeting. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Nicolas Michel and Judge
Rosalyn Higgins for their statements.

At the United Nations summit last year, world
leaders reaffirmed their commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
to other norms of international relations as the
indispensable foundations of a more peaceful,
prosperous and just world. The establishment of fair,
democratic and harmonious international relations
based on international law is the aspiration of the
people of the world and the trend of our times.
Building a foundation based on the rule of law is of
significant importance to ending conflict and to
realizing stability and post-conflict reconstruction.

As the major United Nations organ responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council not only performs its functions
within the framework of international law, but also

plays an important role in strengthening international
law. From that perspective, there is no doubt that
today's meeting is timely and helpful.

Here I would like to stress the following points.
First, strengthening the rule of law during and after
conflicts is both a necessary prerequisite for peaceful
transition in the context of a conflict situation and a
fundamental guarantee for the consolidation of lasting
peace in the long run. In the absence of the rule of law,
there can be no genuine and lasting peace. At the same
time, we must also realize that strengthening the rule of
law is not merely a legal matter but is closely related to
political, economic and social factors. The various
aspects of post-conflict reconstruction should not be
dealt with separately, in isolation. Instead, they should
be integrated as a whole, with systematic coordination
and mutual enhancement, so as to ensure a successful
transition and the elimination of potential causes of the
recurrence of conflicts.

Secondly, the support and assistance of the
international community are indispensable to
strengthening the rule of law in conflict areas. One
important way of eliminating the root causes of armed
conflict and preventing any recurrence of conflict is to
strengthen the rule of law and transitional justice.

In that respect, the United Nations should
mobilize global resources in a timely manner, and the
international community, especially donors, should
respond positively. In providing assistance, it is
necessary for the United Nations to take full account of
local historical customs, cultural traditions and legal
systems, respect the autonomy and right of decision of
the local people and provide guidance on the basis of
actual situations and needs, with particular emphasis
on assisting local capacity-building in the area of the
rule of law.

Thirdly, organs of the United Nations system
should strengthen their coordination, exchange
experiences and adopt multiple ways to improve rule of
law. It is also necessary to enhance capacity-building
in the sphere of the rule of law within peacebuilding
operations. The Security Council should engage in
close communication and coordination with the
Peacebuilding Commission in a joint effort to enhance
capacity-building in the area of the rule of law in
conflict areas, including by establishing and improving
transitional justice mechanisms, effectively putting an
end to impunity and bringing about reconciliation, thus
creating a sound peacebuilding environment in terms
of the rule of law.

Fourthly, it is necessary to improve the efficiency
and credibility of United Nations sanctions measures.
Over the past decade, the Security Council has
increasingly resorted to sanctions as a means of
deterrence or punishment. It is therefore only natural
that attention has been focused on the effectiveness of
sanctions and on their negative impact. On sanctions,
China has always advocated caution. We believe that it
is necessary to set strict standards and time lines for
sanctions in order to mitigate their negative
humanitarian effects. Currently, the Secretariat, the
Security Council and the academic community are all
engaged in studying the question of how to improve
the fairness, transparency and effectiveness of current
procedures of listing, delisting and granting
humanitarian exemptions.

China supports the improvement of United
Nations sanctions regimes and believes that the
following principles should be adhered to: sanctions
should be based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and applied with caution after extensive
consultations; we should base ourselves on facts and
evidence and should avoid double standards; full
account should be taken of the practical situation of the
countries concerned and the nature of the work of the
sanctions committees; and it is necessary to improve
internal mechanisms and enhance efficiency.

Finally, I wish to reiterate that international law
is important as the foundation of the Security Council's
work in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Strengthening the rule of law in conflict areas
is conducive to the realization of the overall objective
of peacebuilding. When becoming involved in
reconstruction on the ground, including by providing
assistance in capacity-building in the field of the rule
of law, the Security Council should bear in mind the
fundamental interests of the people concerned and the
need for overall social stability and should respect the
sovereignty of the country concerned. Only in that way
can we win the trust and acceptance of the recipient
country, truly strengthen the rule of law and give full
play to the Security Council's proper role in the
maintenance of peace and security.

