Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the members of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my own country,
Myanmar.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, for taking the
initiative to convene this public meeting on the
important topic of terrorism. My appreciation also goes
to France for having convened, on 20 January 2003, a
high-level meeting of the Security Council on the
subject of combating terrorism.

On 4 October 2002, to mark first anniversary of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), we met in an
open meeting of the Security Council. Barely a week
after we met, on 12 October, another dastardly terrorist
attack took place, in Bali, killing almost 200 persons,
tourists and Indonesians alike. That struck at the heart
of the ASEAN region, and we are particularly
devastated by that cowardly attack.

The tragic loss of life in Bali, as well as in
Moscow and Mombassa, is a reminder that although we
have made great efforts to combat terrorism through
the adoption and implementation of far-reaching
resolutions, success in combating international
terrorism is still not fully ensured. Greater efforts are
needed at the international, regional and country levels
to intensify our fight against terrorism.

Allow me to give a further update on ASEAN's
ongoing efforts to combat international terrorism. The
devastating Bali attack came just one month before the
ASEAN Summit that took place last year in Phnom
Penh, Cambodia. Combating terrorism remains high on
the agenda of ASEAN members, both individually and
collectively. The Phnom Penh Summit adopted a
declaration on terrorism, in which ASEAN leaders
expressed the determination of the Association to build
on measures announced last year at its Summit in
Brunei Darussalam to intensify its efforts to prevent,
counter and suppress terrorist activities in the region.
At the summit, ASEAN called on the international
community to avoid indiscriminately advising their
citizens not to visit or otherwise deal with ASEAN
countries in the absence of established evidence to
substantiate rumours of possible terrorist attacks, as
such measures could help achieve the objectives of the
terrorists.

Cooperation among members of ASEAN to
counter terrorism was further strengthened last year
through increased intelligence sharing, as well as
through workshops related to countering terrorism and
other transnational crimes. ASEAN members had
already planned on expanding their individual and
collective efforts. Following the summit, ASEAN
countries undertook the following activities. The
International Conference on Anti-Terrorism and
Tourism Recovery was held in Manila, the Southeast
Asia Regional Centre for Counter-Terrorism was
established in November 2002 in Kuala Lumpur, and
the regional conference on combating money
laundering and terrorist financing took place in Bali in
December. In January 2003 a workshop on terrorism
was held in Jakarta, and Singapore hosted a workshop
on counter-terrorism financing.

Cooperation in countering terrorism has also been
extended through the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF),
which has continued to be an important mechanism in
considering security-related issues in the region. Last
year, ARF participants discussed measures against
terrorism, as well as its financing. In March this year,
an ARF intersessional meeting on counter-terrorism
and transnational crime will be held in Malaysia. The
ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime,
with ministerial counterparts from China, Japan and the
Republic of Korea, is to be held in Bangkok in October
2003.

On 1 August 2002, ASEAN and the United States
signed the Joint Declaration on Cooperation to Combat
International Terrorism. It provides a framework for
cooperation in the prevention, disruption and
combating of international terrorism through the
exchange and flow of information, intelligence and
capacity-building. The Declaration also provides for
cooperation to enhance efficacy in the efforts to combat
terrorism.

Recently, at the ASEAN-European Union
ministerial meeting in Brussels, the Joint Declaration
on Cooperation to Combat Terrorism was adopted. The
ministers agreed to enhance cooperation in areas
including the exchange of information, strengthening
links between law enforcement agencies of the
European Union and ASEAN, and capacity-building to
assist ASEAN members in the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and to address
the impact of terrorist activities.

Evidently, countering terrorism remains high on
the agenda of ASEAN, both individually and
collectively. At this juncture, I would like to reassure
the Council of ASEAN's commitment to the global
fight against terrorism and specifically to the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1456
(2003). I wish to inform the Council of ASEAN's
intention to participate in the forthcoming special
meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
scheduled for 7 March 2003. ASEAN takes note of the
various proposals that were put forward at the last
high-level meeting of the Council, including the French
proposal to establish a cooperation and assistance fund.

We find the open meetings of the Security
Council, including this one, extremely valuable.
Member States can learn what works in one particular
country or region and have the option of adapting it to
suit their unique environments and situations. It has
helped us to identify and address inadequacies,
including in terms of national legislation.

We are also pleased with the latest efforts of the
CTC, including the directory of assistance that is
currently published on the web. The cooperation that
the CTC is promoting is one of the many valuable ways
in which it has helped to further the cause of our fight
against terrorism.

Finally, I pay tribute to the Chairman of the CTC,
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, and the CTC as a whole for
their tireless efforts and their commendable
achievements. The work of the CTC has been, indeed,
a great contribution to efforts in countering terrorism.

