Mr. Christian (Ghana): I would like to express
my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this
meeting, and to Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
update on the situation in the Middle East.

The grave situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory continues to be of much concern to my
delegation. Violence has escalated in recent days in the
Gaza Strip because of repeated Israeli incursions,
ostensibly to prevent the firing of missiles by militants
into Israeli towns. Regrettably, that has often resulted
in lethal and harmful consequences for the Palestinian
people.

It is unfortunate that the efforts of President
Abbas at forming a Government of national unity have
foundered on the issue of the recognition of Israel. In
the larger interest of their people, we urge the
Palestinian Authority and Hamas to cooperate and form
a Government that will, we hope, enter into
negotiations with Israel.

While the current woeful state of relations
between Palestine and Israel does not augur well for
the viability of such an undertaking, we are mindful of
the continuing commitment of President Abbas to a
platform of peace and the stated readiness of Prime
Minister Ehud Olmert to engage his Palestinian
partner, which should encourage us to endeavour to
bring those leaders together for the resumption of
peace negotiations.

Once again, we appeal to Israel to take steps to
end the financial boycott of the Palestinian
Authority - a measure that would greatly assist the
Administration in meeting its financial obligations and
would bring relief to the Palestinian people, who have
suffered from the dire consequences of the withholding
of funds.

There is no military solution to the conflict in the
Middle East. Cognizant of that political reality, the
Security Council acted rightly through resolution 1701
(2006) in bringing about the cessation of hostilities
between Israel and Lebanon and laying the foundation
for a sustainable ceasefire. By so doing, the Security
Council underlined its important and crucial role in the
search for comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

The Security Council must continue to assert that
role, and work assiduously towards the resolution of
the Palestinian problem - which is indisputably at the
core of the Middle East question - on the basis of
Council resolutions and in accordance with the road
map and the Arab Peace Initiative. That is the surest
way to guarantee the right of Israelis to their own State
within well defined and secure boundaries and, equally,
to guarantee the right of Palestinians to their own
viable and independent State in order to ensure their
freedom of movement and their right to development.

