Mr. Li Baodong (China)(spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council has just voted on the draft resolution
on Syria (S/2012/77), and China voted against it.

China has, all along, followed closely the
developments in Syria. We call on all parties in Syria
to stop the violence and in particular to avoid
casualties among innocent civilians, to restore order in
the country as soon as possible and to respect the
request of the Syrian people for reform and for the
safeguarding of their own interests. This is in the
fundamental interest of Syria and its people. We
support the good-offices efforts of the Arab League to
resolve the Syrian crisis so as to promote an early
launch of an inclusive political process led by the
Syrian people and in which all parties extensively
participate, to peacefully resolve differences and
disputes through dialogue and negotiations, and to
restore stability in Syria.

The international community should provide
constructive assistance to help achieve these goals. At
the same time, the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria should be fully respected.
The actions of the Security Council on the Syrian issue
should comply with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and help ease the
tensions, help promote political dialogue and diffuse
disputes, and help maintain peace and stability in the
Middle East region, rather than complicate the issue.

Under these principles, China participated
actively in the consultations on the draft resolution and
supported the efforts of the Arab League to facilitate a
political settlement of the Syrian issue and to maintain
stability in the region. Like many Council members,
China maintains that under the current circumstances,
to put undue emphasis on pressuring the Syrian
Government for a prejudged result of the dialogue or to
impose any solution will not help resolve the Syrian
issue. Instead, that may further complicate the
situation.
9

China supports the amendments proposed by the
Russian Federation and has noted that the Russian
Foreign Minister will visit Syria next week. The
request by some Council members for continued
consultations on the draft resolution is reasonable. It is
regrettable that these reasonable concerns were not
taken into account. To put through a vote when parties
are still seriously divided over the issue does not help
maintain the unity and authority of the Security
Council nor help to properly resolve the issue. In this
context, China voted against the draft resolution.

Syria is an important country in the Middle East.
Peace and stability in Syria serve the common interests
of the Syrian people and the international community.
China will continue to work with the international
community and to play a positive and constructive role
in the proper settlement of the Syrian issue.

