Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate the opportunity to brief
the Security Council today on the situation in Somalia.
The participation of high-level representatives
underscores the commitment of the international
community to address the conflict that has been going
on in Somalia for the past two decades.

Much has been achieved in the past few years, yet
many challenges continue to plague our attempts to
stabilize the political, security and humanitarian
situation. We continue to work closely with the African
Union (AU), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and our many international
partners to move the peacemaking efforts in Somalia
forward. I would like to sincerely thank this Council
for its consistent support to our efforts in Somalia.

Commissioner Lamamra and certain AU member
States Will present in detail the requirements for
expanding the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) operation, following the recent decisions
of the Peace and Security Council. The joint
undertaking of the AU and the United Nations to
develop the strategic concept of AMISOM. operations,
which will be presented shortly, has been an exemplary
model of collaboration between the two organizations
under the leadership of the African Union.

There are some outstanding issues that will
require further refinement before we request Council
action, such as establishing further linkages between
3
the political and military strategies; agreeing on clear
command-and-control arrangements; determining the
allocation of AMISOM. contingents by sector; further
fine-tuning a reasonable package of enablers and force
multipliers; and identifying the required support for the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and its allied
forces, whose contribution is essential to sustaining
AMISOM. efforts. We look forward to working closely
with the African Union and IGAD in finalizing those
issues.

In order to help frame our discussions today, I
believe that it would be useful to outline once again the
Somalia strategy that we have been pursuing and how
we see that process moving forward. Council members
will recall that, in 2008, the Secretary-General laid out
the United Nations three-pronged integrated approach,
aligning the political, security and humanitarian tracks.
His approach was endorsed by the Security Council
and in several international conferences held thereafter
on Somalia.

The political strategy we have followed over the
past four years has been consistent. It is, first, to
support the TFG in completing the key tasks that will
bring the transition to a close; secondly, to assist the
TFG in broadening the base of the peace process
through outreach and reconciliation; and thirdly, to
work to help develop basic State institutions, especially
in the security sector.

To implement the first part of the political
strategy on moving the transition to a close, we have
the road map for ending the transition, signed in
Mogadishu on 6 September, which comprises priority
tasks that need to be completed by August. This entails
finalizing the constitution-making process, in which we
have we have seen some good progress. We welcome
the adoption of the Garowe Principles by the leaders of
the Transitional Federal Institutions, Puntland,
Galmudug and an Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a
representative last month. They provide a credible path
for adopting the new constitution and ending the
transition according to the Transitional Charter.

Secondly, we have supported the outreach and
reconciliation efforts of the TFG with those groups
outside the peace process. This outreach was the key
element behind the Djibouti Agreements of 2008,
facilitated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah. It
will be recalled that this process led to the joining of
the then Asmara-based Alliance for the Re-liberation of
Somalia in the political process and the formation of a
broad-based Somali Government, led by President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, and an expansion of
Parliament to represent a broad spectrum of political
positions.

Today, with the support of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mahiga, the TFG is
continuing its dialogue with various groups and has
provided support to local-level reconciliation and
peacebuilding initiatives. It has developed a close
working relationship with Puntland, as demonstrated
by the visit of President Sheikh Sharif to Garowe last
year. It is attempting to implement similar initiatives
with Galmudug. Last November with the support of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS),
60 civil society leaders met and agreed that they should
play a principal role in the implementation of the road
map. The next step is for the TFG to draw up a national
reconciliation plan with regional authorities including
the Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a. We hope that this will be
completed soon.

The third imperative is to help the TF G develop
functioning State institutions. In this regard, the
Government is committed to moving forward. It has
been collecting revenue from Mogadishu port and
airport, and paying its security forces and civil
servants, although more work needs to be done to
ensure accountability. With the help of the United
Nations and members of the international community,
the TFG has established a functioning Joint Security
Committee and the Cabinet has approved a national
security policy in consultation with all road map
signatories.

The efforts to strengthen AMISOM, build
Somalia's security institutions and address piracy are
an integral part of the broader United Nations strategy
I have just mentioned. Since 2009, the United Nations
Support Office for AMISOM. has been building the
capacity of AMISOM. to provide security through its
logistics support package. This has entailed the
provision of fuel and rations, medical and logistical
support, accommodation and transport, and
administration of the Trust Fund through which
Member States fund the provision of contingent-owned
equipment.

Meanwhile, in line with the 2008 approach,
Member States have provided significant assistance in
forming a Somali National Security Force. The Force
now numbers more than 10,000 troops, who are being
paid and supported regularly. We are grateful to the
Government of Japan for its generous contributions,
which have enabled UNPOS, working with AMISOM
and the United Nations Development Programme, to
pay the salaries of the Police Force. We will continue
to work on improving their living conditions, providing
them with the necessary equipment and refurbishing
the police stations.

With this support, and of course the backing of
AMISOM, the TFG has expanded its presence to cover
almost all of Mogadishu. The improvement in security
is not complete, as witnessed by the grenade tossed
into the United Nations compound today. We cannot
relax our efforts. Establishing national security forces
is the work of a generation and we should not expect
transformation overnight. However, the visit of the
Secretary-General in December, and the relocation of
his Special Representative to Mogadishu later this
month, are indications of just how far we have come.

The efforts of the international maritime forces
are having a significant impact on the fight against
piracy, with the number of ships being captured
actually declining. The contributions of the various
naval forces are an integral part of a wider effort that
includes assisting local communities to undertake
alternative forms of employment, tracking the flow of
money to identify those benefiting from piracy,
prosecuting those responsible, and creating a coastal
security force.

Let me turn to our humanitarian efforts. Despite
many risks and difficulties, the United Nations and
other humanitarian actors have provided humanitarian
assistance to Somalis in the country and in refugee
camps in neighbouring countries for the past 20 years.
Over the past year, humanitarian actors have managed
to reach more than 2 million people with food
assistance and 1.4 million people through water and
sanitation interventions. In addition, the massive scale-
up in humanitarian efforts has reduced the number of
areas affected by famine from six to three. We
welcome the vast international support in response to
the famine and hope that this assistance will continue.

It is important to underscore the serious
difficulties humanitarian operations continue to face,
especially in getting access to affected populations.
This will be an ongoing problem as long as the security

dynamics remain fluid. Ultimately, establishing
sustainable peace and stability is the only way to bring
an end to the suffering of the Somali people. But we
must recognize that the increase in military operations
carries some risks and difficulties for civilians and
humanitarian operations, and we are working to
mitigate those as much as possible.

Let me briefly discuss how we see the path
forward for Somalia. We believe that we - along with
the African Union, IGAD and the Somali Government -
have all the elements of a political, security and
development strategy that the Somalis and the
international community can together implement. In
the next few months, the focus will be, first, on
ensuring that the final draft of the constitution is
completed by 20 April and adopted by a national
constituent assembly the following month. This will be
followed by the election or selection of a new
Parliament, reduced from the current 550 to 225, to be
sworn in by mid-June, followed by the election of the
Speaker and President, in accordance with the Kampala
Accord. This timetable is ambitious and requires full
buy-in and determination on the part of the Somalis
and the full support of the international community. Let
me reiterate that the consensus, both inside and outside
Somalia, is that there will be no extension of the
transition period.

The second major task will be expanding the
control of the Government by establishing
administrative arrangements for those areas in southern
Somalia recently recovered by military actions from
Al-Shabaab. Special Representative Mahiga has been
promoting a transparent and inclusive approach in
setting up local administrations in the newly recovered
areas, and has made several efforts to involve civil
society and clan elders in these reconciliation and
outreach efforts. The TFG has pledged to organize
meetings with political actors on the two areas where
the extremists have already been pushed back. We
expect to see more progress in the next few weeks.

The third component is improving governance,
promoting transparency in the use of financial
resources and establishing a functioning civil service.
There is already some progress in this regard with the
re-establishment of the Bureau for Investigation of
Corruption, whose commissioners are currently being
vetted. We also intend to continue working with the
Government in finalizing its national development
plan.

On the fourth issue, security, we will continue to
work on building the capacity of the TFG's security
forces. The national security and stabilization plan has
been finalized and is awaiting parliamentary approval.
The relocation of UNPOS to Mogadishu will facilitate
further coordination with AMISOM. and the
Government in implementing this plan. It is important
that AMISOM. be provided with the necessary financial
and logistical capacity to expand its operations in
Mogadishu and South-Central Somalia.

In the next few months, the focus will be on the
fifth area, namely, revitalizing economic activity and
delivering basic services. There are reports of greater
economic activity throughout Mogadishu.
Reconstruction has started in a number of the
devastated areas previously defined in 1991 and 1992
as the green line, as well as in parts of the city affected
by the most recent fighting. For instance, a number of
businessmen have joined together to rebuild the central
oil depot, and there is a plan to build a holiday
weekend sports resort along Gezira beach. As we
increase our presence in Mogadishu, the various United
Nations agencies will work closely with the
Government and its partners to focus on recovery and
development. We are pleased that the Government of
Turkey is working with UNPOS to host the second
Istanbul meeting in April, whose primary focus will be
economic development.

Finally, let me turn now to the risks and
challenges of the current moment. To achieve the
strategy I have outlined, it is vital to address the issue
of internal and external spoilers that are trying to
undermine the implementation of the road map, and
ending the transition as planned. We are particularly
concerned about the impact of the current
parliamentary crisis. The international community must
support the TFG to resolve the crisis through dialogue.
At the same time, the Council has indicated that it is
willing to act against spoilers to the peace process. We
need to consider how to make that a reality.

On the security front, Al-Shabaab continues to be
a threat, despite its withdrawal from Mogadishu in
August. It has stepped up its suicide and improvised
explosive device attacks in the capital. A concerted
military offensive by AMISOM. and regional Powers
may present a chance of defeating them as a military
movement, but the political and ideological challenge
must also be addressed. That can be achieved through
the delivery of a peace dividend and real change in
people's lives. Limited resources continue to hinder
our ability to do more. In October, the United Nations
and TFG laid out proposals for stabilization and
recovery in Mogadishu. However, despite improvement
in transparency, direct resources to the Government are
still not flowing.

As we continue to support the peacemaking
efforts in Somalia, it is important that we provide
practical means to help the Government to become
more cohesive and inclusive, strengthen its ability to
address the security challenges, carry out
reconstruction and development planning, and generate
and collect revenue. Irrespective of the structure of the
State to be defined by the constitution, it is vital that
the Somalis have a national security sector. That will
require longer-term commitment and investment by the
international community.

It is also important that the international
community, with support from the African Union,
IGAD, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
League of Arab States, continue to work in a concerted
manner, building on the recent gains made in the peace
process. The United Nations system, guided by the
Security Council, will continue to provide the
necessary coordination and support. We look forward
to the upcoming London conference, which also offers
an opportunity to discuss and work on those critical
issues.

It is evident that the only lasting solution for
Somalia is one that is created and led by Somalis
themselves. The Government's efforts at building
consensus for reconciliation are slowly gaining ground,
despite the serious challenge by extremists. The
international community must make a vital investment
at this time to nurture the fragile peace process, help
the Government to establish its authority in more areas
of the country, build its security and rule of law
institutions and expand AMISOM's operations as
requested by the African Union.

