Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): For conflict
prevention, the Organization and this body, the
Security Council, derive authority from the Charter of
the United Nations to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace,
suppress acts of aggression, uphold the principle of
equal rights and self-determination of peoples and
promote international economic and social cooperation.
This, then, is the full context of preventive diplomacy.

From experience, we have learned that the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflict prevention are
closely related. States themselves bear the primary
responsibility for preventing conflict - if necessary,
with the help of the United Nations. Preventive action
is effective if it is taken at an early stage, has a long-
term human rights and humanitarian perspective
and is geared towards addressing root causes. Peace
and security and sustainable development should not
be separated, because both processes are mutually
reinforcing. The success of prevention would be ensured
through a well-coordinated participation of multiple
actors and entities, especially regional and subregional
organizations.

Prevention should never become a pretext for
interventionism. Preventive diplomacy does not mean
preventive deployment or peace enforcement. We like
your statement, Mr. President, that the Council should
serve as "a smoke detector, not just a fire extinguisher."
Conflicts should not be brought to the Council's table
only after they have already erupted.

At the same time, the Council should avoid activism
in situations where parties are in a position to handle and
resolve their differences or where regional mechanisms
can play a more effective role. The Council should not
inadvertently become an instrument for igniting or
fuelling crises. After hostilities have already broken
out, such as in Gaza, the Council's responsibility
increases many fold to intercede and intervene to stop
further deterioration. Passivity or a hands-off approach
in the face of a raging crisis should not be an option.

In the recent past, there has been a growing tendency
in the Council to adopt resolutions under Chapter
VII. The Council feels that its action is not important

enough ifit has not done so. Some situations do require
immediate action under Chapter VII. But we urge the
Council to make full use of the preventive diplomacy
tools at its disposal under Chapter VI - especially
mediation, arbitration, judicial settlement, inquiry, the
involvement of regional organizations and the good
offices of the Secretary General - to defuse tensions
and to resolve conflicts that are simmering just below
the surface but threaten to explode.
The Council has little appetite for Conflicts that are
not news-driven. We would suggest that the Secretary-
General conduct quiet diplomacy, rather than Council
members. For its part, the Council can appoint special
envoys and special representatives who can pursue
such diplomacy on its behalf. The Council's preventive
missions should be properly mandated and pursued
to enhance the objectives of building confidence and
finding solutions.

The Council is not omnipotent. Many decisions
impinging on peace and security, especially those
involving major Powers, are taken outside the Council.
It is therefore important for those Powers to use the full
cycle of early warning, conflict prevention and crisis
management to avoid a descent into a new Cold War
or the exacerbation of tensions. A timely agreement
between major Powers on solutions for Syria and
Ukraine, for instance, could have averted the escalation
of those conflicts.

Finally, the Security Council's efforts to prevent
conflicts will lack credibility if its resolutions are
implemented selectively. The Council's resolutions on
long-standing issues await attention and implementation,
while the Council takes on new issues. The Council
should uphold the international rule of law.

