Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Madam President, I thank
you for organizing this meeting. I would also like to
thank Special Representative Kubis for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

With the crucial phase Afghanistan has reached
in terms of the political, security and economic
transformation it is undergoing, our continued support
to Afghanistan is vital for a peaceful, secure and stable
Afghanistan that can effectively serve the needs of its
people. It goes without saying that the international
community should keep investing in positive scenarios
for Afghanistan at this vital juncture.

The Afghan people have demonstrated strong will,
courage and determination to move towards a peaceful,
democratic and stable Afghanistan, by participating
enthusiastically in the presidential and provincial
elections despite the security risks. It is time to honour
their wish. The recent completion ofthe nationwide audit
of the ballots cast in the country's 14 June presidential
elections run-off is a step in the right direction. We
believe in the capacity of Afghanistan to undertake
a successful political transition, and we believe that
all stakeholders will act responsibly, exercise self-
restraint and show genuine leadership and partnership.
The consequences of the failure of governance efforts
would be too great for any of us to bear.

We deeply regret and condemn the terrorist
attacks that have taken place in Afghanistan in the
reporting period, resulting in the deaths of many
civilians. We believe that those heinous attacks will
not derail Afghanistan's efforts to achieve a peaceful
transformation. We stand beside Afghanistan in this
difficult period and reiterate our fullest support.

The Secretary-General's latest report (S/2014/656)
highlights that Afghanistan has continued to engage with
its neighbours in the promotion of regional cooperation.
As international forces are withdrawing, regional
cooperation and commitment become increasingly
vital for transforming the region into a zone of peace,
stability and prosperity. Based on that vision, the region
must come together to transform common problems
into mutual interests. In that context, we appreciate
all bilateral and multilateral dialogue and cooperation
efforts and welcome the positive momentum that has
been reached in the Istanbul Process, including the
senior officials meeting held in Beijing on 10 July. We
are looking forward to the upcoming Istanbul Process
conference in Tianjin, and we would like to thank China
for its leadership in that regard.

I would like to voice our strong support for the crucial
and comprehensive role that the United Nations and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will
continue to play in supporting Afghanistan during the
post-transition period. I also want to voice our heartfelt
appreciation to Mr. Kubis. His tireless efforts and
dedication have undoubtedly brought Afghanistan one
step closer to peace. We would also like to extend our
support to his successor, Mr. Haysom, and wish him
good luck in his endeavours.

To conclude, Turkey will always remain in
solidarity with the Afghan people, and we will
continue to contribute to a safe, secure and prosperous
Afghanistan, as we have done for many decades.

