Mr. Feltman: Mr. President, I thank you for the
invitation to brief on recent developments in Myanmar.
I welcome the participation of Ambassador Hau Do
Suan as well as Ambassador Masud Bin Momen. I also
welcome being joined by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The estimated number of refugees who have entered
Bangladesh since 25 August now exceeds 626,000. As
the Secretary-General underlined in his 2 September
letter to the Council (S/2017/753), we need collectively
to encourage the adoption of policies to end the vicious
cycle of discrimination, violence and displacement
in Rakhine.

The Council's 6 November presidential statement
(S/PRST/2017/22), reaffirming the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and unity of
Myanmar, noted that the Government holds the primary
responsibility to protect its population through the
rule of law and the respect, promotion and protection
of human rights. During my October visit, I explored
with the authorities potential United Nations support in
these key areas.

My visit followed shortly after State Counsellor
Aung San Suu Kyi's 12 October address responding
to the humanitarian concerns in Rakhine and the
return of refugees from Bangladesh. We welcome
the State Counsellor's decision to establish the Union
Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement,
and Development in Rakhine as well as the signing of
the memorandum of understanding on returns between
Myanmar and Bangladesh.

We are also encouraged by the announcement that
the new Advisory Commission comprising international
experts and the Committee for Implementation of the
Recommendations on Rakhine State will meet in early
January to finalize action plans to rehabilitate and
develop the region. We hope that plans will swiftly be
followed by action.

The State Counsellor's visit to Rakhine on
2 November was an important step. We urge all
Myanmar leaders, including in the military, to
condemn incitement to racial hatred and violence. We
encourage them to adopt measures to defuse tensions
between communities and create an environment for
safe and dignified repatriation, including through
interfaith initiatives.

We have highlighted to the authorities that the
capacities, best practices and extensive experience
of the United Nations can help in implementing their
stated intentions in a timely and effective manner.

Although the violence has subsided, new refugees
continue to arrive in Bangladesh, albeit at slower
rates. These refugees arrive exhausted, destitute and
traumatized. The Government of Bangladesh estimates
that more than 36,000 unaccompanied children arrived
with no immediate family support system. During
November, arson in Rakhine state appeared to lessen,
but recent satellite imagery revealed renewed fires and
related destruction in different villages.

Humanitarian access to Rakhine state remains
insufficient. Although Myanmar permitted some
International Committee of the Red Cross and, more
recently, World Food Programme assistance, access
by other United Nations agencies and partners to
northern Rakhine is still highly restricted. Issuance of
travel authorizations has eased in central Rakhine, but
large numbers of staff still lack these permits owing to
cumbersome procedures.

We all are grateful for the continued generosity
of the Government and the people of Bangladesh, and
we call on the international community to continue to
support their efforts. But the origins of and solutions to
the Rohingya crisis rest in Myanmar. Repatriation and
reconciliation policies will fail without accountability
and non-discriminatory rule-of-law and public-safety
measures to address the fears and distrust among
communities in Rakhine.
On 23 November, Myanmar and Bangladesh
reached a bilateral agreement on the issue of returns. The
agreement recognizes the need for a "comprehensive
and durable solution" through a "safe, dignified and
voluntary return" in accordance with international law.

In this regard, I would like to present some
key considerations.

First, returns must be supported by reconciliation
efforts, and the time frame must allow for this and other
measures to ensure that return is sustainable. Central
to this is the implementation of the Rakhine Advisory
Commission recommendations.

Secondly, returns should be to the original place of
residence or to a safe, secure place near their destination
of choice, as envisaged by the arrangement. It should
not be to camps, however temporary; experience shows
that camps lead to prolonged segregation.

Thirdly, the reference to freedom of movement
in the arrangement is positive, but the qualifier "in
conformity with existing laws and regulations",
which are currently extremely restrictive, is a serious
limitation. Expanding freedom of movement is essential
to achieving stated commitments on access to basic

services and livelihoods.

Fourthly, eligibility criteria for return must be
applied in the broadest possible manner. The current
requirements, including documentary proof of
residence, would be difficult for many refugees to meet.

Fifthly and finally, experience on voluntary
repatriation movements over the decades underscores
the important role that the United Nations, through the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), can play in all aspects of a return
operation. We encourage the inclusion of UNHCR in
thejoint working group aimed at overseeing all aspects
of return.

We appreciate the role of neighbouring countries,
particularly China, in constructively engaging both
Bangladesh and Myanmar to facilitate the bilateral
agreement. During his recent visit to Myanmar,
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi pointed out the
importance of finding a long-term solution, including
by addressing the chronic underdevelopment in
Rakhine state. Strengthened regional cooperation with
Myanmar will be essential. We welcome Myanmar's
engagement with the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations for humanitarian assistance, which led to an
initial delivery of 80 tons ofreliefmaterial for Rakhine.

The recently established Union Enterprise
for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement and
Development in Rakhine aims to support cooperation
between the Government and all sectors, including the
United Nations, in the implementation of development
projects. Meetings between the Government, donors
and the United Nations have started. In addition, the
Implementation Committee for the Rakhine Advisory
Commission has begun meeting and identified priority
interventions in specific sectors.

These are welcome developments, but we again
urge tangible action and implementation of these
commitments. Plans alone are not sufficient. We hope
that Myanmar will draw upon the wealth of expertise
that the United Nations can offer.

As Kofi Annan highlighted, the complex challenges
in Rakhine require civilian-military coordination.
Council members have underlined the importance of
effective partnership with the Myanmar authorities,
especially the military. Close neighbours such as China
and Indonesia can help through their military-to-
military engagement. We appreciate the recognition by
these regional and other Member States of the role of
the United Nations in helping Myanmar address areas
beyond Rakhine, including the peace process, to help
advance the country's democratic consolidation efforts.

The 2020 national elections will stand as an
important test in the consolidation of the nation's
democratic institutions.

The effort to achieve peace between the Government
and the various ethnic armed organizations is a
cornerstone ofthis transition. All eight signatory parties
have shown a sustained commitment to upholding
the October 2015 nationwide ceasefire agreement.
Momentum in the peace process is slowing, however,
with the majority of ethnic armed organizations still
not among the signatories.

Finally, I note that the General Assembly is
expected to adopt the Third Committee draft resolution
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, which
requests the Secretary-General to appoint a Special
Envoy. We want that initiative to strengthen our
partnership with Myanmar in close consultation with
Member States in the region and beyond. We believe
we have much to offer in working with Myanmar on a
number of challenges the country faces, in full respect
of Myanmar's sovereignty.

