Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (spoke in French): On the
occasion of the presentation of the sixth report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi (S/2009/611), allow me, first of all,
on behalf of the Government of the Republic of
Burundi, to thank the Secretary-General for the
steadfast support that the United Nations is continuing
to provide to Burundi in its effort to consolidate peace
at last and relaunch development.

With regard to the sixth report on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi, my Government
appreciates the fact that the report acknowledges the
additional progress that has been made since the fifth
report (S/2009/270) in most of the areas that are likely
to contribute to stabilizing the country in a lasting way.
Among other things - and without attempting to give
an exhaustive list - I should like to mention the
approval of the Forces nationales de liberation (FNL)
and the Mouvement pour la solidarite et la democratic
(MSD) as new political parties, the establishment of
independent provincial electoral commissions, the
singing of agreements with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) on electoral
assistance projects and the decree by the Minister of
the Interior establishing the Permanent Forum for
Dialogue among political parties. In addition, a revised
electoral code has been promulgated, and a new law
has been put in place to regulate the carrying of
weapons by civilians in Burundi. The Parliament has
also adopted a law amending the functions of the
National Commission for Land and Other Assets. In
cooperation with UNDP, the Government has also just
completed its preparations for the national strategy for
the sustainable reintegration of ex-combatants and
persons affected by the conflict. The Government of
Burundi would also like to take this opportunity to
inform the Security Council that the draft revised law
on communes and the draft law on an ombudsman will
be adopted by Parliament during the session that is
now under way.

Moreover, the Government of Burundi is pleased
with the obvious progress that has been made in the
work of Parliament in reforming the public and
territorial administration, combating corruption,
professionalizing the defence and security services and
in carrying out the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. We also welcome the
observations contained in the Secretary-General's
report with regard to the advances in the national
consultations on a transitional justice mechanism,
which have now been expanded to include Burundians
living abroad, and the fight against the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons.

The Government is especially grateful to the
drafters of the report for having pointed out that there
is no evidence of the presence in Burundi of armed
members of the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR). That is no small detail, given the lies
about our country - of which all of us are aware -
that the experts of the sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have recently propagated in that
connection. Nevertheless, the existence of a
clandestine movement among Burundi's population
that are sympathetic to certain rebel movements in the
eastern part of that country - which take advantage of
the porousness of the borders - does not bode well for
future peace in region. That should be a matter of
concern to the Security Council.

With regard to our concerns, the member
countries of the Economic Community of the Great
Lake Countries have just established a commission
comprised of ministers for defence and security that
will serve as a forum for dialogue between Burundi,
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Along the same lines, the governors of border
provinces in all three countries have agreed to
strengthen border control, both on the ground and on
lake borders. Those steps will strengthen the already
existing Tripartite Plus mechanism. However, it would
also be useful for the Department of Political
Affairs- which already provides support for the
implementation of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes region - to confine
its analyses within the scope of its mandate to prevent
conflicts.

The Government of Burundi would also like to
commend the recommendations of the assessment
mission on security needs for the upcoming elections.
In that regard, the Government would like specifically
to request sufficient and adequate transportation means
to facilitate the movement of police units, who will
provide security for the voting, as well as to distribute
elections materials throughout the country with as little
delay as possible. Our experience in 2005 demonstrates
that it is preferable to purchase such equipment, as
opposed to leasing it.

Other progress has been made, even though the
report does not refer to it. With regard to combating
corruption, the decision by the Government of Burundi
to place Burundi's revenue office under the control of
an international expert for the first five years is a
resounding illustration of the Government's political
will to clean up the collection of taxes. The
establishment of a value-added tax seeks to do the
same thing. Through the country, the project to provide
support for anti-corruption efforts has made it possible
to hold awareness-raising workshops in every
commune for local anti-corruption committees on the
negative consequences of this scourge. Lastly, the fact
that the World Bank has admitted Burundi into the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative is
further proof of the fact that the Government has
improved the management of public finances.

In terms of security, it is incomprehensible that
Burundi remains under security phase III even though
ex-combatants of the last rebel movement have been
disarmed and there has been significant success in the
disarmament of the civilian population. The
Government of Burundi deplores, obviously, the
isolated acts of murder and assassination related to
certain accounts settlements or quarrels over land
ownership issues, as well as looting. While that type of
insecurity exists almost everywhere, the role of rabble-
rousers intending to discredit the Government must not
be discounted in the case of Burundi.

The report discusses demonstrations by former
BINUB staff, yet unfortunately it omitted the fact that
that question was submitted to the competent sections
of the Secretariat for resolution, while knowing full
well that even the national legislation does not permit
an employee to work more than six months without a
contract.

If it is compared to a number of other countries
that are not even at war yet where a murder occurs
every hour, Burundi's security situation is far from
justifying its remaining under security phase III. That
is obvious and could not be understood otherwise,
since even the United Nations system has called for a
five-year support programme for Burundi, believing
that the country is now peaceful.

The World Bank followed suit by organizing the
first meeting of the Burundi Consultative Group on
26 and 27 October to help the country attract foreign
investment. In the same vein, other developmental
partners such as Switzerland and Japan have decided to
resume projects within the country. And at the same
time that the Partnership for Peace in Burundi was
deciding to end its activities, it agreed that the African
Union would withdraw South African troops because
there was no further reason for their presence in
Burundi.

Although the omissions we just listed could be
attributed to forgetfulness, the same cannot be said for
the recurring gratuitous assertions or incomplete
information. The first such concerns the administrative
posts that were promised to the FNL, which were
mentioned in the report. Yet, as the Government
representative explained at the last session of the
Partnership for Peace in Burundi, the country's
authorities were still waiting for FNL candidates who
fit the profiles of the proposed posts.

The second is the reaction of the opposition
parties to the establishment of the electoral department
and to the congress of the FNL dissidents. Not only did
the Minister of the Interior reaffirm the independence
of the Independent National Electoral Commission, but
he pointed out that the department was established to
facilitate any necessary contacts between the
Commission and the territorial administration.

As for dissidents within the FNL, allow me to
recall that that party is not the first to undergo a
partition. In this case it is the third split in the history
of that former armed political movement. Earlier splits
engendered the FNL-Icanzo and the Parti pour la
liberation du peuple hutu (PALIPE)-Agakiza. Trying to
identify, at any cost, the hand of the party in power in
the new schism is simplistic and unjust.

The Government has already taken in hand the
issue of the youth wing of the Conseil national pour la
defense de la democratie-Forces nationales pour la
defense de la democratie (CNDD-FDD). At a meeting
of provincial governors, the Interior Minister formally
banned any political behaviour that does not respect
the freedom and rights of others. That does not mean
those young people must cease their activities as a
party-affiliated league. Furthermore, youth and
women's leagues exist within all of the political parties
and should not cause undue worry.

As for the rule of law, Burundi's Constitution and
specific laws guarantee all civil and political freedoms.
However, enjoyment of those freedoms is subject to
respect for the law and to certain regulations, in order
to guarantee public order. The few restrictions existing
here and there have resulted from misunderstandings in
interpreting provisions in the laws or statutory texts.
The Government reiterates that, given its responsibility
for public security, it will never authorize the
convening of meetings that are not in accordance with
the law.

The Government also shares a certain number of
the concerns expressed in the report on, among other
issues, human rights and the situation of women and
children. However, the Government believes that it is
unfair when a certain opinion indicates that the
Government is doing nothing to improve the situation
in various areas.

The Government has established, or is in the
process of establishing, appropriate mechanisms
everywhere. The process of establishing the national
independent human rights commission is under way.
The new version of the commission, which
incorporates the Paris principles, has been analysed by
the Council of Ministers, which asked the Minister in
charge of the matter to clarify certain concepts. The
draft will soon return to the Council of Ministers for a
final analysis before it is submitted to Parliament for
adoption.

As for women's rights, the provision in the Penal
Code for the repression of sexual and sexist violence
has created an environment conducive to fighting those
crimes. We must now make all national partners aware
of the social importance of that struggle. Civil society
is already involved in that area, and sensitivity training
for the defence and security corps, as well as
disarmament of the civilian population, should promote
progress in the fight against sexual violence. But that
success will be possible only if the families or relatives
of the victims understand that silence, which
supposedly protects their honour, in fact encourages
impunity.

As for the protection of children, the Government
has established a brigade in charge of protecting
minors, but it does not yet have sufficient resources.

Here as well, efforts by the police and the judiciary
must be complemented by civil society.

The report dwells on the insufficient judicial
resources and so-called lack of independence. Besides
the Government's choice to devote more than 15 per
cent of the peacebuilding funds to the judiciary, the
Government has also increased the budget devoted to
that field to further motivate legal professionals.
Peacebuilding funds have made it possible to renovate
and to build several resident tribunals, to execute
thousands of outstanding warrants and judgments and
to equip the Special Anti-Corruption Court. In that
regard, public opinion should bear in mind that the
justice sector has been identified in the course of the
Arusha negotiations as being dominated by a single
ethnic group. That imbalance must be corrected before
other reforms can be undertaken.

As for the killing of the Vice-President of the
Observators for the Struggle against Corruption and
Economic Embezzlement, the interrogation of the
presumed guilty parties in custody is now under way.
We hope that it will help the investigation to continue,
which is to benefit from the contributions of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and INTERPOL,
which are assisting Burundi in this case.

The Government of Burundi is once again forced
to condemn certain irregularities with respect to form
as well as certain errors in the report. The National
Commission for Land and Other Assets was not
established in the course of this semester, as the report
claims in paragraph 13. The law adopted by the
Parliament extended its mandate and identified its
jurisdiction vis-a-vis other State bodies involved in the
management of land disputes.

With respect to the issue addressed in paragraph
29, the so-called Ministry of Civil Service is properly
called the Ministry of Public Service, Labour and
Social Security. Similarly, in paragraph 55, the
ministry referred to is in fact the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock. The report should have
pointed out that the Consultative Strategic Committee
and the Technical Coordination Committee that
coordinates electoral assistance initiatives are
co-chaired by the Government. Further, the Political
Forum of the Partners Coordination Group is not a
monitoring body, but rather a forum for dialogue.
Finally, the Government of Burundi would like to
share its understanding of the future mandate of
BINUB. Given the stage we have reached on the road
to peace, the Government of Burundi believes that

BINUB's future mandate should be limited to the
following fields: assistance in the election cycle;
support for democratic governance, by which we mean
the capacity-building of Parliament, the ombudsman
and the town councils and the operation of the
Permanent Forum for Dialogue among accredited
political parties; continuing peacebuilding, by which
we mean support for the national independent human
rights commission and for transitional justice; and,
finally, raising awareness of the gender dimension in
all public programmes.

A paragraph of the report refers to the absolute
need to carry out the election process according to the
principle of fairness, and our Government welcomes
that recommendation. In this regard, I recall that the
success of the process will depend in part on respect
for the principle of fairness in the implementation of
the BINUB mandate.

The Government of Burundi has observed that,
for some time now, the principle of fairness highlighted
in the report has, regrettably, not been upheld on the
ground. The desire of some to incriminate the ruling
party as if it did not have the same rights as the other
political parties in the coming election, and to assert
that, having been entrusted with the mission of
organizing elections, the Independent National
Electoral Commission's is mandated to replace the
authority in charge of territorial administration,
represent two good examples of the lack of respect for
the principle of fairness. It would be unfortunate and
greatly damaging for the United Nations-Burundian
Government partnership if the latter partner asks for
the replacement of the sitting representatives.

Before concluding my statement, I wish to thank
the Regional Initiative, the African Union, the
secretariat of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the South African facilitation, the
Peacebuilding Commission and all the special envoys
for their contribution to progress in the peace process
in Burundi. I should also like to thank the international
community as a whole for its valuable contribution to
the peace process in Burundi.

