Mrs. Nunez de Odreman (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of Venezuela,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela considers that the issue of small arms and
light weapons is of the utmost importance. We are as
concerned about it as all the other members of the
international community. We believe that the
indiscriminate and illicit use of such weapons and their
unbridled proliferation are increasing insecurity.

We stress the need for effective efforts to resolve
the problem of small arms and light weapons through
administrative measures and legislation, and we call on
manufacturers and on the nations possessing the largest
arsenals to make significant reductions in the
production of and trade in conventional weapons -
which constitute the main source of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons.

All of this is linked to the public harm caused by
the trade in those weapons, in addition to its ties to
such criminal activities as organized crime, drug
trafficking and terrorism. However, that must not
undermine the right of self-determination, taking into
account the special situation of peoples that have been
subjected to colonial domination or other forms of
domination and foreign occupation, and recognizing
the right of those peoples to adopt legitimate measures
to ensure their inalienable right to self-determination,
as noted in the report of the United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects.

In that regard, we agree with the
recommendations outlined by the Secretary-General in
his report, in particular recommendation 1 on the
negotiations being pursued in the Open-ended Working
Group to negotiate an international instrument to
enable States to identify and trace, in a timely and
reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/241.

We also agree that States are endowed with the
right to manufacture, import and stockpile small arms
and light weapons to meet their legitimate defence and
security needs. We believe that such operations
represent the sovereign right of nations to equip
themselves. In that respect, we believe it appropriate in
this forum to denounce the uncertainty expressed by
spokesmen of the Department of State of the United
States of America regarding the purchase of Russian
equipment by my Government. We wish to make it
clear that the purchase and provision of equipment to
our national armed forces serve two purposes: to
support the civil population and to defend the national
sovereignty.

We categorically reject the statements made by
the spokesmen of the United States Department of
State to the effect that the weapons purchased by my
Government could fall into the hands of international
criminals. Those statements are exaggerated,
tendentious and aimed at persuading international
public opinion that the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is a country that shelters criminals and
terrorists, and not a sovereign State endowed with the
legitimate right to defend itself and to purchase any
weapons it deems necessary to maintain its territorial
integrity and to defend its sovereignty.

Reiterating the comments made by the President
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Hugo
Chavez Frias, we also believe that the United States
has no authority to question the purchase of equipment
and we urge it not to intervene in the internal affairs
and to respect the sovereignty of States. We also ask
the Council to remain vigilant for any measure aimed
against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is complying with and implementing
measures established under the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. In that regard, I note here
in the Security Council that Venezuela submitted its
national report last year.

Regionally, we have complied with the norms
established under the Inter-American Convention
Against the Illicit Manufacture and Trafficking in
Weapons, Munitions, Explosives and Related
Materials, adopted by the Organization of American
States. We also participated in the meeting in South
Africa of the group of experts mandated with drafting
the Andean Plan to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in all
its Aspects, and we are signatory to the Quirama
Declaration on that issue.

