Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): May I, on behalf of the
Sultanate of Oman, join you, Mr. President, in extending
heartfelt condolences to the people and Government of
Japan and to the bereaved families of those who died as a
result of the severe earthquake.

I should like to begin my statement by conveying my
delegation's sincere thanks and appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his lucid
report on the work of this Organization, entitled
"Supplement to An Agenda for Peace: Position Paper of the
Secretary-General on the Occasion of the Fiftieth
Anniversary of the United Nations".

My delegation associates itself in particular with the
position of the Non-Aligned Movement on the Secretary-
General's Supplement, as reflected in the statement
delivered this morning by the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia to the United Nations on behalf of the countries
of that Movement.

The issues addressed in the Secretary-General's report
are of crucial significance, prompting all of us to take
effective and collective measures to achieve positive
developments in line with the fundamental purposes and
principles of the Charter on which the creation of this
Organization was based.

In recent years the role of the United Nations in the
field of the maintenance of international peace and security
has been augmented and has evolved by diverse means
and as a result of complex situations that have brought to
the fore both its potentials and its shortcomings. None the
less, the achievements of the United Nations in this field
are commendable. In the light of the experience gained in
this regard, my delegation is of the opinion that it is high
time for the United Nations to undertake a careful review
and to approve some clear guidelines for the adoption of
urgent and serious approaches that will eventually lead to
the establishment of permanent mechanisms to deal with
this matter. Therefore, my delegation welcomes the
Security Council's timely discussion of this report.

While concurring with the statement of the
Ambassador of Indonesia, my delegation would like to
highlight additional points that could be taken into
consideration with regard to the question of enhancing the
United Nations peace-keeping operations and, more so,
the means of doing so.
The United Nations can be proud of the
achievements of its peace-keeping operations, of which
there were 17 at the end of 1994, and of the successes of
most of them. Inevitably, in the last few years, we have
witnessed the emergence of other, new multidimensional
peace-keeping operations. In this context, my delegation
would like to recall the three principles highlighted by the
Secretary-General in paragraph 33 of his report: the
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of
force except in self-defence and under clearly defined
mandates.

We should like to emphasize that it is up to the
conflicting parties themselves to assume the responsibility
of resolving their conflicts and that the peace-keeping
forces should play a complementary role. If it becomes
necessary to establish peace-keeping forces, it is
obviously better for the United Nations to work closely
with the regional organizations or regional groups and the
concerned parties, in proportion to the readiness of the
latter to cooperate with the mandate of these troops, than
to work unilaterally and without the categorical consent
of the conflicting parties and even the participation of the
regional group.

The regional arrangements world-wide do not in any
way undermine the role of the Security Council as the
principal body responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security; rather, these
arrangements must assist in alleviating the Council's
workload and in instilling the spirit of sharing and caring
in international affairs. Lessons must be learned from the

 

mistakes of the past so that these lessons may be prevented
from recurring.

My delegation would like to reiterate what the
Ambassador of Indonesia said with respect to the
maintenance of the assessments of Member States agreed
upon in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3101
(XXVIII). My delegation also recognizes the necessity for
a broad-based discussion by the General Assembly on the
report's proposals concerning the fulfilment of the
additional financial obligations.

My delegation strongly believes that today's open
debate is most opportune and timely. Once again, we are
very grateful to the Secretary-General for the Supplement
to An Agenda for Peace - his position paper on the
historic occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations. This is a very thought-provoking document. We
hope that our deliberations today and the informal
consultations of the members of the Council will lead to
realization of the need for a proper study of objectives and
appropriate actions in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

Finally, we hereby recognize and commend the
international community' s earnest and prompt contributions
in respect of the many difficult issues - whether
preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping, post-conflict peace-
building, sanctions or disarmament.

