Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's open debate.
Allow me also to express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his statement on the important
issue before us.

Indonesia subscribes to the letter (S/20l2/257)
submitted by the delegation of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement on today's open Security
Council debate. In that context, Indonesia is of the
View that close cooperation and coordination among all
principal organs of the United Nations is essential to
effectively addressing existing, new and emerging
threats and challenges.

Indonesia supports the United Nations efforts
within existing mandates and together with other
international stakeholders to assist countries,
particularly countries that lack capacities and
resources, to improve the border security in those
countries upon request. Securing borders is the
responsibility of the relevant national authorities, but
this responsibility is fulfilled effectively when there are
adequate capacities and necessary instruments
available to Governments.

It is important to also stress that the strengthening
of capacities against illicit flows needs to be
considered in a comprehensive manner in which there
is sustained support for achieving overall political,
economic and social betterment. A prospering and
aware society with robust and accountable governance
structures will be in a better position to implement
strong controls over its territorial borders and take full
responsibility for the issues concerned.

Transnational illicit flows of materials, goods and
people are age-old phenomena, but globalization and
technological improvements have enabled issues as
terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and organized
crime to manifest themselves as serious global
challenges. Indeed, illicit flows and State legitimacy
and security are closely linked.

Non-State actors, such as transnational crime
groups, terrorist networks and insurgents, exploit gaps
in border security. They tend to thrive in conditions of
conflict, poverty, and political instability, undermining
the State's legitimacy and security. On the other hand,
the weakening of a State's writ and its security
apparatus presents opportunities to those non-State
actors to enhance their nefarious activities. The
international community, in accordance with
international law, should help countries in need to
strengthen their national systems, and they must
undertake vigilant border management.

Indonesia fully recognizes the importance of
securing borders against the illegal cross-border
movement of people, including terrorists and criminals;
as well as goods, including small arms and light
weapons, ammunition, explosives, chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear material; and other
illicit materials, such as drugs. In this regard,
Indonesia, through a variety of measures, including
surveillance, patrols, physical barriers, joint control
operations, information exchange, intelligence and
engagement with border communities on control and
policing, is carrying out border management.

Indonesia has adopted numerous laws and
regulations to prevent and detect the movement of
illicit materials and related crimes. A new law on
immigration was enacted in May 2011. We expanded
our border control management system and
strengthened a web-based enhanced system that
includes biometrics capture at 27 of our air and sea
ports. We pursue the prevention of illegal cross-border
movements of people and goods also through
international instruments. In 2009, Indonesia ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, along with its two Protocols to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air. We are
also very satisfied with our cooperation with Australia
through the mechanism of the Bali Process.

Indonesia is also taking measures to prevent the
illicit traffic in drugs and psychotropic substances and
their precursors. We established a multi-stakeholder
national narcotics body in 2009 and have ratified all
three anti-drug conventions under the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime.

Terrorist movement across borders is indeed a
serious matter that should be addressed. Weak State
border management will be a source of exploitation by
terrorist networks. Indonesia realizes that cooperation
at the international level is needed if States are to
overcome such exploitation. To that extent, Indonesia
continues to strengthen its cooperation on countering
terrorism at every level - bilateral, regional and
multilateral. In the multilateral forums, Indonesia has
always played an active and important role through the
United Nations system and related mechanisms.
Indonesia is also proud to have ratified seven
international instruments related to the prevention of
terrorism, as a gesture of seriousness and commitment
to combating terrorism.

At the regional level, we are deeply engaged in
combating terrorism with other countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and
ratified, among others, the ASEAN Treaty on Mutual
Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters in 2008, which
streamlines legal cooperation on countering terrorism
and its financing.

In closing, I would like to reiterate that, in order
to develop appropriate border security, a combination
of wide range of measures is needed. But the most
effective approach is one that is undertaken on the
basis of cooperation among the neighbouring countries.
Consistent cooperation and coordination among
neighbours reinforce individual national control
systems and help establish an environment conducive
to taking effective action on each side of the border.

