Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We are pleased to see you,
Mr. President, preesiding over today's open debate of
the Security Council.

We fully align ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned countries.

Over the years there have been improvements in the
Security Council's working methods. That has happened
in no small measure due to the persistent efforts of the
non-permanent members. Much more, however, needs
to be done. In that regard, my delegation would like to
highlight the following key points.

The Council must continue to work towards
enhancing openness, transparency and inclusivity
in its decision-making processes. Member States
not serving on the Council nevertheless have high
stakes in its decisions, and dialogue with the wider
membership is therefore crucial. Effective and
consistent implementation of the decision to improve
the Council's working methods, including the decision
on intra-Council communication adapted from
Pakistan's proposal during its last term on the Council,
is important.

We should continue to find ways to forge a more
robust partnership among the Council, the troop-
contributing countries, the Secretariat and general
membership. Troop-contributing countries and
police-contributing countries must be closely consulted
before the formulation and adoption of peacekeeping
mandates. Their involvement in the processes of
mission formation will address many issues related to
command, control, communication, coordination and
inter-mission movements. Such consultations would
help peacekeeping missions to adapt to realities on the
ground.

A transparent process leading to a balanced
representation on the Council's expert panels is
required. And the Office of the Ombudsperson needs to
be strengthened. There is no justification for limiting
its role to only one sanctions committee.

To enhance the relationship between the Council
and the General Assembly more public briefings,
substantive annual reports by the Council and
meaningful interaction between the Council and the
Assembly on the annual report of the Council would be
helpful. Taking up some of the proposals set out in the
letter written last year by the President of the General
Assembly in that regard could be a good beginning.

The process of the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General is upon us. The opaqueness of that
process is good for neither the Council nor the United
Nations as a whole.

Finally, the early election of non-permanent
members next year will enable the Council to
allocate the Chairs of subsidiary bodies in a timely
manner - a demand that we have been making for
many years. Perhaps that will also enable the Council to
have more penholders from among the non-permanent
members.

The Security Council is a master of its own rules
of procedure, which unfortunately to date remain
provisional. Many of us today are giving our opinions

on what needs to be done. The important question to
ask is, How could all this be accomplished? It is a fact
that non-permanent members have convened almost
all the debates on the working methods of the Security
Council. It is a fact worth pondering over. There is an
inextricable link between the nature of the membership
of the Council and the need felt to make the Council more
open and transparent. That link is called accountability.
