Mr. Steinmeier: It is an honour for me to address
the Security Council today as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), the largest regional arrangement under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

First of all, allow me to pay tribute to the late
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali. His "Agenda
for Peace" (S/24lll) not only marked a milestone for
the international order after the Cold War. It was also
Boutros-Ghali who recognized the important role of
regional organizations in conflict settlement. He laid
the foundation for the strong relationship between the
United Nations and the OSCE - a relationship we
would like to strengthen even further in 2016.

Nobody will deny that the challenges we are facing
are enormous. As an European organization, I have to
start with our own region. Violent crises and conflicts
surround us, even on our own continent of Europe - and
it is not only about Ukraine. In a very real sense, the
Russian annexation of Crimea brought back to our
agenda concerns about our common European security.
At the same time, violence has spiked in regions of the
Middle East and Northern Africa. Oppression, terror,
religious radicalism and regional rivalries have led to
immeasurable human suffering, especially in Syria.
The brutal conflicts in the Middle East have also
reached the European continent. Hundreds of thousands
of people have been forced to flee their homes and are
seeking shelter in Europe, many of them, as members
know, in Germany.

All of those developments are challenging our
common security more fundamentally than we long
thought possible. Maintaining international peace and
security, that is what the Charter of the United Nations
provides for; while a new era of democracy, peace and
unity in Europe was the vision in the Charter of Paris.
However, this vision of a Europe whole and free has
not yet materialized and, even worse, the principles
of international law, as stipulated in the Charter of
the United Nations and OSCE documents, seem to be
coming under more and more pressure. How should
we respond? What should our guiding principles be in
these uncertain times?

First, let us face this world with a realistic
eye - with the eye oftoday not of yesterday. We are not
reliving the Cold War, and we should not talk as if we
were. The world of today is different; its conflicts are
of a new kind - more complex, with more actors and
more conflicting interests - so yesterday's arguments
are, from my point of View, not only inappropriate; they
are counterproductive.

Secondly, I am convinced that the principles to
which we have all agreed in the United Nations and the
OSCE, such as the territorial integrity and sovereign
equality of nations, must still form the bedrock of how
we live together as nations. These commitments still
form the basis for overcoming divisions, provided that
all States muster the necessary political will.

Thirdly, we need strong multilateral organizations
to help safeguard and implement these principles, to give
us tools for conflict resolution, and to provide us with
opportunities for debate to overcome our differences.
The United Nations was created to do exactly that, and
the same holds for the OSCE. I firmly believe that these
two organizations continue to give us the best tools we
have to shape the future of a rules-based international
order and to prevent the fragility of our time from
turning into perpetual disorder. That is why these
two institutions are so important, particularly in our
turbulent times. We want the OSCE to help us overcome
the fragile security situation, in close cooperation with
the United Nations. Let me highlight some focal areas
of our chairmanship.

The first is Ukraine. The developments in and
around Ukraine have shown how indispensable the
OSCE is when it comes to unite our strength to
maintain international peace and security, as the
Charter of the United Nations says. Without the OSCE
and particularly the courageous men and women of the
Special Monitoring Mission we would not have made
the progress we have seen on military de-escalation and
at least a partial withdrawal of weapons. However, we
remain deeply concerned over the continuing violations
of the ceasefire and the restrictions of access for the
Mission. I strongly believe that implementing the
Minsk agreements is the only way towards a sustainable
political solution, and I call on both sides represented in
the Council to live up to their responsibilities. Together
with our French colleagues, we remain committed to
supporting this process within the Normandy format,
and I count on the support of the Council in this regard.

Secondly, I would like to highlight conflicts that
are often referred to as "frozen" or "protracted". I
believe that we should not adopt this kind of fatalism.
For many years, these conflicts have brought hardship
to the people affected and stagnation to the regions
involved. During our OSCE chairmanship, we want
to make every effort to return to more constructive
approaches, to stabilize ceasefires, and to rebuild trust
by building confidence in small but tangible steps.

In the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, we are
concerned about the high number of deadly incidents
along the line of contact and the border between
Armenia and Azerbaijan. We need to intensify efforts
under the auspices of the OSCE Minsk Group. We must
find ways to reduce the number of casualties quickly,
and we should not be disheartened in seeking a lasting
solution to the conflict on the basis of the principles of
territorial integrity and the non-use of force.

In Georgia, we have seen at least some progress
on practical cooperation between the sides. I want to
commend the efforts undertaken by the United Nations,
jointly with the OSCE and the European Union, in the
Geneva international discussions. We want to underpin
this momentum with more confidence-building
measures and humanitarian action. We will also use
the chairmanship to revive the 5+2 negotiations on the
Transnistria conflict.

My third point concerns security- and confidence-
building measures. Whether we look at Ukraine, Russia
or Turkey, we are currently seeing increased military
activities and a high risk of military incidents between
OSCE member States. In these times, confidence- and
security-building measures are more important than
ever. One important element is the Vienna Document.
The Ukraine conflict has revealed that it needs to be
updated substantially. Progress will be difficult, of
course, when confidence is low, but I am convinced that
the proposals we have made would lead to better crisis
prevention and risk reduction. On the basis of these
confidence-building measures, I do hope that we will
eventually return to a broader dialogue on European
security. We should adhere to the long-term vision
of renewed arms control and cooperative security
in Europe.

The OSCE and the United Nations share the task of
preventing armed conflicts. I believe we should make
every effort to strengthen OSCE capabilities in this
field, from early warning to crisis management to post-
conflict rehabilitation. We will also address the role
of women in conflict management and the protection
of women in violent conflicts, in line with resolution
1325 (2000). The experience of the United Nations in
all these areas can enrich this process. I believe that
we are more likely to be successful if we work closely
together and combine our toolboxes.

The same is true when it comes to addressing the
many other global challenges we face, from terrorism
and extremism to organized crime. I believe that
the pressing issue of migration should figure more
prominently on our agenda. I welcome the Secretary-
General's initiative to organize a global summit
on migration in September. The OSCE has a lot of
expertise in this field, from human rights standards
and best practices in labour migration to combatting
human trafficking. That is why we want to discuss how
the OSCE can contribute to the international efforts, in
line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1).

Human rights and fundamental freedoms are top
priorities of our chairmanship. I believe that we need
to intensify the fight against discrimination, racism,
xenophobia and intolerance throughout Europe,
including in my own country. In Germany, people's
overwhelming readiness to help arriving refugees has
recently been overshadowed by xenophobic assaults.
These are despicable acts that we must not and will
not tolerate.

Finally, I would like to highlight the fact that
security within the OSCE area is intrinsically tied to
the security of its neighbours. The OSCE is a unique
organization, but my hope is that its principles can
provide a glimmer of hope to other regions, particularly
in the Middle East. Let us remember that the road to
Helsinki began when the Cold War was at its coldest.
At the start of the negotiations, who would have dared
to hope that at the end of it, the Berlin Wall would fall?

Of course, one cannot transfer a security architecture
to another region. But perhaps our experiences can
highlight useful principles and processes, and maybe
they can encourage the parties in the Middle East to
live up to their responsibility and explore new paths
to political settlements. This is a discussion that we
started at the OSCE conference in Amman last year and
on which we would like to build.

Germany is fully aware of the responsibility
attached to assuming the OSCE chairmanship in
these turbulent times. I am convinced that we have to
remain firm with respect to our principles. At the same
time, I believe that we need to promote dialogue and a
cooperative approach so as to overcome our differences
and put us back on track towards restored security.

We should remind ourselves of the spirit of Helsinki:
persistent dialogue and a cooperative approach can
pay off in the end. This very hope is expressed in our
motto for 2016: "Renewing dialogue, rebuilding trust
and restoring security". This embraces the spirit of the
United Nations Charter. Rebuilding trust will not be
easy, and there is no quick fix. But if we want to be able
to look future generations in the eye and say that we
did everything possible to return to peace in Europe,
we have to work on it together, in the OSCE and in the
United Nations.

