Mr. Jumeau (Seychelles): May I start by
expressing Seychelles' condolences to the Ambassador,
the people and the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) of Somalia over the loss of life from the bomb
attack in Mogadishu yesterday, as well as my country's
strong condemnation of the attack.

I am pleased to inform the Security Council that,
on 26 July, the Seychelles Supreme Court convicted
ll Somali pirates and sentenced them to 10 years in
prison, which is the first time pirates were convicted by
a Seychelles court of law. Moreover, only eight of the
pirates were found guilty of actually committing an act
of piracy. The other three were convicted of aiding and
abetting piracy after Seychelles amended its domestic
laws so that a person does not have to be caught in an
actual act of piracy to be arrested and successfully
prosecuted. Another 29 suspected pirates are awaiting
trial in Seychelles or transfer to Somalia.

These events underscore Seychelles' determination
and firm commitment to playing a proactive role in
combating, arresting, prosecuting and imprisoning
pirates. We hope it will also serve as a further example
that, as has also been shown by Kenya, piracy can be
tackled through domestic legislation where there is the
political will and courage to do so.

But this is not the only way in which Seychelles,
the smallest country in Africa and the Indian Ocean,
and one of the States most heavily impacted by piracy
in the region, has shown its willingness and
determination to lead from the front. Since the General
Assembly's informal meeting on piracy in May this
year, Seychelles has hosted no fewer than four
international and regional meetings of ministers,
parliamentarians and technical and military experts to,
among other things, spearhead a regional approach to
tackle piracy in the Indian Ocean.

This process started on 21 May when ministers
from six Eastern and Southern African countries, the
European Union High-level Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Vice-President of the European
Commission and representatives of the African Union,
the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
(COMESA), the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC),
INTERPOL and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) met in Seychelles to lay the
foundations for a regional plan to combat piracy. That
meeting was followed in July by the Seychelles
International Symposium on Maritime Security, which
included the participation of a representative of the
Secretary-General, the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security and representatives of the World
Bank, the International Maritime Organization and
countries and organizations from both inside and
outside the Indian Ocean region.

July also saw Seychelles host the fifth regional
meeting of the African, Caribbean and Pacific States-
European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly, which
looked at piracy, among other issues, and a joint
COMESA-IOC workshop that started work on the nuts
and bolts of a regional plan of action. As you can see,
Mr. President, Seychelles is firmly committed and
determined to do as much as it can within the limits of
its resources and with the much-valued support and
assistance of partner countries and organizations.

In the past three months, a number of these
partners - in particular the UNODC, the European
Union, the United Kingdom, the United Arab Emirates,
India and Germany 4 have responded to Seychelles'
initiatives with generous offers of support in the form
of technical assistance, capacity building, the building
of infrastructure and the provision of funding and
equipment, for which we are deeply grateful.

The Summit of Heads of State and Government
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) held in Windhoek, Namibia, last week noted
the economic and security threat posed by piracy in the
coastal waters of SADC member States. It also
mandated its secretariat to send a team of experts to
establish the extent of the problem and recommend
appropriate measures.

Seychelles calls on the international community
to provide generous support for the regional plan of
action, which is well on its way to being approved by
countries of the region and key international partners.
A well-supported regional plan will encourage more
countries in and around the Indian Ocean to play a
more active role in combating, prosecuting and
imprisoning pirates. It will also relieve international
partners from outside the region of some of the high
costs of stationing naval and other military units in the
Indian Ocean.

Finally, as the Security Council considers the
various options put before it by the Secretary-General
to more effectively bring pirates to justice, I must
recall that the current rough seas of the south-east
monsoon in the Indian Ocean will die down towards
the end of September, when there will once again be an
upsurge in pirate activity off the coast of Somalia,
reaching as far south as Madagascar and as far east as
Maldives and India.

Seychelles has meanwhile used the lull in pirate
activity caused by the bad weather to show that a lot
can be done to combat piracy by the region itself, and
within the boundaries of domestic law, if there is the
political will and commitment to do so, accompanied
by the necessary international support and solidarity.

