Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Klein, and High Representative
Ashdown for their presentations. I have three questions
to ask, but first, as the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) comes to a close,
I would like especially to praise Jacques Klein for his
dedication, resolve and tenacity. His leadership has
made a positive difference in Bosnia.

Now to my questions. First, what will be the
response of the High Representative if coalitions
emerge from the October elections that include
nationalist parties that have refused to cooperate with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY)? My Government does not
subscribe to some of the views of some in the
international community that have accepted certain
outcomes as inevitable. As Lord Ashdown himself has
said, we should judge parties by their deeds, not their
words. We believe that the international community
and the Council should continue to demand active
cooperation with the ICTY, not just meaningless
gestures, by parties which have long-standing
associations with persons indicted on war crimes, such
as Radovan Karadzic. For its part, the United States is
concerned about the presence of obstructionist parties
in Government and in bureaucracies that have triggered
legal restrictions on assistance to the Republika Srpska.
Let us hope that this does not need to be extended to an
additional and different level.

If local governments do not take appropriate
action, will the High Representative use his Bonn
powers to remove Dayton obstructers - including
those found to have transferred military items to Iraq,
which would constitute a violation of requirements to
keep the Stabilization Force (SFOR) informed
regarding exports of military items, but which also is in
violation of the United Nations sanctions agreed to by
this Council.

Secondly, is the European Union Police Mission
(EUPM) ready to take over the residual police tasks
from the International Police Task Force (IPTF),
especially in the critical areas of counter-terrorism,
organized crime and trafficking in persons?

We congratulate Jacques Klein on the successful
completion of UNMIBH's mandate. And we support
the High Representative's comprehensive rule of law
programme, which we are supporting with considerable
resources. Is the EUPM. ready, in terms of resources
and organization, to take over this critical function?

Finally, we would like to ask Mr. Klein whether
he sees any problem between now and the end of the
year in bringing UNMIBH's operations to a close. As
we have indicated, we are satisfied with the
considerable progress that has been made in
UNMIBH's operations, but we would like to hear his
assessment of any developments that will receive
special attention in the transition period between IPTF
and EUPM.

