Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): We are very
grateful to the permanent representatives of the United
States and the United Kingdom, Ambassadors John
Negroponte and Emyr Jones Parry, for their valuable
and substantial presentations to the Council this
morning on the efforts of the Coalition Provisional
Authority (CPA) to move forward with the political and
reconstruction process of Iraq.

We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report on the fact-finding mission led by Lakhdar
Brahimi which represents a major contribution to the
understanding of the situation prevailing in Iraq and the
narrow options that the country is facing.

My delegation takes note of the progress achieved
so far, in building Iraq's institutional, physical and
political infrastructure, as pointed out this morning by
the two ambassadors.

During the year 2003, Iraq, once again, became
the most worrisome issue on the Security Council's
agenda. This year, Iraq's people, the occupying
Powers, the United Nations and the international
community find themselves at a dramatic crossroads,
with a nebulous, dangerous way forward and few
options towards the future. The security situation
remains a cause of extraordinary concern since it is, as
observed earlier today and as we have all seen, still
very dangerous. Once again a collective and concerted
effort by the international community is needed to face
this dangerous situation.

Restoration to Iraq of its national sovereignty, on
30 June 2004, must take place within a dramatically
improved security situation if it is to mark a real
departure from the past and the beginning of a new
phase. In our View, and as stated at various points in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/l40),
without a steady improvement in the security situation,
it will be very difficult, if not totally impossible, to
hold just, free and fair elections.

We view with great concern the growing
fragmentation of the Iraqi political class and the
polarization of inter-communal politics - in other
words, the irredentism - which is the source of evil
deeds. Elections should by no means contribute to
legitimize such realities. Instead, we need to see the
building of a truly national consensus, the building of
trust and the building of cooperation.

Iraq is at a very dangerous crossroads in its history.
The Security Council also finds itself at a crossroads with
few options. The report of the Secretary-General is a
wake-up call and a realistic reminder of the narrow
road that the Iraqi people and the international
community must pursue towards the future.

We are pleased that, finally, the United Nations
can play the vital role which the international
community so insistently demanded. I am pleased that
Iraqis have also welcomed the active participation of
the United Nations in the search for just solutions in
which the ownership of the process by Iraqis must
become a reality.

We have taken note of the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's fact-finding report
(S/2004/ 140), particularly regarding the deadline of 30
June 2004 for the transfer of sovereignty to the
provisional Government - a representative Iraqi
Government.

As the Secretary-General has so often reminded
us, we need to maintain a consensus within our
Council, as that is the best way to translate our support
to the Iraqi people, and maintain the support of all the
stakeholders in Iraq, in order to find a solution to the
very difficult situation we are facing. I am confident
that we will be able to move in that direction.

