Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Taye-Broook Zerihoun, Ambassador Apakan
and the Special Representative of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine, Mr. Martin Sajdick,
for their informative briefings. I would also like to
thank the Ukrainian delegation for calling this essential
meeting. We recognize, as I think all members of the
Council do, the critically important work that OSCE
teams are carrying out in the field, often at significant
personal risk - as illustrated by the recent attacks
on OSCE monitors. We also note the great work
done by United Nations staff - again at significant
personnel risk, as evinced by the detention of a United
Nations staff member by Russian-backed separatists
since 8 April. That staff member should be released
immediately and unconditionally.

The Security Council has not met to discuss
the situation in Ukraine since December 2015 (see S/PV.7576) - a long stretch by recent standards. It
would not be unreasonable to interpret the absence of
meetings as a sign, perhaps, that the implementation of
the Minsk agreements is advancing. Yet, as we all know,
and as we have heard starkly today, that is, sadly, not
the case. Over the past several months, the conflict has
worsened. Violence has increased, and the challenges
to implementation of the Minsk agreements have only
increased. Before delving into those discouraging
developments, it is important to remind ourselves of the
root cause of this crisis.

What is happening today is the result of Russia's
violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, which began with its occupation of Crimea
more than two years ago. That occupation expanded
with substantial military on the ground and weapons
support for armed separatists in eastern Ukraine.
Every negative consequence of the conflict that we see
today - every one - can be traced back to that original
sin. We must not lose sight of that incontrovertible
fact, even as we focus on the issues and the human
consequences in the present.

Let me begin with the situation in eastern Ukraine,
where Violence along the line of contact has reached its
highest levels since the 1 September 2015 ceasefire was
declared. According to the most recent report by the

OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, from
25 January to 10 April,

"the [Mission] recorded 11 consecutive weeks in
which the number of recorded ceasefire violations
was higher than in any other single week since
early September 2015."

On 14 April alone - and this is shocking even by
Ukraine standards - the Monitoring Mission recorded
more than 4,000 ceasefire violations, some 500 of them
on a single day, using heavy weapons that are prohibited
under the Minsk agreements.

Just yesterday, as others have noted, we were again
reminded of the dreadful human toll of this violence,
when an explosion killed four civilians and wounded
at least eight more along the line of contact. This cycle
of escalation must stop. As the fighting has increased,
the unarmed international monitors, whose job it is to
document ceasefire violations and to try to de-escalate
the violence, have found themselves denied access,
threatened and, in some instances, even targeted
themselves.

The climate, as has been noted by OSCE
colleagues, is a climate of impunity. On 7 April, a
Monitoring Mission vehicle that was driving deep into
Russian-backed separatist-controlled territory some
60 kilometres from the line of contact came under
small arms fire. The same day, in separatist-controlled
Luhansk, another such vehicle was blocked by Russian-
backed separatist forces. When a monitor stepped out of
the vehicle to negotiate their passage, a Russian-backed
separatist cocked his rifle and pointed it directly at the
monitor. Those are not isolated incidents. According
to OSCE reports, separatists have been responsible for
more than 90 per cent of incidents in which access has
been restricted or denied during this month.

That brings us back to a question we have asked
many times before in the Council. When Russia and the
separatists it backs have denied impartial monitors and
investigators access - from the time of the invasion
of Crimea to the inspection of the Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 crash site - the question is: what do they
have to hide? Why are OSCE monitors so scary that
one needs to shoot up their car, cock guns at them and
impede their movement? What is Russia hiding?

Working to ensure that a comprehensive and
sustained ceasefire takes hold along the line of contact,
and that OSCE monitors have the full and unfettered
access they need to help monitor that ceasefire, is the
sina qua non for the political steps set out in the Minsk
agreements. Consider the steps of passing an electoral
law and holding free and fair local elections under
Ukrainian law and in accordance with OSCE standards.
That is of critical importance. We all recognize that.
Yet, to hold a democratic election, citizens and election
monitors need basic security and basic freedom of
movement. Candidates must be able to express their
opinions and assemble publicly without fear of violence
or reprisals. Yet the climate created by the separatists
in the parts of eastern Ukraine that they occupy is not a
climate that looks anything like that.

In addition to de-escalating the fighting and
allowing full access for international monitors
throughout eastern Ukraine, Russia must engage
constructively and support serious efforts to propose an
election law for areas of Donetsk and Luhansk oblast,
as well as support the steps necessary for an adequate
security environment for elections in the Donbas region
that meet OSCE standards. Actions such as those, as
well as the release of all hostages and detained persons,
will help pave the way for further implementation of
the Minsk agreements, which should ultimately lead to
Russia's withdrawal of all forces and equipment from
Ukrainian territory and the restoration of Ukrainian
control over its side of the international border.

Pulling back forces and abiding by the ceasefire is
also crucial to improving the dire humanitarian situation
faced by civilians, who are disproportionately bearing
the costs of Russia's aggression in Ukraine. According
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, an estimated 3.1 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance as a result of the ongoing
conflict. Approximately 1 million of those people live
along the line of contact or in separatist-controlled
territory. Yet they are receiving only a fraction of
the aid they need, in large part because Russian-
backed separatists expelled most United Nations and
international humanitarian organizations in July 2015,
and have not allowed them consistent access since.

In aperverse cycle, Russia uses the dire humanitarian
situation that it has helped fuel to send its so-called
humanitarian convoys across the international border
with Ukraine, all the while preventing Ukrainian and
international authorities from inspecting those convoys.
Once again, if your convoys are filled with food and
medicine, why prevent international inspectors from
looking inside of them. To that end, we again urge
Moscow to honour its commitments in Minsk to ensure
that separatists allow the immediate resumption of full
humanitarian access.

As the Government of Ukraine seeks to address
this Russian-manufactured crisis, it should facilitate
the safe movement of civilians and commercial cargo
across the contact line. It should keep checkpoints into
separatist-controlled territories open, unless closing
them is essential to ensuring the security of civilians.
And it should find ways consistent with security and
administrative requirements to ensure that social,
economic and educational benefits are provided to
internally displaced persons and other populations,
such as older persons and persons with disabilities.

Let me turn to another part of Ukraine, Crimea. It
has been more than two years since Russia held its sham
referendum, one, we must recall, where the question
posed to voters - those who turned out - was to join
or leave Ukraine. Some choice. It has been two years
since then, as well, that 100 Member States, including
the United States, adopted General Assembly resolution
68/262, which underscores that the referendum has no
validity and affirms our shared commitment, as stated
in paragraph 1, to

"the sovereignty, political independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders".

If you want a picture of the way Russian authorities
govern on sovereign Ukrainian territory, just look at
Crimea today. On Tuesday of this week, the Russian-
controlled Supreme Court in Crimea declared the
Mejlis, the self-governing body of the Crimean Tartars,
an extremist organization. As a result, virtually all
forms of Tartar political expression and organization
have effectively been criminalized. No more speaking
to the press - that is a crime. No more convening
meetings - a crime. No more holding elections - a
crime. Of course, the Mejlis will be allowed to keep its
bank accounts, although now they may be used only to
pay taxes and penalties to occupying authorities. On the
day of the ruling, Crimea's so-called Chief Prosecutor
declared,

"Today, we build a world in which every Crimean
will be safe andjoyful".

That is unless one is a Crimean Tartar or another
resident who happens to oppose the occupation.
Meanwhile, the crackdown on dissent in Crimea
continues to deepen, as the few remaining independent
journalists and other critical voices are methodically
targeted. On 18 April, a high-ranking Russian justice
official argued publicly for passing legislation that
would treat questioning the legitimacy of sham Crimea
referendum as an "extremist activity", punishable by
law. The following day, the homes of at least seven
journalists in Crimea were raided by authorities. One
of those journalists is now facing up to five years in
prison on charges of allegedly "calling for undermining
Russian territorial integrity via mass media". In another
words, for reporting that Crimea is part of Ukraine, as
all United Nations maps show that it is, one is locked up.
How is that possible? In Crimea and eastern Ukraine,
as in so much of Russia, telling the truth is now an
extremist activity. Go figure.

Let me conclude. I began my remarks today by
encouraging us all not to lose sight of the root cause of
this crisis: Russia's occupation of Crimea and ongoing
arming, training and fighting alongside separatists in
eastern Ukraine. Just as the root cause of this crisis has
not changed, neither has the solution. As has always
been the case, the crisis manufactured by Russia can
and must be ended by Russia, by stopping its arming,
training and fighting alongside separatists in eastern
Ukraine and by ending its illegal occupation of Crimea.
The Minks agreements offer the only pathway - one
agreed upon by all sides * to de-escalate this conflict,
to restore peace to Ukraine and to reaffirm the principles
of sovereignty and territorial integrity that undergird
all of our collective security. But to implement them,
Russia and the separatists whom it supports must
fulfil the very first step of abiding by an immediate
and comprehensive ceasefire and grant full access to
OSCE monitors. Together with the Normandy format
leaders, the United States will continue to press for
their full implementation by all parties, just as we will
keep sanctions in place for as long as Russia continues
to obstruct their implementation. And we will maintain
our Crimea sanctions until Russia ends its occupation
of the peninsula.

