Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the holding of this meeting and to
Mr. Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing and the
work that he is doing with his team. We welcome the
participation of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine and Jordan.

Peru is following with deep concern the situation
in Palestine. The uncompromising positions, the lack
of dialogue between the parties and the continued
violence have led to a stalemate in the peace process.
The situation is unsustainable and destabilizing for
the Middle East and the international community. We
must continue to condemn the persistent indiscriminate
attacks against the Israeli civilian population by Hamas
and other radical Palestinian actors, the disproportionate
response by the Israelis, and the aggressive rhetoric
of their respective leaders, which perpetually fuel the
hostile dynamics of the situation.

In that regard, we stress the importance for the
Security Council to regain its unity on this sensitive
issue so that it can speak out when the situation on the
ground warrants and demand that the parties comply
strictly with their obligations under international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights
law. We are alarmed that the prospects for reaching a
political solution are becoming increasingly faint and
that unilateral decisions, actions and their subsequent
declarations could degenerate into an even greater
escalation of tension and violence.

We recognize Israel's right to safeguard its
own security and existence through the exercise of
legitimate self-defence, provided it do so in accordance
with the principles of legality, proportionality and
precaution. The human rights of Palestinian citizens,
including those of minors, cannot be ignored. To that
end, we must recall Israel's obligation to comply with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. In particular,
we believe it urgent, in line with resolution 2334
(2016), to end the rise in settlement activities, property
demolitions and evictions in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967. Such practices run contrary to
international law, seriously jeopardize the territorial
integrity of the Palestinian State and undermine the
chances of reaching a two-State solution.

We also emphasize the urgent need to address
the basic needs of the people of Gaza, as poverty
and marginalization provide fertile ground for those
advocating violence and terrorism. We encourage the
continuation of infrastructure and development projects,
the pursuit of efforts to ensure that the Palestinian
Authority can regain effective control of the area, and
the provision of stable and predictable funding to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.

In conclusion, we express our full support
for Mr. Mladenov in his efforts to prevent further
escalation and to promote dialogue among the parties,
while reaffirming our commitment to finding a solution
to the question of Palestine, which will undoubtedly
contribute to the achievement of sustainable peace in
the region.

