Mr. Tanin: As reflected in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/102), this past period was characterized
by action and rhetoric that did not improve the overall
atmosphere or the potential for a swift resumption of
the political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
Antagonistic gestures and accusations continue to
be far more evident than efforts to return to the new
phase of dialogue that has been widely discussed for
many months now. While there is no question that the
leaders on both sides are facing serious challenges, the
minimum requirement for a continued dialogue is to find
the means to steady rather than agitate the atmosphere.
Instead, there has been a tendency to disrupt rather
than de-escalate the situation. The absence ofa unified
stance in Pristina on the conditions for the resumption
of the dialogue with Belgrade has reached a critical
point in the days since the close of the reporting period,
raising concerns about the continued viability of the
current Government coalition in Kosovo.

Where does this leave the prospects for constructive
political engagement? Much attention has been focused
on the 100 per cent tariff introduced by the Pristina
authorities on goods originating from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, beginning in November
last year. This measure has been challenged in many
quarters and Belgrade has made a resumption of the
dialogue contingent on Pristina's revocation of the
tariff. Pristina has linked the lifting of the tariff to a
number of conditions. This is not the only example of
positions taken by the parties that complicate efforts
to return to the negotiating table. A responsible and
forward-looking approach is essential if we are to
remove obstacles to restarting the political negotiations.
An expanded negotiating team for the dialogue,
which includes members of the Assembly of Kosovo,
was established in Pristina in December. However,
internal discussions on the key principles that should
guide Pristina's position in future negotiations are still
ongoing. At the same time, more must be done on both
sides to prepare the ground for whatever agreement
may be reached between the parties. It will require
more active engagement with and support from a
wide range of stakeholders, including by pursuing the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
the dialogue-related processes and by taking gender
perspectives into account.

In December, the Kosovo Assembly enacted three
laws that relate to the comportment and activities of the
Kosovo Security Force. They were not supported by the
Serb caucus and were heavily criticized in Belgrade.
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) provides the
sole legal framework for the international security
presence, the Kosovo Force (KFOR), entrusted with the
responsibility of ensuring a safe and secure environment
in Kosovo. KFOR has reiterated that stance, stressing
that any adjustments must be transparent and inclusive,
and that all previous commitments by Pristina
regarding the Kosovo Security Force must continue to
be honoured.

Recent developments in the relations between
Pristina and Belgrade have complicated the efforts
to create an atmosphere conducive to dialogue and
good-faith compromise. This is a reminder that
while commitment at the top levels remains central,
dedication to building mutual confidence and trust
across the communities on the ground is just as crucial.
In order to contribute effectively to this important
aspect of normalization and reconciliation, the work
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) has focused on facilitating
people-to-people engagement in Kosovo. Together with
the United Nations Kosovo team and other international
partners, UNMIK is advancing the implementation
of the joint recommendations of the United Nations
Kosovo Trust-Building Forum held in May 2018 in
Ljubljana, focusing on supporting activities across
various sectors and layers of society. They include
cross-community dialogue, the promotion of language
rights and equality under the law, youth empowerment
and gender equality. In collaboration with the United
Nations Kosovo team, the Mission has also engaged
Kosovo civil society to help reduce gender- and ethnic-
based discrimination. UNMIK has leveraged its limited
resources by combining its efforts with those of our
international partners.

UNMIK also continued to support the implementation
of human rights-related initiatives and legislation,
which are often made harder by inadequate financial
and other resource commitments. Important progress
has been made in the work of the Working Group on
persons who are unaccounted for in connection with
events in Kosovo. No obstacles in the form of political
influence should be placed in the way of this work if
we are to maintain momentum on the issue, which is
vital to long-term reconciliation. More needs to be
done to effectively guarantee the rights of non-majority
communities, including Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma,
as well as returnees and internally displaced persons.

Promoting genuine gender equality in Kosovo is
another area that deserves particular attention. I have
already mentioned the need for gender perspectives in
the dialogue. For its part, UNMIK supports initiatives
that build women's entrepreneurial skills and their
ability to start new businesses. I have been engaged
directly with women leaders at the central and local
levels to promote such initiatives, and I believe that
there is a growing sense of empowerment.

UNMIK, in partnership with other United Nations
actors, supports local-level Kosovo institutions in the
rehabilitation and reintegration of victims of domestic
violence. The Mission has contributed to a series of
advocacy initiatives aimed at preventing violence
against women and girls, within the framework of the
16 Days of Activism against Gender-based Violence.
During the campaign, a UNMIK-produced documentary
called Not Your Property was launched in Pristina,
followed by screenings in 10 municipalities of Kosovo,
organized in collaboration with UN-Women and led
by local authorities and civil society partners. The
documentary features stories of survivors from across
Kosovo's communities and interviews with experts
on how the exceptionally low property ownership by
women, owing to customary norms, leaves women
vulnerable to domestic violence.

In supporting intercommunity trust-building,
UNMIK has placed a special focus on youth
empowerment. In recent months, UNMIK has partnered
with two youth-led non-governmental organizations
to implement projects aimed at fostering sustainable
reconciliation through human rights education.
UNMIK continues to support multi-ethnic teams of
young leaders in organizing various activities that
bring positive change to their communities. UNMIK
also supports youth advisory boards in enhancing their
capacity to engage in cross-community dialogue. In
January, the United Nations Kosovo team, supported
by the Peacebuilding Fund, launched a project, in
coordination with UNMIK, to empower youth for a
peaceful, prosperous and sustainable future in Kosovo.

The European perspective remains an important
incentive to achieve peace and stability in the region.
It is important for Kosovo's leaders to maintain focus
on advancing initiatives that are essential to the people
of Kosovo, particularly in the areas of rule of law
and anti-corruption, human rights, strengthening the
independence of the judiciary and bringing legislation
in line with the European Union acquis and other
international standards.

In conclusion, let me underline the importance
of the support of all members of the Council for the
engagement between Belgrade and Pristina. Reducing
tensions, enhancing mutual trust and removing
obstacles to the dialogue are crucial to stability in
the region. I have committed UNMIK's resources to
promoting trust-building at all levels of Kosovo society,
and we will continue to focus on that process in close
coordination with all our partner organizations on the
ground. I thank the Security Council for its support to
our Mission.

