Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First ofall, Bolivia wishes to express
its condolences to the families of the victims of today's
attack in Mogadishu. We regret that the international
community has still not been able to halt the vicious
cycle of violence that we see in various areas of the
globe.

While I was on my way to the United Nations to
attend this debate convened by the President of the
Security Council, I was chatting with a Latin American
colleague on the Chaco War, an armed conflict that
played out in the past century between two of the
poorest countries in South America. That war was
promoted by two multinational oil companies that
were fighting over the natural resources in that part of
the world. That very painful example from my region
goes straight to the heart of what must be stated very
clearly in today's debate, namely, that the history of the
majority of armed conflicts is the history of invasions
and the appropriation of natural resources.

The approach that we have heard about today and
read about in the President's concept note (8/2013/334, annex) cannot, from our point of view, be described
as anything other than interventionist, meddling
and a violation of the sovereignty of States. Matters
concerning the regulation, use, control over and access
to natural resources, whether they be renewable or not,
are subjects that fall exclusively within the prerogative
of States. Furthermore, issues pertaining to sustainable
development, transparency and the fight against
corruption are subjects within the purview of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and other agencies and bodies of the United Nations.

We are concerned at what is concealed under certain
words. In connection with the topic, we hear such terms
and phrases as "good governance", "transparency",
"conflict prevention", "effective management of natural
resources" and "sound regulation of the extractive
sectors". We are concerned because many of the warlike
interventions promoted by some permanent members of
the Security Council have been carried out using such

lofty language.
For some time now, we have been aware that
wars orchestrated under the slogan of freedom have
meant that raw materials were at stake; when we hear
"democracy", that means oil; and when we hear "human
rights", that means consumer markets and cheap labour.
If there is any doubt, let us ask ourselves what happened
and what were the reasons, or excuses, for the wars in
Iraq and, more recently, in Libya.

We are witnessing a process that seeks to refine
argumentative structures and intervention mechanisms.
What other explanation is there for claims regarding the
degree of "susceptibility to conflict" of countries that
are "dependent on extractive industries"? On the basis
of that so-called susceptibility, an attempt is being
made to intervene in the design or the redesign of the
architecture of our institutions and legal systems on the
pretext of preventing conflicts, including the supposed
establishment of sanctions through committees and
groups of experts.

In truth, that is all an inadmissible form of
interventionism; it is in fact a more refined form of
colonialism that violates, as I have said, the sovereignty
of States, and distorts the concept of international
cooperation andjeopardizes peace.

We therefore ask whether we are going to be
considered "susceptible to conflicts" when we exert
our sovereign right to recover our strategic resources
from the hands of multinational companies. Will we
be considered "susceptible" when we nationalize our
strategic resources? If we are talking about conflict
prevention, I trust that the Council will for once be able
to look at the role of multinationals in armed conflict.
There is an essential and urgent need - I say it again in
this Chamber - for reforming the very structure of the
Security Council, just as the United Nations itself must
be reformed. Its structure, as we have said thousands
of times, does not meet the needs of today's world,
and control is still in the hands of a few, violating the
principles of democracy and equality among States. In
more general terms, as my colleague from Argentina
has said, what we need is a new world order, a new
United Nations, a new economic and financial order
that will change production patterns and consumption
paradigms, because what we have now is unsustainable.
We must combat poverty, malnutrition and hunger, and
bring transparency to tax havens. Another issue that
merits serious analysis is the concentration of wealth
and knowledge in the hands of a few, as well as the lack
of technology transfer. Again, they are all sources of
poverty and, of course, exclusion.
