Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): 1 thank you, Sir,
for convening this critical meeting. Let me also thank
Iraq's Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Al-Jaafari,
for his statement, and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nikolay Mladenov for his insightful
briefing and dedicated work.

A united and democratic Iraq within the
internationally recognized borders, with a viable,
inclusive and representative Government, where
the interests of all the groups and components of the
society are taken into account, is the only antidote to
the murderous ideology of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), which is threatening the very
existence of Iraq as we know it today.
Muslims, Kurds, Turkmen: no one is safe where
ISIL sets foot. Yezidis, Shabaks and Christians, who
have been part and parcel of Iraq's unique heritage, are
persecuted, forced to convert and brutally executed.
Mass rapes, sexual violence and horrific abuses
of women and children are routine. Destruction,
displacement and death: such is the daily reality for
millions of Iraqis as ISIL seeks to expand its hideous
hold.

It is against that horrific background of ISIL's
devastating onslaught that the new Government of Iraq
must tackle the multiple challenges facing the country
today. The solidarity and support of the international
community - for the Iraqi people have shown
exemplary resilience even in the worst of times - could
not be more important.

We warmly welcome the formation of an inclusive
Government under the leadership of Mr. Haider
Al-Abadi. As it juggles the multiple challenges and
tasks, it is essential that it should avoid the mistakes
of the past that have placed Iraq's people , as well as
the country's unity and territorial integrity, at grave
risk. The sectarianism and divisiveness of the past
must be overcome and give way to a genuine and
credible process of reconciliation. Real inclusiveness
and representation of various social, political, religious
and ethnic groups must be guaranteed. Women, youth
and civil society, all vital assets for the development
and future prosperity of the country, must have an
equal say in the decision-making. Strengthening good
governance, accountability and the rule of law and
resolving existing problems of revenue- and wealth-
sharing must be tackled head on, in a fair and inclusive
manner. The strengthening of the armed and security
forces, including the Kurdish Peshmerga, remains a key
priority.

The humanitarian crisis must also be urgently
addressed. Sustained humanitarian assistance by the
international community is vital for saving lives and
addressing the urgent needs of a stricken population.
Lithuania has contributed to humanitarian efforts
through relevant European Union multilateral aid
mechanisms. Today, my country's council decided on a
national contribution to be executed through UNICEF,
which will be transferred shortly.

The international community must stand firmly
with Iraq by providing the necessary economic,
financial and military support. The recent international
conference in Paris and the meeting in Jeddah of Gulf
Cooperation Council members and regional States
should act as a catalyst for long-term assistance to, and
a renewed focus on, Iraq.

The United Nations and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq have stood with the people
of Iraq through good and bad. Their engagement
with the newly elected Government on a whole range
of needs and concerns remains critical. The United
Nations counter-terrorism bodies have an important
role to play by assisting Iraq through demand-based
capacity-building, the improvement of counter-
terrorism legislation and the sharing of best practices
on counter-terrorism and deradicalization.

Those latter measures are particularly important
in order to counter the terrorism onslaught. At
the same time, brainwashed fanatics and deadly
adventure-seekers from far beyond Iraq's borders,
duped by the extreme apocalyptic ideology of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), are joining
its ranks, fighting against the nation they know little
about in the name of a faith they do not know. The issue
of foreign terrorist fighters demands our most resolute
action. In that respect, we consider very timely the
holding next week of a Heads of State meeting by the
Security Council on this important matter.

In conclusion, to assist Iraq in the face of an
existential threat, the international community must
act as one to counter the spread of terrorism and the
likes of ISIL, and we appreciate their dedicated efforts
in that respect. At the same time, let us remember that
winning against terrorist threats cannot be done without
winning the hearts and minds of the Iraqi people.

The new Government of Iraq must restore the trust
of all Iraqis in their rich regional, ethnic and religious
diversity - men and women, young and old people
alike. They must be able to stand firm and fight for
their security, dignity and rights on the basis of the rule
of law, genuine equality, inclusiveness and justice. I am
pleased to hear, as Special Representative Mladenov
mentioned earlier today, about the important steps
taken already by the Prime Minister in that respect,
which we warmly welcome.

Finally, we welcome the adoption of today's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/20), and we affirm
our readiness to work closely with our partners in the
international coalition for the future of Iraq.

