Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): On 14 March, the Security Council held an
open meeting (see S/PV.8203) on a letter from the Prime
Minister of Great Britain, Theresa May (8/2018/218, annex). It accused Russia, in monstrous and completely
unfounded terms, of using chemical weapons on British
territory. The representatives of the United Kingdom
then promised to brief the Council regularly on the
course of the investigation. But there have been no
briefings. Well, never mind. We will brief the Council
ourselves, in detail.

It is a month today since the Russian citizens Sergei
Skripal and his daughter Yulia Skripal were found
unconscious in the city of Salisbury. If a chemical
weapon was indeed used, that constitutes a threat to
non-proliferation, and that is a matter that merits the
Security Council's consideration, not to mention the
fact that we have something to say about it and some
questions for our British colleagues.

So, what do we know about the crime and its
Victims? In 2006, Sergei Skripal was convicted of
spying for Britain. He has been living there since
being amnestied, in 2010, While retaining his Russian
citizenship. From time to time he has been Visited by
his daughter Yulia, also a Russian national. According
to the United Kingdom's version of the story, Russia
had not forgiven him for his treachery and decided to
liquidate him, although he clearly presented no threat
of any kind to Russia. We have a number of questions
about that.

First, taking a cynical approach, why wait eight
years and then do this two weeks before the presidential
elections and just a few months before the start of
the World Cup? Why was he even allowed out of the
country? Why get rid of him in such a strange and public
way that was so dangerous to both the perpetrators and
bystanders? Anyone familiar with detective stories such
as the popular television show Midsomer Murders, now
in its twentieth season, knows there are hundreds of
relatively uncomplicated ways to cleverly do someone
in. And yet apparently whoever attacked Sergei
Skripal and his daughter chose an intensely poisonous
chemical substance - in other words, the riskiest and
most dangerous method possible. Nor did they even
manage to finish the job. Everyone who was affected
is apparently still alive, and Yulia, thank heaven, is
rapidly recovering.

This murky business raises a great many questions,
and the further into it we go, the more there are. From
the very beginning, the British, represented by such
well-known experts in chemistry as Prime Minister
Theresa May and Foreign Minister Boris Johnson, stated
unequivocally that the Skripal incident involved the use
of some kind of toxic substance known as novichok and
that it was highly likely that the substance originated
in Russia. If this super-powerful substance had been
released in Skripal's house or on the doorknob - and that
appears to be the direction of the investigation - how
could Sergei and Yulia have remained in a normal state
for several hours afterwards, while Detective Sergeant
Nick Bailey, the first person to come to their aid, lost
consciousness right away? How could they all have
survived this at all? The only possible explanation is
that they all received an antidote almost immediately.
In the experts' unanimous opinions, in order to do that,
a sample of an identical substance, not just a similar
one, would have had to be somewhere to hand.

The British research centre at Porton Down,
known for its work on chemical weapons, is a few
kilometres from the site of the attempt. We have quite
a few questions about its activities too. But alas, on
Tuesday, Gary Aitkenhead, the chief executive of the
laboratory at Porton Down, stated that his laboratory
had established that it was "a military-grade nerve
agent [but] we have not verified the precise source".
He also said that the Skripals had not received any
antidotes. He assumed that the British Government,
unlike him, might have some additional information.
To give Mr. Aitkenhead his due, he did not sacrifice his
professional reputation in the service of the conjectures
of the British authorities. However, he also affirmed
that nothing like this would ever leave the four walls
of his facility. The question is, what does he mean by
"this"? What could not leave his laboratory's walls? And
does the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) know about it? Whatever the answer,
as far as we are concerned, all of this means that the
main argument of the British - that the substance was
undoubtedly of Russian origin, which is the basis for
the entire body of the so-called evidence that Russia's
involvement was highly likely - has disintegrated. But
Mr. Aitkenhead's statement only makes the case we are
considering more mysterious.

Once again, we want to explain to all and sundry
that "novichok" is not a Russian copyright, despite its
seemingly clearly Russian name. It was invented in the
West for a line of chemical warfare agents that were
developed in many countries, including the United
States and Great Britain, something that will come as
no surprise to experts and scientists in the field. Boris
Johnson, in answer to a direct question from a Deutsche
Welle correspondent, confirmed, also directly, that
Britain has a sample of it at Porton Down. Yesterday, a
tweet saying that the substance was definitely produced
in Russia, which has already resulted in recriminations
and false rumours, was deleted from the British Foreign
office's website. But like Chip 'n' Dale, the British
intelligence services hastened to the aid of Boris
Johnson and the Foreign Office, reporting yesterday,
Via the newspaper The Times, that with the help of
scientific analysis and investigation they had succeeded
in establishing the probable source of the toxic
substance's origins only a few days after the chemical
attack in Salisbury. They stated that the Cabinet knew
on 7 March that the toxin had very likely been produced
in Russia. The British intelligence services believe that
they have located a secret Russian laboratory where
the nerve agent was produced. But wait. There is more.
The article says that the British intelligence services'
sources cannot confirm the laboratory's location
absolutely unequivocally, although their degree of
certainty about it is very high. They also believe that
the Russians conducted tests to determine whether a
novichok could be used for political killings. And there
is more. Yesterday the Daily Mail also suddenly revealed
that British intelligence had top-secret information
from certain sources to the effect that before the attack
in Salisbury, Russia had been testing a novichok nerve
agent on everyday objects such as door handles. I do not
even know what to say about this. It is a sort of theatre
of the absurd. Could they not have come up with a more
realistic fake story? Although we all know the price of
British intelligence information, thanks to Tony Blair.
We have told our British colleagues that they are playing
with fire and that they will be sorry, because it is one
thing to make totally unfounded accusations but quite
another to move the conversation to a professional level,
which requires clear answers to substantive questions,
not diplomacy by megaphone.

I do not think that Britain's investigative
authorities will thank their Government for its hasty
and unequivocal conclusions. Needless to say, their
politicians had not considered this. They had no idea
that their sensational statements might boomerang
back at them. They went all in on that convenient
and timely anti-Russian canard - Russian chemical
attacks - without realizing that once the dust had
settled they would have to answer for their words.
Meanwhile, London has begun poisoning our relations
with foreign countries. In a sign of solidarity, 150
Russian diplomats have been expelled from a number of
States that are allies of the United Kingdom. We know
that all over the world its Ambassadors are twisting
sovereign States' arms and forcing them to follow their
bad example, unleashing a wave that reached as far
as New York. In an unprecedented move, its allies in
the United States have expelled 60 Russian diplomats,
including 12 staff members of the Permanent Mission
of Russia to the United Nations, without offering any
proof or consulting with us as provided for in the
Headquarters Agreement, and thereby acting with
blatant disregard for their obligations as a host country
of the United Nations.

Incidentally, this is sadly not the first time that the
United States has failed to live up to its obligations.
It has seized Russian diplomatic property, including
property belonging to Russia here at the Permanent
Mission in New York, established a 25-mile-radius
travel restriction for our diplomats and refused to
renew or issue United States visas. We urge the United
States to take a responsible attitude to its duties as host
country, return everything that it has taken from us
illegally and refrain from such actions in future.

We are witnessing shocking events. At our previous
meeting on 14 March I discussed this new approach to
the legal system - unproven accusations made simply
on the basis of suspicion. But there is something else
that is no less astonishing. When I look at these British
politicians' debates, interviews and statements, I am
dumbfounded. O temporal O mores! What has happened
to good old England? Is it a lack of professionalism,

or a debased political culture? Or is it an entirely new
political culture? I do not know. I suggest that those
present draw their own conclusions.

The British authorities have been trying to ridicule
Russia over the 30 or so versions of these events that
have been suggested. Notice that these are not versions
from the Russian authorities but the opinions of
experts andjournalists. Yes, there are a lot of versions
because the lack of facts and evidence, but everyone
in Russia wants to get to the bottom of this murky
story. The British authorities, however, have very few
versions - just one, in fact, which they are passing
off as a final verdict. And yet they cannot identify
the source of the poisoning. Is it Skripal's house? His
doorknob? Flowers? Buckwheat? Laurel leaves? We
have to admit that those citizens and experts, both
British and otherwise, who are capable of thought
have also come up with various different versions, and
a great many questions to which there have been no
answers. Here are just a few of them.

Where were the Skripals for four hours with
their phones switched off? How were the samples
taken? Who can confirm their reliability? Why were
relatives not asked for their assent to the taking of
blood samples? How was the antidote to an unknown
chemical substance obtained so quickly, and was it
given to the Skripals? What was Skripal doing? Who
were his connections? Where did he travel to? Who did
he spend time with? Did they meet with anyone that
day or the day before? Where is the data from video
surveillance cameras? How do the rushed accusations
dovetail with the statements from Scotland Yard that
the investigation would take weeks or even months of
work? Why is Russia not being given consular access
to Russian citizens who may have been the Victims of a
terrorist act committed on British territory? The British
authorities decided, thoughtlessly, that they could get
away with their unproven insinuations. Believe me,
friends, this story and its investigation are not over.
They have not even begun.

On 12 March, we sent the Foreign Office a note
requesting access to the data in the investigation,
including samples of the chemical substance that the
British investigation referred to, so that our experts
could examine it as part of a joint investigation. We
were thereby complying with the second paragraph of
article IX of the Chemical Weapons Convention, which
provides that States parties should settle through the
exchange of information and bilateral consultations
any matter that could cause doubt about compliance
with the Convention. Based on the article's provisions,
Russia would have been ready to respond to a request
from Great Britain within 10 days. Instead of all of
that, London issued an absurd, 24-hour ultimatum,
which, needless to say, we rejected, since no one, under
any circumstances, is permitted to take that tone with
Russia. In the ultimatum, which Foreign Secretary
Boris Johnson delivered to Russia's Ambassador in
London in person,

(spoke in English)

"The Foreign Secretary made clear that there
are only two possible scenarios. Either the Russian
State has attempted murder on British soil using a
chemical weapon or Russia has lost control of its
stockpile of nerve agents. The Foreign Secretary
asked the Russian Ambassador to explain which of
the two possibilities was true and to account for
how this Russian-produced nerve agent could have
been deployed in Salisbury."

(spoke in Russian)

We were given 24 hours. That was the sum total
of the questions the British asked us. There were no
others. They look even more ridiculous given the
current situation and the additional information and
statements that have since emerged.

On 14 March, Mrs. May sent Mr. Ahmet Uziimcii,
Director-General of the OPCW, a request for an
independent analysis of the results of the British
investigation of the incident in Salisbury. However, our
British colleagues are forgetting that when they act in
the framework of the OPCW, which we believe is the
only correct way to proceed, they have obligations as
well as rights, including towards us, as a full member
of the OPCW. We reminded them unambiguously about
that during the extraordinary meeting of the OPCW
Executive Council that was convened yesterday at
our request. We proposed a draft decision on a joint
investigation. It was blocked by the United Kingdom
and its allies, which they hastened to call a victory,
despite the fact that the combined total of those voting
in favour and abstaining exceeded the number of those
voting against. This is understandable. Why would
Britain need a joint investigation when it had already
established who was guilty before the investigation
began? After all, such an investigation might ruin their
carefully crafted version based on such powerfully
5, cc

worded arguments as "highly likely , overwhelmingly
likely", "highly plausible", "there is almost no doubt",
"there is no other plausible explanation", "Russia was
almost certainly to blame", "high likelihood of Russian

responsibility" and "Russia is the likely perpetrator".

Boris Johnson continues to try to persuade everyone
that Britain supposedly sent Russia a list of questions to
which it has so far received no answers. The complete
opposite is true. As I have said, we never received any
list of questions. I would now like to ask the British to
list those questions, if there are any. Just do not claim
that accusations in the form of an ultimatum and a
demand that we admit guilt for the deed are questions.

We, on the other hand, have a lot of questions, for
London, the OPCW and France, which - based on
what provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention
is unclear - has suddenly rushed to help the British
confirm the results of its so-called fast-track
investigation. When we asked about this, the French
informed us that Britain had given them detailed
information about the investigation. As long as London
refuses to provide us with this information, maybe
Paris could share it with us? Today we circulated a
memorandum for members' perusal. We will also
circulate some comments by an official representative
of Russia's Foreign Ministry with some fascinating
information that I think the Council will find very
interesting. We will also send the text of this statement
to Council members, with a translation.

The intellectual level of the basis for the
accusations and the quest to discover Russia's motives
is pitiful. Boris Johnson, who constantly claims to
be a Russophile, has made the absurd and amoral
suggestion - and "absurd" is the kindest way ofputting
it - that Moscow needed an incident like this in order
to unite the people before the elections. Just as amoral
is his comparison of Russia's holding of the World Cup
football championship with the 1936 Olympic Games
in Berlin, in which, incidentally, a British delegation
participated, including with high-level officials, unlike
the Soviet Union.

Boris Johnson has alluded to Dostoevsky's novel
Crime and Punishment, in which he claims that the
whole plot turns on whether the criminal will confess
or be caught. It is not really about that at all. It is
not a detective story, as the British Foreign Minister
clearly thinks, but rather a deeply philosophical work
of literature. By the way, we have already cited the
English proverb in the novel that says you cannot make
a horse from a hundred rabbits. Incidentally, I would
advise Mr. Johnson to read Dostoevsky's other novels,
or at least get to know their names. I am not going to
recite them myself.

As a reasoned proof of the evidence for Russia's
guilt, the British Ambassador to Moscow gave his
colleagues a slide show of six pages, including the
title page. These are comic strips passing themselves
off as evidence. Once again they say nothing but
"highly likely". One must assume that this is the same
incontrovertible document that Mrs. May showed to her
European Union colleagues, many ofwhom - to be fair,
not all - accepted it as reliable evidence of Russia's
guilt. Look at this travesty. We will circulate it. Using
these six little squares as the basis for an argument is an
insult to intelligence. How can one respect people who
are convinced by this kind of thing? This thing. And do
those who are doing the convincing not understand that
they are being zombified, that they are participants in a
collective psychosis?

Boris Johnson's revelation about the so-called dead
cat on the table as simply a manoeuvre for diverting
attention from other problems - and anyone who
does not know what I am talking about can read his
interview - is the clearest possible example of the
no-holds-barred propaganda war that Britain is waging
against Russia. By the way, on the subject of dead
cats, according to Sergei Skripal's niece Viktoria, his
household in Salisbury - supposedly contaminated by
the poison - included two cats and two guinea pigs.
Where are they now? What about the animals? Why
has no one said anything about them? After all, their
condition is also important evidence.

We are living in an era of the collective blurring
of intellectual reason. I do not know what psychotropic
substances are being used to turn the public into zombies,
except for one - the media. It is a terrible weapon of our
times. It is easy to use the media to manipulate human
minds, and we can see that the Western media is very
good at that. However, no intellectually sophisticated
schemes are necessary. It is enough, in signalling to a
basic instinct, to regularly and purposefully repeat the
same unproven lie, gradually drilling it into people's
consciousness and eventually presenting it as truth.
It is Dr. Goebbels's method - repeat a lie a thousand
times and it becomes the truth. We will seek answers
to the questions we have posed. And if the answers are
not provided, if there is no response, we will regard
that as an admission of the slander that has been made
against us with no thought for the consequences. We
will seek full cooperation on the Skripal case, and if
that is refused, we will consider it an attempt to cover
up the truth.

Everything that has happened leads us to believe
what has basically been clear from the very beginning.
This is a coordinated campaign, carefully prepared
ahead of time. It is not accidental. The main goal is
clear - discrediting and even delegitimizing Russia;
accusing it of using terrible, inhumane weapons;
concealing stockpiles in violation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention; calling into question our role in
resolving not just the situation in Syria, for instance,
but anywhere at all; and calling into question the
very principle of Russia's political legitimacy, while
discrediting our position on the Syrian chemical issue.
Basically, killing two birds with one stone.

Since the British authorities, without a moment's
pause, have the audacity to say that it is "highly
likely" that Russia was responsible for the incident in
Salisbury, we also suggest that it is "highly likely" that
the intelligence services of certain countries are behind
this massive provocation. Russia, which has absolutely
nothing to do with the poisoning ofthe Skripals, is more
interested than anyone in establishing the truth. We
will work to find out the truth based on the provisions
of the Chemical Weapons Convention. If the British
continue to operate based on suspicions passed off as
evidence, if they continue to rely on assumptions based
on conjecture rather than facts, they will confirm our
much more than highly likely hypothesis that all this
murky business, or rather fiction, is a gross provocation.

He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

We can see that the only way to obtain an objective
picture is by strictly adhering to the mechanisms of
the Chemical Weapons Convention and collaborating
on the investigation. We are also waiting for answers
to our obvious questions from the British criminal
investigation. We demand consular access to
Yulia Skripal.

To sum up, this is what is going on. There has
been no confirmation that the substance originated
in Russia. We have already stated that we were not
involved. But the demands that we admit our guilt are
still being made. The British refuse to cooperate with
us, on the pretext that victims cannot cooperate with
criminals. I beg their pardon. Their categorization
of us as criminals, without facts, evidence, a trial
or an investigation is null and void. Meanwhile, a
crime - possibly a terrorist act - has been committed
on British soil against Russian citizens. And it is they
who are the victims. That is why we are entitled to
demand cooperation and the British are obliged to
provide it. By the way, it was funny that at yesterday's
meeting of the OPCW Executive Council, some of the
United Kingdom's allies called on us to cooperate with
the British. Evidently there had not been enough time to
brief them on the correct way to proceed.

We have prepared a very simple draft press
statement by the Security Council. It will be a truth-
telling litmus test for the United Kingdom and its allies.
If they bury it, as they did the last time, or turn its
meaning on its head, it will be yet another confirmation
and proof of their unscrupulous game.

