Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Allow me to begin
by congratulating you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Argentina has been one of the leading
voices calling for regional cooperation in South
America, and the choice of the topic for this high-level
open debate clearly demonstrates your astuteness in this
area. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his earlier briefing.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement made
by the representaive of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

As a firm believer in multilateralism and
regionalism, Malaysia recognizes the importance of
regional organizations cooperating with the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. As one of the founding members of ASEAN,
we have strived to create a regional union of States that
can concentrate our shared efforts aimed at addressing
common challenges. From the outset, ASEAN has
faced threats to our collective peace and security,
ranging from post-colonial territorial disputes to the
non-traditional security issues of today.

As ASEAN has evolved over time, it has also
strengthened and deepened its linkages with the United
Nations and other international and intergovernmental
organizations. That of course includes cooperation
with the United Nations in maintaining international
peace and security. The pace of that cooperation has
accelerated, as can be seen in the ASEAN-United
Nations comprehensive partnership. This Partnership,
which was adopted over a year ago, has already
achieved tangible results, such as the exchange of
experiences and best practices in conflict prevention
and preventive diplomacy between ASEAN and United
Nations officials.

Peace and security has been one of the major
components of political and security cooperation, which
has been identified as the first priority area under the
ASEAN-United Nations comprehensive partnership.
As an initiative to enhance cooperation between
ASEAN and the United Nations on counter-terrorism,
including by improving capacity and the exchange of
information, Malaysia hosted a workshop and a seminar
on international joint investigations on cash courier
border controls, held in Kuala Lumpur, in November
2011 and June 2012, respectively. Both the workshop
and seminar, which were facilitated by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, aimed at
strengthening the capacity of ASEAN member States
injoint investigations in the region and in detecting and
preventing the illegal cross-border movement of cash. It
also emphasized the rule of law and the importance of
respecting human rights while countering terrorism. In
that regard, Malaysia looks forward to the first review
of the comprehensive partnership, which is expected to
take place in October.

It would be relevant at this point to also highlight
the comprehensive approach taken by Malaysia in
addressing threats to regional security, especially
within the ASEAN context. We have always argued
that it is necessary to address the root causes of such
threats, be they underdevelopment, poverty, political
disputes or the preservation of national, socio-cultural
or ethno-religious identities. We therefore believe that
regional security arrangements should also take into
consideration such factors in a more holistic approach.
At the same time, the broader framework of ASEAN
also provides us with policy instruments to tackle the
economic and social factors that drive conflicts.

I should also like to point out that, while regional
problems require regional solutions, there is also a
smaller subset of subregional problems that can be
more effectively resolved by subregional solutions.
That can be illustrated by using the case of the
Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East
ASEAN Growth Area. One example that complements
the work of the Security Council on the ground is that
arrangement's working group on customs, immigration
and quarantine. That mechanism has the capacity
to enhance existing measures by individual States
to prevent the smuggling of small arms and light
weapons and the cross-border movement of individuals
suspected in terrorism. As such, despite its primary
intentions for enhancing economic cooperation, the
Growth Area and other subregional organizations have
demonstrated the potential to also play a supporting
role in the maintenance of peace and security.

In conclusion, ASEAN has been successful
in promoting peace and security in its region. My
delegation believes that this is due to the consultative
and discreet diplomacy that ASEAN members practice,
or what is commonly known as the ASEAN way.
Therefore, looking at the examples of other regions, we
are of the view that there should not be a one-size-fits-
all approach to collaborations between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Instead, the unique
circumstances ofa region and its people should be taken
into consideration when devising such mechanisms of
collaboration.

