Mr. Johnson (United Kingdom): I am most grateful
to Ms. Fang Liu for her comprehensive briefing on
behalf of the International Civil Aviation Organization.
The United Kingdom wholeheartedly welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2309 (2016) thanks
to the strong and united action of the Council. This is
the first resolution ever to focus on the threat posed
by terrorists to civil aviation, and it demonstrates our
joint resolve to protect our citizens from an escalating
danger. We have come a long way since the first
scheduled commercial flight took off from Florida over
100 years ago. Today, over three billion passengers
reach their destinations by air every year, and it is those
lives that we are acting to protect today.

We only have to remember some of the recent
tragedies to see the urgency of our task. The attacks
on airports in Brussels and Istanbul, the destruction of
the Russian Metrojet aircraft over Sinai last year and
the explosion on board a Dallo Airlines flight from
Mogadishu in February. All of those outrages posed a
serious threat to international peace and security. All
were stark reminders of how civil aviation faces an
evolving danger from terrorists, who probe relentlessly
for chinks in our collective armour. And there is one
reality that none of us here can escape - we all depend
on each other to provide a secure aviation environment.
No country alone can safeguard what is by its very
nature a global activity. That is why action here in the
Security Council at the global level is so important.

By adopting the resolution today, the Security
Council has delivered a resounding call to action for the
entire international community. The resolution provides

for specific arrangements to be consistently applied. It
also makes clear that precautions should be adapted
in response to the changing tactics of the terrorists.
The resolution encourages all countries to observe the
security standards laid down by the International Civil
Aviation Organization. And we recognize that, if all
nations are to meet this challenge, assistance will often
be required. Targeted capacity development, training
and other technical help will all be needed. I believe
that such assistance should be provided with the full
knowledge that protecting civil aviation represents a
vital objective for all of us.
In conclusion, over the past two years the Security
Council has taken a series of steps to counter the
terrorist threat. Just as the danger has evolved, so has
our response. We have sought to counter the emergence
of Daesh. We have taken steps against the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters. We have tried to block,
or otherwise disrupt, the many channels of terrorist
financing. The resolution represents another significant
step forward in that common struggle. It provides a
comprehensive approach to safeguarding civil aviation
from terrorism, and it shows the determination of the
entire international community to keep our citizens
safe.

The United Kingdom looks forward to the full
implementation of the resolution after this Council's
unanimous show of support. Doing so will involve
working both nationally and internationally with our
partners. We also welcome the Council's intention to
remain seized of this vital matter. The terrorists will
not relent in their efforts to attack civil aviation, so we
must never cease to persevere together to thwart their
evil desires. Air travel is one of the greatest liberators
that the human race has ever known, and the resolution
will help us to continue to enjoy that freedom in safety.

