Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China consistently maintains that the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria and
the choice and will of the Syrian people should be
respected. The Syrian crisis should be resolved in a
just, peaceful and proper manner through political
dialogue. We urge all parties, including the Syrian
Government and the opposition factions, to strictly
honour their commitments to cease all acts of violence
and create conditions for the launch of a Syrian-led
inclusive political process.

Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan's mediation is
the practical way out and an important channel for the
political settlement of the Syrian crisis. China
appreciates and supports the efforts made by
Mr. Annan for a political solution of the Syrian crisis.
We urge all parties in Syria to take real actions to
support and cooperate with Mr. Annan in his mediation
and continue the process of a political solution of the
Syrian issue.

We call on the international community to
continue its support for Mr. Annan's mediation efforts.
We need to guard against any attempt to create
difficulties or trouble for that mediation. Any words or
deeds that stand in the way of Mr. Annan's mediation
efforts are unacceptable and must be firmly opposed.
What the relevant parties say and do about the Syrian
issue should contribute to an easing of the tensions, a
cessation of violence, the launch of a political dialogue
and the maintenance of peace and stability in Syria and
the Middle East, rather than the other way around.

The imminent deployment of the advance team of
the supervision mission in Syria with the consent of the
Syrian Government to swiftly kick off the task of
supervision and the cessation of violence will help
consolidate the progress made by Joint Special Envoy
Annan's mediation efforts, fully implement
Mr. Annan's six-point proposal and launch the political
process at an early date. We hope that the advance team
will fully respect Syria's sovereignty, act in strict
accordance with the mandate of the Security Council,
carry out its mission in a neutral, objective and just
manner, make good preparations for the deployment of
the supervision mission and play an active and
constructive role in sustaining the cessation of violence
and bringing about lasting peace and stability in Syria.

We also hope that the Syrian Government and the
other relevant parties will vigorously support and
cooperate with the advance team. We hope that the
Secretary-General will put forward his proposals on the
deployment of the supervision mission as soon as
possible.

In View of those remarks, China voted in favour
of resolution 2042 (2012), which the Security Council
just adopted

