Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Fisher, for his intervention. I endorse the
statements to be given by the observer of the European
Union and the representative of Uruguay on behalf of
the Group of Friends.

I share the doubts that were just expressed by
my British colleague on the topics of elections and
the police. At our most recent debate in October (see S/PV.6842), I noted the progress that had been made on
the political and institutional levels. Unfortunately, the
Secretary General's report before us today (S/2013/139)
reminds us that not all the hopes we had formed have
materialized. I would especially like to recall the
words of the press statement issued by the Council on
28 January adopted by this same Council on January
28. The local and partial legislative elections have
been postponed for too long. 11 is essential that they
be held this year and that they be free, inclusive and
credible. We call on all parties concerned to appoint
without delay all members of the transitional board of
the permanent electoral council.

We are also concerned by other information
contained in the report on the proliferation of contested
appointments, recent statements concerning the freedom
of the press, and more generally systemic deficiencies
in the area of human rights. We also note the relatively
disappointing economic and fiscal forecasts that,
coupled with difficulties related to climate - as noted
by a number of my colleagues - may also explain
the alarming multiplication of demonstrations of an
economic and social character.

MINUSTAH has provided Haiti with 10 years of
relative calm without political violence. However, this
calm, in large part due to the deterrent presence of the
Mission, does not reflect real, fundamental progress
allowing the Haitian National Police to ensure security
and stability on its own. We support the guidelines
proposed by the Haitian authorities for the period 2012
to 2016, including the goal of increasing the number of
police officers from 10,000 to 15,000. However, there is
reason to doubt how realistic that goal is. MINUSTAH
must remain engaged in that collective effort.

Lastly, we support the commitment of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General's personal efforts to
help Haiti eradicate cholera. We believe that is not an
unattainable goal. We also think that, in the short term,
that could include the targeted measures on which we
are currently working with the Haitian authorities.

MINUSTAH must continue to adapt to
developments in the situation, both in terms of nature
and scope, so as to fulfil its dual objective, namely, to
contribute to the maintenance of peace as well as to
promoting Haitian national ownership by strengthening
the rule of law and its major instruments, that is, the
police and justice sectors.

Obviously, we must avoid a hasty departure of
the Mission. However, the indefinite continuation of a
peacekeeping mission ofthis magnitude is not an option
either. The departure of MINUSTAH should not be a
taboo, but that prospect should serve as a catalyst. We
must define and create the conditions for its success.
When must contemplate a withdrawal date, along with
a desired end result and a post-MINUSTAH presence
for the United Nations.

In that regard, we welcome the consolidation plan
set out in the report of the Secretary-General. That
plan provides for the Mission a credible time horizon,
for we owe Haitians clarity as to what we can achieve
in a reasonable time frame. We fully endorse the four
priority areas that have been identified, as well as an
approach based on metrics for calibrating the evolution
of the Mission.

I should like to conclude by commending
MINUSTAH staff for their dedication. I also commend
the Acting Special Representative for his energetic
efforts in this period of transition in the Mission.

