The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Equatorial Guinea.

I thank Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, for the concise updates
she has given us on her trip to Myanmar and Bangladesh
at the end of January. I also thank the delegations of the
United Kingdom, France, Germany, Belgium, Poland,
Kuwait, Peru, the Dominican Republic and the United
States for requesting this important meeting.

We are concerned about the information in
Ms. Schraner Burgener's important report on the
continuing protracted delays in the voluntary return to
Myanmar of the Rohingya refugees who have been in
camps in Cox's Bazar and other parts of Bangladesh
for more than a year. Despite all the support they
have received internationally and from Myanmar's
neighbour Bangladesh, the serious challenges presented
by the living conditions in refugee camps mean that life
there cannot be compared to a normal existence, and
yet the refugees still resist returning to their places
of origin. Another cause for concern is the very poor
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
signed on 18 May 2018 between the Government of
Myanmar, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

Barely two months after we joined the Security
Council in January of last year, the Governments
of Myanmar and Bangladesh, on the basis of their
friendly relations and good-neighbourliness, signed
an agreement on repatriating the people who had
been displaced from Rakhine state. We believe it was
an important step, but we were all in agreement that
the return was voluntary, and that as the refugees'
country of origin, the Government of Myanmar had
to deal with certain issues in order to ensure their
healthy, dignified and safe return. We also thought the
signing of the memorandum of understanding between
the Government of Myanmar, UNHCR and UNDP
was important as a first essential step in establishing
a framework for cooperation between the United
Nations and the Government with the aim of creating
the conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable repatriation of the refugees in Bangladesh
and helping to improve the livelihoods and resilience of
all communities in Rakhine state.

In a letter to the President of the Security Council
dated 27 June, the Permanent Representative of
Myanmar updated the Council on the progress that
had been made and the measures taken to address
a number of issues, as the Council had requested in
May. In another letter, of 20 July, he again listed the
developments and the Government's initiatives in
the three main areas that the Security Council had
identified, that is, humanitarian access, responsibility
for human rights abuses and the implementation of
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State.

What we want is for all the essential basic
requirements for the Rohingya's successful return to be
addressed and ensured in a reasonable time, keeping in
mind that hundreds of thousands of people from that
ethnic group have been living for more than a year in
very insecure conditions. If they have to remain in that
situation any longer it will jeopardize the future of their
children, who, like the rest of us in this world, deserve
to grow up in decent conditions. In that regard, and
without discounting the important steps that Myanmar
has taken so far, including the agreements it has already
signed and the written updates we have had from its
Permanent Representative in New York, I want to urge
the Government of Myanmar once again to redouble
its efforts to ensure a full settlement of the problem in
Rakhine state.

In the same way, we call on the countries of the
region such as China, regional organizations such as
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the United
Nations and the international community to spare no
effort in their support for Myanmar and Bangladesh so
that we can at last ensure the normal and unhindered
flow of humanitarian aid to the vulnerable population of
Rohingya refugees, as well as their return to Myanmar,
their country of origin, under humane and dignified
conditions and with the necessary security guarantees
to avoid any return to the previous situation that led to
their displacement to Bangladesh.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Myanmar.

