The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bahrain, Cuba, Finland and Israel, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 17 October
2006 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
8/2006/827 and which reads as follows.

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Thursday, 19 October 2006, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
Council's provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alvaro de Soto,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. De Soto to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special Representative
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General. I give Mr. De
Soto the floor.


