Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me first welcome
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed to this meeting.
We greatly value this timely exchange of views
between the Council and the Somali leadership. The
transition will end soon, and it is vital that we address
all necessary issues. I would also like to welcome the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mahiga, and to thank him for his exhaustive
briefing and for his commitment and leadership under
very difficult circumstances.

I will focus briefly on three points: first, the
political process and the situation on the ground;
secondly, the achievements of the African Union and
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); and,
finally, the role of the international community and
especially of the European Union (EU).

On my first point, with the end of the transitional
period in sight, it is crucial that the targets laid down
by the road map be achieved. Another extension of the
deadline is inconceivable and unacceptable, and would
certainly not be in the interest of Somalia and its
people. We agree that some progress has been made,
and in that regard I would like to commend the
recently launched convention of Somali elders, who
will select the members of the Constituent Assembly.

However, great challenges remain. We are
worried about the ongoing infighting in and among the
Transitional Federal Institutions. In particular, the
continuing deadlock in the Transitional Federal
Parliament is having troublesome effects on the whole
transitional process. Let me be very clear - the
international community has always supported Somalia,
especially since the country has found itself in dire
straits and dealing with instability. The United Nations
has deployed some of the largest peacekeeping
operations in the country, and many regional and
individual actors have stood and still stand by the
country and its people.

The past 20 years have taught us one lesson.
There is no solution to the conflict without strong
political will on the part of the Somali political actors
themselves and without their earnest efforts to provide
for a better, peaceful future for all Somalis. Looking at
past and current support for Somalia, we simply do not
agree that what is lacking is international support. Nor
must such language be used as an excuse for delays
and failures in the transitional process. There are many
tasks remaining unresolved that do not even require
financial support. Let me also stress that future support
will depend on results. We cannot accept a call for
more when there is no real progress.
Let me come to my second point. Three months
ago, the Council reacted very swiftly in adopting
resolution 2036 (2012), which endorsed the new
AMISOM. strategic concept and considerably enlarged
the Mission's scope, mandate and support. That was
another sign of the commitment of the United Nations,
the Security Council and its members to AMISOM. We
welcome AMISOM's achievements and reiterate our
strong support for the Mission. In the past, my country
has contributed considerably to it and will continue to
do so, bilaterally and within the framework of the
European Union.

AMISOM. has been key to improvements in the
security situation in Somalia, and without it we would
not be where we are today. Apart from its military
achievements, the Mission has contributed to the
establishment of the Somali National Security Forces.
Now, it is essential that the Transitional Federal
Government finally succeed in establishing a
functioning command-and-control structure. The
Government and the Somali forces must become less
dependent on AMISOM. Responsibilities need to be
handed over to national forces and administrations,
especially in regions where Al-Shabaab has been
driven out.

Let me come to my final point. As I mentioned
earlier, Germany has supported Somalia, among others,
through the European Union. In that context, I would
like to recall the substantial contributions the European
Union has made so far. The training of Somali security
forces in Uganda by the European Union Training
Mission for Somalia, in close cooperation with
AMISOM, is only one example. Furthermore, and in
addition to its counter-piracy engagement at sea, the
European Union will launch an additional mission to
enhance the capabilities of the States in the region in
the field of maritime security and to develop their legal
frameworks. In Somalia, in addition to support for the
legal system, a coastal police force will be trained in
order to help end the criminal activities of pirates that
add to the instability and insecurity in Somalia, and
thereby to the misery of Somalia's people.

The transitional process will end in August. In the
few weeks that are left, it is crucial to focus and work
effectively to achieve that goal. That is first and
foremost the responsibility of the Somalis themselves.
They can be assured that the international community
will continue to support them.
