Mr. Pleuger (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's open
debate on Afghanistan, prior to the revision and
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

As on previous occasions, I would like to take the
floor today to make comments additional to the policy
statement made by the presidency of the European
Union, with which we fully align ourselves.

In addition, I would like to thank Jean Arnault for
the work he carried out in his previous position and to
welcome the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tom Koenigs,
who addressed the Security Council today for the first
time in his capacity as head of UNAMA. We thank him
for his comprehensive report and wish him every
success in his work.

We would like to express our appreciation for the
latest report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Afghanistan and on the future work plans for the
United Nations following the launching of the
Afghanistan Compact in London earlier this year
(S/2006/145).

The Compact is a solid and promising basis for
Afghanistan and for the international community when
we look at the challenges of the post-Bonn era until
2010. We are confident that progress will be achieved
by consolidating Afghan institutions and by mastering
the key challenges of security, good governance, the
rule of law, economic and social development and -
as a cross-cutting priority that has been mentioned by
many previous speakers - the fight against the
narcotics industry. The substantial pledges made at the
London Conference demonstrated the readiness of the
international community towards a long-term
commitment in Afghanistan. In our view, rebuilding
Afghanistan has been a successful example of what can
be achieved through a coordinated and sustained
multilateral approach. In that respect, the United
Nations will continue to have a decisive role.

For Germany, Afghanistan will remain a priority
in its worldwide engagement. Our bilateral financial
commitment from 2002 until 2010 will amount to more
than $1 billion. We are also prepared to relieve
Afghanistan of old debts within the framework of the
Paris Club.

We agree with the observations made in the
Secretary-General's report, including those on the
paramount importance of security. Therefore, Germany
will remain strongly involved in the security sector
through our lead role in police reform, through support
for the disbandment of illegal armed groups by the
provincial reconstruction teams under our
responsibility, and by providing the largest military
contingent to the International Security Assistance
Force until Britain replaces us in that role.

Let me add that at the end of February, the
Governments of Afghanistan and Germany jointly
organized another major conference on police reform
in Doha, generously hosted by the State of Qatar. The
conference focused on police reform and border
management in a regional perspective. We believe that
a functioning police force in Afghanistan will have a
key role in providing security, fighting crime and drug
trafficking and protecting borders in cooperation with
neighbouring States.

At Doha, Afghanistan and its neighbours created
the basis for joint regional border management. Two
declarations were adopted - the Doha Declaration on
Border Management, which takes a regional approach,
and the Declaration on Closer Cooperation on Border
Police, within the framework of the Kabul Declaration
and the reconstruction of the police of Afghanistan. In
addition, pledges of up to $38 million were made
available for police reform in Afghanistan. The Doha
conference was a step towards meeting the relevant
benchmark of the Compact.

The United Nations will continue to play a
central role in Afghanistan, as of now on the basis of
the Afghanistan Compact. We welcome this role and
the functions and the structure of UNAMA outlined in
the Secretary-General's report. We reiterate Germany's
support for United Nations activities in Kabul, as well
as throughout the country. We wish the United Nations
and, in particular, UNAMA and Mr. Koenigs, success
in their future work.

