Ms. Patterson (United States of America): We
would like to join Mr. Arnault in conveying our
condolences to you, Mr. President, on the tragic loss of
life in the unusual double airplane crash in your
country.
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Arnault for his
very informative briefing. My delegation is very happy
to see him here in New York. We thank him for his
perseverance and hard work on the elections and on
other vitally endeavours in Afghanistan.

The election scheduled for 9 October is an
important milestone in Afghanistan's path towards
democracy. We commend the courage of the over 10
million Afghans who have decided to register to vote
despite the threats of intimidation and Violence. We
welcome the over 4 million women who have chosen to
take part in the political process. It is inspiring to see
the determination of the Afghan people to make these
elections succeed. There is no better tribute to the
democratic process.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) needs the international
community to ensure the success of that election. First,
it is imperative that UNAMA have sufficient resources
to carry out the election. UNAMA has reported that it
is facing a budget shortfall, caused by pledged funds
that have not yet been disbursed. That gap must be
closed to allow the election to be conducted in an
effective and timely manner. Existing pledges will
cover the costs of in-country voting, but the shortfall
must be closed to allow the refugees in Pakistan and
Iran to vote as well.

In that regard, it is important that Pakistan and
Iran move forward in tandem on out-of-country
registration and voting, so that the over 600,000
Afghans in Pakistan and the over 800,000 Afghans in
Iran can take part in the election process. The fullest
possible participation in the election by Afghan
refugees will further the legitimacy of the elections and
solidify the refugees' ties to their native country. The
United States has already pledged and disbursed $24.7
million to help fund the election. We ask other States to
work with us to identify and to pledge additional funds
to meet the funding shortfall and to ensure success in
this historic election.

Secondly, UNAMA staff must be protected so
that they can carry out their mandate. We share
Mr. Arnault's concern as to the impact of the recent
attacks against election workers. Violence targeting
registration sites and United Nations convoys over the
past three weeks has underscored the dangers faced by
election staff. It is imperative that we do all we can to
counter that violence and protect the election process.

In June, NATO leaders agreed to provide
enhanced security to Afghan authorities for the
election. The deployment of additional forces has
already begun. By September, the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) will assume the
leadership of five provincial reconstruction teams in
the north and north-east of Afghanistan. ISAF is
working with coalition forces and Afghan authorities to
complete an election security plan and to coordinate
the implementation of a security framework.

Along with many other nations, the United States
has worked with the people of Afghanistan for the past
two years to rebuild their war-torn country. Together
with ISAF, UNAMA and many non-governmental
organizations, we have provided infrastructure, health
care and education to a generation of Afghans that has
known only war. The Afghan people have responded,
enacting a strong, democratic constitution. The October
election will mark the end of a transition period and the
beginning of a new, democratic future.

