Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me to
begin by welcoming the holding of this meeting. I wish
also to thank the Special Representative, Mr. Tanin, for
the clarity of his briefing. I should also like to welcome
among us His Excellency Mr. Dacie, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku.

My delegation would like at the outset to welcome
the election on 26 February by the Kosovo Assembly
of Mr. Hashim Thaci as President of the Republic of
Kosovo. My delegation takes the opportunity presented
by this important event to call on all political players in
Kosovo to follow the rules of democracy and respect the
choice that the Assembly has just made, in particular
by refraining from any acts of violence, which harm
individuals and public property.

I hardly need to stress the negative effects that
recent events such as the ones I have referred to,
especially violent demonstrations, could have on the
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. Senegal
welcomes this dialogue, which is being held under the
auspices of the European Union. Senegal therefore
calls on both parties to continue talks at a very high
level, also under the auspices of the European Union.
At the same time, we wish to encourage countries and
partners with influence to continue to bring it to bear in
order to support the talks.

Furthermore, I am pleased to note the two
agreements signed in August 2015 by the Government
of Kosovo, one with Serbia, including the establishment
of an association of Serb municipalities; and one with
Montenegro, on territorial delineation between the
two countries. The agreement on a three-stage plan
between the Chambers of Commerce of Belgrade
and Pristina to harmonize veterinary certificates and
to overcome technical obstacles to cross-boundary
commerce also deserves our approval, as does the
signing by representatives of the Serbian Armed Forces
and the Kosovo Force of an agreement to fully relax
the air safety zone. We strongly encourage the parties
to continue along this path and to strengthen dialogue
in order to comprehensively manage border crossings.

These advances will not be in vain. We call on the
international community to support and encourage
them. The confirmation of Kosovo's eligibility to
develop a Millennium Challenge Corporation compact
is good news; this should translate into the mobilization
of financing for development amounting to $60 million
to $100 million over a five-year period. We should
encourage the stakeholders to take further steps
towards peacebuilding and development, especially by
implementing the agreements of 25 August 2015 in the
north of Kosovo.

With regard to promoting the rule of law, my
delegation is pleased with the imminent start ofthe work
of the specialist court, a Kosovar institution, which will
have its headquarters in the Netherlands and will be
made up of international judges responsible for trying
serious crimes committed during, or immediately after,
the Kosovo conflict.

In the same vein, continued cooperation and
coordination efforts between parties is essential to
facilitate, with the support of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the return
of over 16,502 displaced people or, if not, seek lasting
solutions for them.

Senegal also supports without reservation the
joint European Union-United Nations programme
aimed at building confidence among communities
by protecting cultural heritage and recommends the
strengthening of synergies, especially the cooperation
to exchange information on resolving the situation of
disappeared persons.

In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute once
again to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his wise leadership of
UNMIK. We would also like to recognize the efforts
of the Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, all of which are working
for peace and progress in Kosovo.

