Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.
My delegation supports the recommendations of the
special report (S/2018/530) and would like to make the
following observations.

We are encouraged by the continuing improvement
in the security situation in Darfur, as well as the
overall reduction in intercommunal clashes and
criminal activities. The arms collection campaign
and the deployment of Government security forces
have contributed to the improved security situation.
They have consolidated the Government's authority in
Darfur and have created acceptable conditions for the
exit strategy of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

However, there is still insufficient progress in
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur. My delegation welcomes the extension of
unilateral ceasefires by the Government and other
parties, and underscores the need for a permanent
ceasefire agreement to create an environment
conducive to peace talks. We call on all parties in
Darfur to meaningfully participate in an inclusive
political process led by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and supported by Joint Special
Representative Mamabolo. Otherwise, the Security
Council will need to consider appropriate measures
to increase the pressure on those who undermine the
peace process.
With regard to the upcoming extension of
UNAMID's mandate, we would like to note the
progress in implementing phases one and two of the
reconfiguration of UNAMID and the absence of the
reported adverse impact of the drawdown. These
positive developments allow for UNAMID's further
drawdown and its repositioning, which should prioritize
support for the peace process. It should also focus
on addressing the root causes of conflict, including
poverty, lack of basic services, drought and massive
harvest failures and on providing a durable solution for
internally displaced persons through existing planning
documents, including the UNAMID-United Nations
country team integrated strategic framework.

Like many others, above all the three African
members of the Security Council, we therefore support
the proposal for a whole-of-system approach for Darfur
with a new concept for UNAMID and a transition clause
providing a solution with a two-year frame through four
priority areas. Our delegation also supports the idea of
developing an action plan based on the provisions ofthe
Doha Document. The success of this concept, aimed
at preventing relapse and preparing for the mission's
exit, will require a greater investment by the United
Nations system delivering as one United Nations. That
is necessary in order to streamline operations to meet
the greater demand in the light of the personnel and
resource constraints. The Government's continued
cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union, and its increased efforts aimed at improving
the effectiveness of land management, provisions of
access to basic services, ensuring the right of return
and restitution of property, as well as increasing the
presence of police and rule-of-law institutions in the
areas of return are also critical.

Finally, we underscore the importance of the
development of a resource-mobilization strategy
that will ensure the long-term financial support for
sustaining peace in Darfur.

