Mr. Noke (Japan) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all to thank the Netherlands presidency for its
initiative in organizing this timely open debate today
following the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), various
high-level meetings of Member States and discussions
in the Security Council, including the adoption of
resolution 2378 (2017).

My Government appreciates the efforts of the
Secretary-General to ensure that peacekeeping missions
can implement their mandates more effectively and
continues to support the various United Nations actions,
such as improving the security of peacekeepers,
the protection of civilians and the role of women. In
that regard,

Japan associates itself with the activities and
statements of the Group of Friends to which it belongs.

(spoke in English)

Japan also stresses that political efforts are
of the utmost importance for resolving conflicts,
as demonstrated by resolution 2406 (2018), which
renewed the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, clearly emphasizing the importance of
supporting the peace process as the Mission's mandate.

In order for United Nations peacekeeping
operations to implement their mandates while ensuring
the safety and security of their staff in today's complex
operational environments, peacekeepers must be
sufficiently equipped and trained. Since 2008, Japan
has supported peacekeeping centres in 13 African
countries. Furthermore, with the participation of
Brazil and Switzerland, Japan has supported the
capacity-building of United Nations peacekeepers
under the triangular partnership project of the United
Nations, troop-contributing countries and supporting
Member States.

As part of that project, since 2015 Japan has
provided training in Kenya on the operation and
maintenance of heavy engineering equipment to 130
future peacekeeping engineers from five African
countries. Engineering is a critically important enabler
for the security of personnel by improving the physical
security and mobility of peacekeeping missions. The
triangular partnership project will be enhanced and
expanded to other regions and capabilities. As our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Taro Kono, said last September,
the training will be provided to countries in the Indo-
Pacific region given that more than 30 per cent of
peacekeepers are from that region (see S/PV.8051).

Moreover, medical capabilities are essential to
safety and security. I echo the Cruz report in that regard.
Japan has already supported the United Nations in the
standardization of buddy-aid training and will support
the training of medical personnel in Africa under the
triangular partnership project.

Resolution 2378 (2017) and the corresponding
letter to the Secretary-General (S/2017/766) emphasize
the importance of effective and efficient training and
capacity-building. The triangular partnership enables
role-sharing among Member States to develop capable
peacekeepers. Japan strongly encourages Member
States to participate in the partnership. With their
involvement, such training efforts will be a sustainable
way to share our skills and experience.

With regard to training and capacity-building,
I would like to emphasize the importance of the
linkage between force generation and training and
capacity-building. The Secretariat also needs to assess
mission-specific needs for effective training and
capacity-building.

(spoke in French)

I mentioned the need for collective and concrete
actions by all stakeholders to tackle challenges
in peacekeeping. Under the banner of a proactive
contribution to peace, Japan will continue its concrete
contributions to making peacekeeping more effective
and more efficient in response to today"s challenges.

