Mr. Ka (Senegal) (spoke in French): As this is the
first time I have addressed the Security Council under your
presidency, Sir, I should like first to congratulate you on
your assumption of your important post, and repeat my
delegation's commendation of your personal commitment
and the commitment of your country, Slovenia, to the
attainment of the noble objectives of the United Nations
Charter.

Your welcome and timely initiative to include on the
Council's agenda the item we are discussing today stems
from that commitment. By organizing this discussion you
have sought not merely to stimulate discussion about the
activity and the role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security, of which
prevention is an essential part, but also to create a climate
conducive to improving transparency in the work of the
Council, something rightly sought by many countries that
are not members of the Council.

This debate arises from one of the relevant issues
raised by the Secretary-General in his report (S/1998/318)
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa, which was
that since the establishment of the United Nations conflict
prevention has been, as it remains, a source of major
concern, even if circumstances have considerably changed
its nature. When the idea of preventive diplomacy was
introduced by a former Secretary-General, Dag
Hammarskjold, it was closely linked to the threat of a
nuclear escalation between the two super-Powers. Today
we must recognize that this idea of preventive diplomacy
is no longer, mutatis mutandis, the monopoly of
professional diplomats and military experts alone.

Over the years its scope has expanded considerably,
following the proliferation of inter-State and domestic
conflicts, which are in many respects the main causes of
the destabilization of States and the causes of
humanitarian disasters. Therefore, the United Nations -
particularly the Security Council, which bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security - has sought to improve considerably its
methods and strategies for conflict prevention.

The push towards joint coordinated action, which
emerged at the end of the cold war, is gaining ground and
strength at all levels: international, regional and
subregional. The need to act is becoming increasingly
imperative as the list of the new generation of intra-
national conflicts, particularly in Africa, is growing with
the ever-lengthening procession of civilian victims,
refugees and displaced persons.

The painful and tragic events of Rwanda, and to a
lesser extent in Somalia, have also helped make the
international community more aware of the urgent need
to consolidate domestic peace and to prevent the risk of
violent conflict breaking out again.

In view of the emergence of new intra-State and
inter-State conflicts, and given the re-emergence of old
conflicts, with their aftermath of displaced persons, and
the need to preserve political stability and ensure the
economic development of the African continent, nothing,
we feel, is more important than to focus on the prevention
of conflicts in order to create the conditions for lasting
peace in Africa.

However, this awareness of the need to prevent the
outbreak or worsening of violent conflicts led African
leaders to organize flexible mechanisms for the prevention

 

and management of conflicts at the continental and
subregional levels. African leaders increasingly believe that
the international community must give substantial support
to their laudable efforts to prevent African crises and that
it has no choice but to react to existing crises. It is in this
context that we welcome the initiative taken by Japan,
which organized in January 1998, in Tokyo, a conference
on preventive strategy, whose recommendations need to be
revisited, pursued and amplified.

In the ongoing search for a solution to what appears
to be a global threat, because peace and security are a
concern and a challenge for both the South and the North,
the recurrent question is whether it is possible to think
today of an effective conflict-prevention policy to prevent
conflicts without directly tackling other important questions
intrinsically linked with it.

In his report of 13 April 1998 on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, the Secretary-General rightly
recognized that the prevention of conflict was not an end in
itself and that it must take into account and incorporate the
various functions of peace-building and political and
humanitarian activities designed to root out the underlying
causes of conflict: economic destitution, social injustice and
political oppression.

In this context, I wish to make the following
comments.

Today we all recognize the close correlation between
the need for peace and the objectives of sustainable
harmonious economic development. We agree that
development can only be effectively attained in an
environment of peace, security and stability. Likewise, the
results obtained in the development process may easily be
jeopardized by instability or lack of peace. Poverty, disease,
famine and oppression are still ravaging the world, as
evidenced by the millions of refugees and displaced
persons. These problems are both the source and the
consequences of armed conflict. The attention given to
them by the Security Council must not slacken, and efforts
devoted to them must remain an absolute priority.

The thorny question of illicit trafficking in and
increasing circulation of small arms is a challenge to us all,
and we need to move beyond sterile debates about the
misleading question of whether these arms are the cause or
the consequence of conflicts.

In this respect, it is undeniable that today everyone
agrees that the flow of weapons feeds and increases
insecurity and leads to the outbreak of conflict. The
increasingly systematic use of weapons causes the
militarization of part of the civilian population, which
ultimately creates a new equation of force between the
various groups and takes them, de facto, away from the
framework of negotiation. These new armed civilian
actors often weaken existing institutions and pose a long-
term threat to peace and stability in the regions where
they operate.

Controlling, restricting and limiting the illicit
trafficking in weapons is therefore a priority within the
context of conflict prevention, and the international
community must give special attention to this problem.
Obviously the ideal approach would be to develop within
the framework of the United Nations an international
treaty limiting conventional arms transfers. That is why
my country, Senegal, strongly supports the convening in
the year 2001 of an international conference on all aspects
of illicit trafficking in and proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.

It is useful to recall here that in his "Agenda for
Peace", published in January 1995, Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, Secretary-General at that time, proposed the
establishment of "micro-disarmament", based on the
collection and subsequent destruction of stockpiles to
prevent their reuse. In November 1998, the member
countries of the Economic Community of West African
States, aware of the magnitude of this scourge, decided on
a moratorium on the import and export of small arms.

The third comment I would like to make is based on
a logical approach. In order to prevent armed conflict,
should we not establish a special fund with the sole
purpose of supporting strategies of preventive diplomacy?
Such a fund would finance prevention mechanisms that
are already operational in various subregions of the world,
rather than spending vast sums on peacemaking,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building operations.

Conflict prevention has become an absolute priority
for the African continent, which is paying a high price for
its armed conflicts. That is why in 1993 the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) established its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, which
also has a Peace Fund designed precisely to finance
African capacity-building for conflict prevention and
settlement.

 

I wish to pay tribute here to the many donor countries
that have lent assistance to the OAU in pursuit of this goal.
I should also like to thank the Governments of the United
States of America, the United Kingdom and France for their
commitment to African countries, under the tripartite
initiative known as RECAMP, designed for swift, effective
intervention in peacemaking and peacekeeping operations,
as well as in emergency humanitarian relief operations.
Other such initiatives will always be welcome if they
remain open to any African State that wishes to participate
in them.

Conflict prevention is a very complex field. It requires
both the mobilization of various actors and the combination
of various political, economic and social factors. It requires
a comprehensive, concerted and resolute approach and the
participation of the various United Nations bodies, each
operating in its area of competence.

One of the major challenges to be faced in the next
century and one of the key sectors where Member States
must pool their ideas in order to strengthen the credibility
of the Organization in the twenty-first century definitely
relates to the capacity of our Organization to establish a
flexible, open mechanism, responsible on a permanent basis
for alerting the international community to potential crisis
situations in the world and for recommending appropriate
emergency measures.

At the end of this twentieth century, we must
recognize ultimately that our culture of reaction to crises
that shake the world must be replaced by another type of
culture, one of crisis prevention. Today's discussion must
help us delineate the contours of this important
matter, which in our view must remain on the agenda of the
Security Council.

