Mr. Mekel (Israel): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of July, and to
express our appreciation to your predecessor in that
position. I would also like to warmly welcome the
Russian chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and, in particular, Ambassador
Konuzin. I welcome also Ambassador Ruperez as the
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). I assure
you, Sir, of Israel's readiness to do its utmost to assist
in advancing our common counter-terrorism agenda.

Since its establishment, the CTC has faced the
challenge of formulating a clear standard of
international activity against terrorism. While it has not
been easy, we are now beginning to see the positive
fruits of those labours.

For Israel, the past few years have challenged us
to identify our place in the global counter-terrorism
effort and to find ways in which our unfortunately
extensive experience in combating terrorism can be of
benefit to others. We are encouraged by the increasing
number of countries seeking to ally themselves with us
in this context, and we hope, too, to be able to make a
visibly greater contribution to the CTC. To this end, we
are looking forward to participating in the CTC's
meeting with international organizations, scheduled for
the fall. Another way in which Israel could contribute
successfully to the CTC would be through the inclusion
of Israeli experts within its efforts.

Like a disease, terrorism spreads quietly and
erupts with deadly effect. Like a disease, it cannot be
successfully fought with partial measures but must be
combated as a whole. It must be faced with steely
resolve and unblinking determination. Terrorism is a
network, interconnected and often global. It must be
fought as such. Terror anywhere in the world should be
acknowledged for what it is and dealt with accordingly.
Left to breathe, abandoned to fester or immorally
discounted as someone else's problem, it only
strengthens into an undertow that will inevitably re-
emerge from the depths.

As the international community has recognized,
there is no cause or grievance that justifies terrorism.
There is no such thing as good terrorism and bad
terrorism.

Unfortunately, Israel knows this all too well, for
Israel too often finds itself on the frontline of the
international war on terror. Israel knows the pain and
devastation that terror wreaks because, although we
wish it were not so, Israel sees it first-hand on an
almost constant basis. We are keenly aware of the
excruciating dilemmas democracies in particular face
in confronting an enemy with no respect for life and no
respect for law. Through this agonizing and ongoing
experience, Israel has learned a great deal.

We understand that alongside the success in
international counter-terrorism that the CTC and the
global community have enjoyed, it is also undeniable
that we increasingly face a dangerous proliferation of
terrorism. Terrorism is not just a scattered collection of
individuals, domestic organizations or regional
networks. It is a frantic octopus sending its deadly
tentacles in all directions. This creature is becoming
increasingly sophisticated in initiating joint ventures,
sharing methods and moving investment capital to
where it is needed to be the most lethal. It is constantly
refining its practices and strategies, strengthening the
logistics of mass murder.

As this network adapts, so must we. We must
anticipate new directions that terror will take, and we
must cut them off. As terror changes, we must change
with it. We cannot fight future battles based solely on
past experiences; on the contrary, we must pay careful
attention to emerging trends. The fact that terrorists
bombed military installations did not mean that they
would not attack skyscrapers. Because they attacked
skyscrapers did not mean that they would not bomb
subways. Because they bomb subways does not mean
that they will not attempt to devastate cities with
chemical weapons.

We must listen to terrorists' stated intentions. We
must not underestimate their objectives or their means.
We must take them at their words, and we must never
discount the horrors of which they are capable. They
do not play by the rules of civilized society, and to
expect them to do so is to be constantly caught by
terrible surprise.

One example of this concept is the issue of man-
portable air defence systems (MANPADS). This is a
danger that Israel has experienced intimately, and it is
one on which much work is still to be done. While
Israel applauds the progress made by organizations
such as the Group of Eight and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe regarding
MANPADS, this body still needs to address the issue in
an operative manner. As Israel has cautioned before,
this is a terror trend that, although it has not yet caused
the great number of deaths of which it is capable,
unquestionably has the potential to turn our skies into
vast killing fields. Anyone who ever flies on a
commercial jetliner anywhere in the world has reason
to fear the ease of proliferation and use of MANPADS
and the tremendous danger that they hold. Israel urges
this body to take the concrete steps necessary to
understand and eliminate this menace.

Another problem requiring immediate attention is
the phenomenon of States harbouring terrorists.
Terrorism, as I have said, is a truly global threat
transcending the borders of States and the very idea of
sovereignty. At the same time, however, it is anchored
geographically and spatially, and States that harbour
the culprits of international terror before, during or
after their atrocious activities have themselves become
an integral part of the terrorist enterprise. As many
States have said before in the Council, the international
community's counter-terrorism campaign is only as
strong as its weakest link. If any segment of our
defence is deficient, the whole will suffer. This body
should demand that States that harbour terrorists desist
from doing so. It should name and shame them, and it
should cooperate with international initiatives to fight
terrorism in all its incarnations and in every locality.

A further demand to States should be an end to
incitement. Incitement is not just an integral part of the
terrorist infrastructure; it is its engine, and we must
react to it accordingly. States that allow and even
encourage their media to incite terrorism through hate-
filled propaganda or that tolerate the extremist
teachings of educational and spiritual leaders not only
Violate basic human rights obligations; they breed the
next generation of terrorists, and they provide fuel to
the fire of terrorism. They ensure that the years ahead
will be even more dangerous than the years that have
passed. The violence manifested in terror is immoral
and deadly, and everything that provides its
foundations is equally so. If terror is to end, incitement
must end as well. We must hold those who support or
tolerate it accountable, and we must work to replace it
with a culture of tolerance and mutual respect.

Israel believes that if all States confront terror
directly and without compromise, it can be defeated.
The threat of terrorism anywhere is a threat to nations
everywhere. Its branches must be severed and its roots
must be destroyed. This is a struggle we can and will
win. Israel commends the dedication and noble desires
of the CTC and looks forward to doing all it can to aid
in this crucial endeavour.
