Mrs. Zemene (Ethiopia): We would once again like
to thank the United Kingdom presidency for organizing
today's meeting on the situation in South Sudan. We
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his briefing and for all the efforts that he has made
since assuming office to address the security and
humanitarian situation in South Sudan as one of his top

priorities. We are also pleased to see President Mogae,
and we are very grateful to him for his unwavering
commitment and dedication to discharging his heavy
and difficult responsibilities as Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. We in the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the region are very indebted to him. We would also
like to thank Ms. Sunday for her detailed briefing.

Though not all the causes may be exactly the same
as in Somalia, in South Sudan there is also a looming
humanitarian catastrophe in which millions are at risk
of food insecurity. The situation is exacerbated by the
high levels of insecurity that have resulted from the
continued fighting and intercommunal violence in
the country, coupled with a drought and a deepening
economic crisis. Famine has already been declared
in some counties, and saving lives through urgent
international humanitarian assistance has become a
top priority. In that regard, unhindered humanitarian
access is indeed critical if we are to come to the rescue
of the millions of South Sudanese in need of urgent
lifesaving assistance. We welcome President Salva
Kiir's expressed commitment to restore freedom of
movement to the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and humanitarian actors.

South Sudan has suffered for far too long, and the
situation can be alleviated only through a cessation
of all hostilities and violence in the country. That is
why we remain extremely concerned by the reports of
continued fighting between Government and opposition
forces in several parts of the country and of its
devastating consequences for the civilian population.
Without genuine and inclusive political dialogue, there
can be no end to the violence and the situation is bound
to get worse. No cause is so noble that it should hinder
our unity in helping South Sudan to achieve national
reconciliation, security and peace.

The Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan of 2015 remains an
important framework for ending the conflict in South
Sudan and bringing sustainable peace to the country.
The lack of meaningful progress in its implementation
has been a source of great concern, and Mr. Mogae's
briefing today demonstrates only too clearly that there
is reason for even greater concern. It emphasizes the
importance of reinvigorating the peace process with
the goal of ensuring full implementation of the peace
agreement and restoring peace and security through
greater inclusivity, forgiveness and reconciliation.
The national dialogue initiative announced by
President Salva Kiir has the potential to facilitate that
objective, and we in the IGAD region have reiterated
our unanimous support for that initiative while calling
on the Government to ensure that it is conducted in
an all-inclusive manner. Of course, for that to happen
the necessary conditions have to be established,
which is why the parties to the conflict should cease
all hostilities.

The continued and collective commitment of IGAD,
the African Union and the United Nations to the search
for lasting peace, security and stability in South Sudan,
as encapsulated in the joint press statement of January
29, is imperative. In line with the understanding reached
between the three organizations, former President
Alpha Oumar Konare has already started his shuttle
diplomacy with a visit to South Sudan. He has also met
for consultations with my Prime Minister in his capacity
as Chair of IGAD. Although we will not be able to hear
from him today about the outcome of the consultations
and progress made thus far, we remain hopeful that
his efforts, in close consultations with IGAD and the
United Nations, will help to ensure the inclusivity of
the national dialogue and the implementation of the
peace agreement. We believe that it is important that
the Security Council support those efforts and send a
strong and unified message to all the parties in South
Sudan to engage seriously and constructively. I would
again like to reiterate our firm conviction that if there
is unity in the Council, it will not be overly difficult
or impossible to make headway in achieving peace in
South Sudan 4 peace that is rooted in ownership for the
country and that ensures the safety, security and dignity
of the people of South Sudan in all their diversity.

The deployment of a regional protection force
(RPF) continues to be very important, and we note that
progress, even if slow, has been made in that regard.
As the Secretary-General rightly stated in his report
(S/2017/224), the cooperation of the South Sudanese
Government, as well as the support of regional and
international partners, continues to be extremely
critical to facilitating deployment of the force. Now
more than ever, perhaps, it is self-evident that a regional
protection force is needed, as is the full cooperation of
the Government in facilitating its deployment. IGAD's
Council ofMinisters reaffirmed their support for this at
their meeting last week and called for the RPF's speedy
deployment. As a troop-contributing country, Ethiopia
would like to take this opportunity to once again
reiterate our firm commitment to deploying our forces
as part of the RPF, and preparations are well under way
to deploy an advance company in the near future.

Finally, regardless of what we in the region and the
rest of the international community can do to help, it is
ultimately up to the South Sudanese people themselves
to address the enormous difficulties that they are facing
today, including the interconnected challenges of
peace, relief and inclusivity to which President Mogae
so eloquently referred, which have serious implications
for the lasting survival of their new nation. We therefore
hope that all South Sudanese parties will rise to the
challenge and work to restore peace through genuine
dialogue and reconciliation.

