The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Angola, in which she requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Coelho da Cruz
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep concern
at the delay in the formation of a Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation (GNUR) as a result
of the failure of the Uniao Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) to meet the
timetable established by the Joint Commission in the
context of the Lusaka Protocol (S/ 1994/ 1441, annex).

"The Security Council also notes with concern
the slow pace of implementation of the remaining
military aspects of the peace process, in particular, the
demobilization and integration of UNITA soldiers into
the Angolan Armed Forces.

"The Security Council takes note of the
conclusions of the meeting of the Joint Commission
on 23 January 1997, according to which the
Government of Angola and UNITA agreed to
postpone the inauguration of the GNUR beyond
25 January 1997, UNITA agreed to ensure that all of
its National Assembly deputies and the members of
the future GNUR designated by UNITA be in
Luanda on 12 February 1997, and the Government
of Angola agreed to set a date for the inauguration
of the GNUR immediately following the arrival of
the UNITA deputies.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties to
implement this agreement strictly and to form the
GNUR without any linkages and without further
delay. Failure to implement this agreement could
jeopardize the peace process and lead the Security
Council to consider appropriate measures, as
indicated in relevant Security Council resolutions,
against those responsible for the delays.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
ultimate responsibility for restoring peace rests with
the Angolans themselves. The Council reminds
UNITA and the Government of Angola that the
international community can only provide assistance
if progress is achieved in the peace process and that
it will consider a United Nations presence in Angola
after the expiration of the UNAVEM. III mandate in
this context.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the three observer countries
for their efforts to assist the parties in Angola in
advancing the peace process.

"The Security Council will continue to monitor
closely the implementation of the Joint Commission

agreement.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l997/3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 6 pm.

