Mr. Kooijmans (Netherlands): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
countries aligning themselves with this statement are
the candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and
Croatia, the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia
and Montenegro, and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland and Norway.

The European Union is grateful for the
opportunity to participate in this meeting of the
Security Council in Nairobi. The fact that the meeting
takes place in the region clearly signals the
commitment of the international community to help the
people of the Sudan attain lasting peace and stability.
The EU would like to pay tribute to both the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union for their untiring efforts, both
politically as well as on the ground, to bring peace to
the Sudan.

The European Union welcomes the resolution
that the Security Council has just adopted. It joins the
Council in urging both the Government of the Sudan
and the Sudan Popular Liberation Movement/Army to
conclude the discussions on outstanding issues
expeditiously, to speedily conclude a comprehensive
peace agreement and to implement it without delay. In
this respect, the EU welcomes the signing of the
declaration on the conclusion of IGAD's negotiations
on peace in the Sudan and the parties' commitment to
reach a final, comprehensive agreement before the end
of this year.

The European Union stands ready to assist the
Sudan in the reconstruction and development of the
country, on the understanding that the parties sign and
implement a comprehensive peace agreement and fulfil
all their commitments, including those on Darfur.
Under the European Development Fund alone, €400
million have been earmarked for the Sudan. In this
respect, the European Union will also cooperate
closely with the United Nations and the other donors.

Concluding a peace agreement will not only bring
an end to the long-lasting conflict between the north
and the south that has cost so many lives and has
inflicted tremendous human suffering, but also could
provide a political platform for addressing the
underlying causes of ongoing conflicts in the Sudan,
including in Darfur. The crisis in Darfur can be
resolved only through a negotiated settlement that
tackles the root causes of the conflict. In this respect,
the European Union looks forward to an early signature
of the declaration of principles. The EU has also
welcomed the signing of the humanitarian and security
protocols in Abuja. However, progress made at the
negotiating table has not been reflected yet in tangible
progress on the ground. The EU notes with grave
concern that the situation in Darfur has further
deteriorated in recent weeks due to ceasefire violations
and continued attacks on civilians.

The responsibility to protect the civilian
population of Darfur rests first of all with the
Government of the Sudan. The European Union is
concerned that the Government has not fulfilled many
of its obligations under Security Council resolutions
1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004), in particular disarming
the Janjaweed and other militia groups, as well as
bringing perpetrators of human rights violations to
justice. At the same time, the rebel groups, by stepping
up their attacks, have contributed to an escalation in
insecurity and human suffering. The EU will continue
to exert pressure on both sides and will take
appropriate measures, as contemplated in Article 41 of
the United Nations Charter, if no tangible progress is
achieved in this respect.

The European Union once again urges both sides
to abide strictly by the ceasefire agreement, strongly
condemns all attacks on civilians, in particular ongoing
cases of rape, and reiterates that those responsible will
be held accountable for violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, in order to end
impunity. The EU joins the Security Council in calling
upon all parties to cooperate with the United Nations
commission of inquiry.

The European Union is ready to assist the
Government of the Sudan to meet the challenges it will
face in implementing its obligations. We welcome the
Government's agreement to the rapid expansion of the
mission of the African Union, which the EU and its
member States have facilitated by a contribution of
more than €100 million, in addition to an earlier
contribution of nearly €18 million when the operation
was first launched.

It is essential that the African mission in the
Sudan also receive all the support needed to ensure its
rapid and full deployment and effective
operationalization. In line with Council resolution 1556
(2004), in which the United Nations advance mission
in the Sudan is requested to include contingency
planning for Darfur in its work, the EU welcomes the
further cooperation and exchange of experiences and
expertise between the United Nations advance mission
and the African mission in the Sudan.

The European Union and its member States have
also made a considerable contribution to humanitarian
assistance, amounting to over €320 million, in 2004.
As the number of internally displaced persons is still
growing, additional assistance is needed. The European
Union therefore calls on all United Nations Member
States to respond generously to additional appeals for
assistance by the United Nations and by the
international humanitarian agencies.

