Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I should like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, and to the representative of the Office for
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging,
for their briefings. We also thank the French presidency
for convening this public briefing.

Uruguay sees no other way to arrive at a solution to
the bloody conflict in Yemen except through a Yemeni-
led negotiation process in which all parties involved
participate in an inclusive, peaceful and democratic
manner. There is no military solution to the conflict.
Uruguay emphatically urges the parties to return to the
negotiating table without preconditions and in good
faith and to agree to put an end to the armed conflict
in a peaceful way as quickly as possible. On a military
basis, none of the contenders will prevail.

Uruguay also calls on the parties to the conflict to
fully comply with the cessation of hostilities to facilitate
negotiation and as a first step towards establishing
peace. They should understand that, if the war were
to continue, it would favour the actions of Al-Qaida
and Da'esh. Furthermore, those countries that have
influence on the parties must cooperate in the search
for a peaceful solution to the conflict.

The lack of concrete results in the peace process
continues to create suffering for Yemeni civilians,
causing great harm every day to the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, which is on the verge of collapse,
which is aggravated by famine and the outbreak
of cholera.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, Uruguay
is concerned by the dire situation of civilians, in
particular that of the most vulnerable groups, such as
women and children. According to a recently published
report by Yemen Protection Cluster, led by the United

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, during the
first half of 2017 the number of air attacks reported
exceeded the total number of air attacks for all of 2016,
with a monthly average almost three times greater for
the present year. The same phenomenon applies to the
data on armed clashes. Civilians are the ones paying the
highest price for those acts - with their lives.

Uruguay condemns each and every violation
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law that are taking place in Yemen. In that
connection, we urge all parties to distinguish at all times
between the civilian population and the combatants.
Civilians are not a target, and humanitarian assistance
must be allowed to reach them without restrictions
or interruption.

My delegation has spoken on several occasions
in the Council about the need for accountability for
the serious widespread violations of international
humanitarian law committed by all warring parties.
We are pleased by the recent adoption by the Human
Rights Council of a resolution that provides for the
establishment of a panel of experts to monitor the
situation of human rights in Yemen, including violations
and abuses committed by all the parties to the conflict
since September 2014. In that regard, Uruguay calls on
the parties, in accordance with the provisions of that
resolution, to provide full and transparent access to the
international investigative committee and to cooperate
with it so that it can fulfil its mandate.

All parties involved in this prolonged conflict have
committed war crimes and other serious violations of
international law - and continue to do so with total
impunity. They must be held accountable before justice
for their actions. Accountability is crucial to achieve a
lasting settlement to the conflict.

Similarly, Uruguay welcomes and appreciates the
annual report (S/2017/821) of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict, as well as the inclusion
in the attached list of perpetrators of serious violations
against children in Yemen.

Finally, allow in particular to thank the Special
Envoy for his work and reiterate our strong support
to him. We are also grateful for the continuous work
carried out by humanitarian workers and agencies in
Yemen, who are trying to help millions of persons
under extremely difficult conditions.

