Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I apologize that Senegalese Foreign Minister
Mankeur Ndiaye, who had planned to participate in
the debate, had to attend a limited summit yesterday
in Abuja to discuss the situation in Gambia. He has
asked me, on behalf of Senegal, to congratulate the
Government of Sweden for this month's presidency
of the Security Council, which began directly after its
accession to the Council. We are pleased to participate
in this public debate that Sweden has decided to devote
to the crucially important topic of conflict prevention
and sustainable peace. Senegal attaches particular
importance to that theme as it applies to the Sahel
region of Africa, a region that is, unfortunately, marked
by terrorism and violent extremism - scourges that
my country resolutely seeks to combat alongside the
international community.

I also wish to thank and congratulate the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, Mr. Antonio Guterres,
whose important statement helped us better understand
the matter under review. Senegal will spare no effort
to work with the Secretary-General to contribute to
making 2017 a year of peace, as the Secretary-General
has proposed.

The Security Council needs a paradigm shift in
order to redefine our working priorities and strategies
for promoting international peace and security. We
need to invest more in prevention by addressing at
the earliest possible stage the underlying causes of
conflict throughout the globalized world, in particular
in Africa. Let us make no mistake - the effectiveness
and efficiency of our efforts, and thus the credibility
of the Organization, will essentially depend on our
capacity to detect in a timely manner, better analyse
and thereby prevent threats old and new to international
peace and security.

We have many tools at our disposal to that end,
but what often lacks is political will, undermining
early action, in particular on the part of the Security
Council. As a result, we act late and react after the fact,
frequently to little effect and always at high cost. The
reviews of peacekeeping operations, the peacebuilding
architecture and the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women, peace and security, all found
that prevention needs a new impulse. The cross-
cutting dimension of the preventive approach requires
the development of synergies among those three
complementary reviews so as to develop consistent
strategies to promote lasting peace, bolstered by
political sols that take the protection and promotion of
human and national rights into due account, which is
the only guarantee of real human security.
In that context, the role of the Security Council,
the principal organ entrusted with international peace
and security, is obvious, but we must acknowledge that
the paucity or lack of unity and political often paralyse
this organ, as noted throughout 2016. That is why the
Secretary-General's call to make 2017 a year of peace
strongly resonates with us. The leadership and work
of the Secretary-General as the moral authority of our
Organization, supported by his special representatives
and envoys, must be underscored, given their potential
impact on Security Council decisions and the actions
of parties to a conflict. Article 1 and Chapters VI and
VII of the Charter of the United Nations are at the
Secretary-General's disposal and must be resorted to.

To return to a statement that you made, Madam,
and that we endorse, investing in prevention costs
one-tenth of the price of post-conflict operations,
but we are all aware that few resources are devoted
to prevention activities, as opposed to those spent
on peacekeeping operations. The Organization must
therefore abandon the practice of managing rather than
preventing crises. That is why peacebuilding, which is
the key to prevention, remains a secondary activity and
still lacks sustained and predictable financing, despite
the existence of the Peacebuilding Fund.

The adoption on 27 April 2016 by the General
Assembly and the Security Council of the simultaneous
resolutions 70/262 and 2282 (2016), respectively,
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, was important in that it indicated a
willingness to transform our approach in that area. We
hope that the political will necessary can be mustered
to translate that collective commitment into specific
action so as to correct the anomalies and gaps that
have been identified to date. That requires first and
foremost the effective generation and allocation of
predictable resources for essential prevention and
mediation support activities. After that, we must
adopt a comprehensive and consistent approach that
takes due account of the links between sustainable
development, peace, good governance, human rights
and the rule of law, as enshrined in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, in particular Goal 16 on
peaceful societies.

Furthermore, we recall that the United Nations
is not the only actor in the area of peace and security
and therefore cannot carry this heavy burden alone. In
line with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter,
it must strengthen its cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations and encourage the
development of regional responses to crises. Indeed,
given their proximity to conflicts and enhanced
knowledge of local realities and conflict dynamics,
regional and subregional organizations can help to
better define appropriate intervention policies.

Inthatregard, Senegal supports the recommendations
made in the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations on strengthening the prevention
and peacekeeping capacities of the African Union. The
African Union, as a strategic partner of the United
Nations in this area, has a certain capacity to provide
first responses to crises in Africa, but it suffers one
major handicap that undermines its efforts to that
end, namely, the acute problem of funding peace
operations in Africa. Resolution 2320 (2016), adopted
last November under the Senegalese presidency,
therefore invites the United Nations to provide greater
support to the laudable efforts of the African Union
by sharing the financial burden of deploying African
peacekeeping operations.

It is clear that the key challenge facing the United
Nations as Antenio Guterres takes office is connected
to its capacity to anticipate and better understand the
causes of old and new conflicts, better detect new and
asymmetrical threats, and prevent crises and conflicts,
as stipulated in Article 1 of the Charter. It was in that
spirit that Senegal launched an initiative in the Security
Council on the issue of water, peace and security by
convening, on 22 April 2016, an Arria Formula meeting
on this issue under the auspices of His Excellency
President Macky Sall, and, on 22 November 2016,
an open debate on the same theme (see S/PV.7818).
Through that initiative, supported by a preventive
approach to hyrdodiplomacy, Senegal sought to sound
the alarm in the Security Council about twenty-first
century security challenges linked to shared water
resources in the context of their increasing scarcity. My
country wishes to see that resource shared in a peaceful,
efficient, fair, and lasting manner. Peace and security
throughout the world, particularly in Africa, with its 50
continental rivers and border lakes, depend on it.

