Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. We are confident that your able leadership
will guide the Council in the right direction.

The Government of the Federal Republic of Somalia
would like to convey its sincere gratitude to the Member
States of the regional and international organizations
assisting Somalia in the challenge of combating the
scourge of piracy off the coast of Somalia. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for his report before us today (S/2017/859).

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Somalia welcomes the renewal of the mandate, in
accordance with resolution 2316 (2016), in securing
the international and territorial waters off the coast of
Somalia for the safe conduct of shipping and navigation.
Additionally, we welcome the acknowledgement in the
text of resolution 2383 (2017) that the phenomenon of
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in Somalia's
exclusive economic zone results in a loss ofhundreds of
millions of dollars in lost revenue and could lead to the

destabilization of the coastal communities of Somalia.
Noting the Secretary-General's report of 12 October
2017 on piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia and the complex linkage between piracy
and illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, we
ask Member States and international organizations
to support the Federal Government of Somalia in its
efforts to address illegal fishing in Somalia's exclusive
economic zone.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Somalia is working assiduously to tackle the piracy
and illegal fishing problems. The Federal Government
of Somalia established the Maritime Security
Coordination Committee as a mechanism to showcase
the Government's initiatives to address illegal fishing
through six areas of importance to Somalia: maritime
governance, maritime safety at sea, maritime response
and recovery, maritime law enforcement, maritime
security and the maritime economy.

The problem of illegal impacts Somalia more
acutely and adversely in that it has the longest
coastline - 3,323 kilometres - in the contiguous
continent of Africa. A key underlying economic
cause of piracy in Somalia is the depletion of seafood
resources through illegal fishing by foreign companies.
According to Kofi Annan, former Secretary-General
and current Chairperson of the Africa Progress Panel,
"natural resources plunder is organized theft disguised
as commerce". Mr. Annan has further indicated that

"commercial trawlers that operate under flags of
convenience and unload in ports that do not record
their catch are unethical and illegal".

The root causes of piracy, in addition to illegal
fishing, are poor State control of land, the lack of legal
economic opportunities and the absence of the rule
of law. Incidents of piracy off the coast of Somalia
have increasingly dropped, but piracy could easily
escalate again should the naval patrolling lessen before
Somalia's maritime forces are built and fit to control
Somalia's exclusive economic zone.

If it is to be effective and fair, the renewed
Security Council resolution on piracy must address
the devastation caused by the wide prevalence of
illegal fishing in Somalia's exclusive economic zone on
Somali fisheries and coastal communities. Reality on
the ground has changed materially since the adoption
of resolution 2316 (2016).

First, President Farmajo's Government in Somalia
is seriously committed to rebuilding the country's
maritime security, with the assistance of the European
Union as part of the programme under the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.

Secondly, we are taking several measures to
demonstrate our determination, such as the proposed
enactment of new legislation that would designate
piracy offences as criminal activity, with long prison
sentences, as well as the building ofa new correctional
facility that can hold potential perpetrators of
piracy crimes.

Thirdly, we are building the capacities and
maritime security governance of the authorities of
regions with coastline in Somalia, in such critical areas
as the commissioning of coast guard forces, legal and
prosecution capacity, and the rebuilding and revival
of the maritime economy to create jobs and generate
income, particularly for young people.

The value of Somalia's fishing licenses is
significantly and adversely affected by the widespread
prevalence ofillegal fishing. Fishing licenses issued by
the Somali authorities will not be attractive to fishing
companies, as they cannot compete in the market with
those who get it free of charge - that is, illegally.
This will negatively affect the potential revenue of the
Government, which in turn undermines the ability of
the local economy to create jobs and generate income
for young people. Thus, illegal fishing enhances
security risks. If the Security Council does not address
the devastating consequences of illegal fishing, it will
further exacerbate the widespread strong feelings and
sentiments of the coastal communities, as well as the
population as a whole.

Somalia once again thanks the entire Security
Council for its efforts in Somalia in all areas, including
piracy. We welcome both the long-term and the short-
term recommendations, suggestions and solutions set
out in today's resolution and the Secretary-General's
report, and we encourage more research into the complex
link between piracy and illegal fishing. My delegation
assures the Council ofits full cooperation on this matter,
and remains fully engaged in its implementation.

The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.
