Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking Mr. De Mistura for his
briefing to the Council and Ambassador Khalilzad for
his briefing on the Multinational Force.

My delegation requested the floor after
Ambassador Al Bayati had made his statement because
we were convinced that the statement would provide
additional elements that the Council should consider. It
is possible that, in future, we will again ask the
Council's permission to take the floor after the
interested parties have done so.

Costa Rica believes that, as other delegations
have stated, the humanitarian situation in Iraq remains
worrisome. However, we believe that we must
acknowledge and welcome the progress made with
regard to establishing security and the rule of law in

Iraq. We welcome the Special Representative's
statement that 2008 should be a year of sovereignty
and responsibility.

In that connection, we welcome the willingness
of the Government of Iraq and its political forces to
move forward with flexibility. We note with
satisfaction the agreements of the political forces to
promote agreements leading to national reconciliation,
which we consider an important element in the ultimate
resolution of the Iraqi situation. We welcome the spirit
in which the Government of Iraq is calling for
international support while, at the same time,
expressing its will to assume ownership of its own
national process.

In that regard, we recall how, in a letter dated in
December 2007, the Iraqi Government shared with us
how it had replaced the multinational forces, in terms
of security, in eight provinces. Costa Rica - I believe
that the representative of Indonesia said this as well -
anxiously awaits significant progress in that process.

We were also pleased to read in December's letter
from the Iraqi Prime Minister of his agreement to the
extension of UNAMI's mandate for a further year, that
it would be subject to ongoing review and that it could
be concluded earlier at the request of the Iraqi
Government. We also welcome the statement made
today by the representative of Iraq concerning the
desire of his country, people and Government no
longer to be considered under the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter and to normalize their
relations with the international community.

