Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your team on
assuming the presidency for this month and to reaffirm
Malaysia's full support. I also wish to congratulate the
Russian Federation on its stewardship of the Council
during the past month.

Ijoin other Council members in thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ms. Sandra
Honore for her briefing on the latest developments in
Haiti. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/667).

Since the Council's last discussion on this issue
(see S/PV.7408), Haiti has seen a number of significant
developments, most notably the holding of the first
round of legislative elections on 9 August. We are
encouraged to note that the election period was marred
by only isolated instances of violence. We hope that the
subsequent rounds scheduled for later this month will
be equally, if not more peaceful.

In organizing and preparing for the elections, we
note that the Provisional Electoral Council discharged
its role and its responsibilities in a professional and even-
handed manner and accommodated many demands
from various quarters and from potential candidates. In
our view, such efforts are crucial towards cementing the
Provisional Electoral Council's credibility and could
positively contribute towards deepening trust in Haiti's
democratic institutions. We are confident that with the
necessary support of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations and
other international partners, the Provisional Electoral
Council will be able to successfully conduct the
subsequent rounds and the municipal and presidential
polls scheduled for later this month. We also commend
President Martelly and the transitional authorities in
Haiti, including the Haitian National Police (HNP), for
taking the steps necessary to ensure a safe and secure
environment for the conduct of the elections.

We note the extensive preparations for the elections
carried out by the security actors, including the holding
of simulation exercises with MINUSTAH. The fact that
State functions such as security and law enforcement
are increasingly Haitian-led bodes well for the future.
In terms of checks and balances on the Haitian National
Police, Malaysia notes that the Inspectorate General
has been empowered to exercise oversight functions
over the HNP and that it has exercised that role well.
We urge the Haitian authorities to stay the course and
continue working towards the holding of inclusive,
transparent elections, and we hope that the Government
will continue to allocate the required resources as and
when needed.

We are also pleased to note that during the
reporting period, Haiti submitted periodic reports to
the human rights treaty bodies for the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
We also note the emphasis placed on containing the
spread of HIV/AIDS in the country and the awareness-
raising programmes on gender-based violence, underage
pregnancy and sexual and reproductive health.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, which
remains dire, we are of the view that the Government
should also consider stepping up its readiness and
responsiveness in responding to possible emergencies,
particularly in relation to cholera, drought and the
upcoming hurricane season.

We are encouraged by the ongoing efforts on
administrative and legislative reform and urge the
Government to step up efforts to cement the rule of
law in the country. In that regard, we note the positive
steps taken to address prolonged pre-trial detention
and prison overcrowding, including concerning women
detainees.

On the development front, while we take note of
the various plans and the implementation of measures
to stabilize the economy, serious challenges, including
food insecurity, remain. Ultimately, the goal must be to
improve competitiveness and attractiveness to investors,
with a view to achieving sustainable economic growth.

With regard to the consolidation of MINUSTAH,
Malaysia notes the developments and progress under the
four stabilization benchmarks. The gains made under
police development and electoral capacity-building are
indeed noteworthy, while further improvements could
be made under rule of law and human rights and on key
governance issues.

To conclude, I take the opportunity to express
Malaysia's appreciation to MINUSTAH, its leadership
and all its personnel for their sustained and exemplary
contributions in support of the Government and people
of Haiti. We take note of the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH.

In light of the unfortunate passing of Force
Commander Lieutenant General Jose' Luiz Jaborandy
Jr., we hope that his successor will be appointed soon,
given the heavy tasks that lie ahead.

We look forward to working alongside other
Council members, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Honore, MINUSTAH and the wider
United Nations family, as well as institutional donors
and other partners and stakeholders, towards achieving
the goals of stability, security and development for
Haiti and her people.

