Mr. Minami (Japan): Mr. President, at the outset
I would like to express my appreciation to you for
holding today's open debate on terrorism and cross-
border crime and the impact it has on international
peace and security, with a special focus on Africa. I am
also grateful for the detailed concept paper (S/2014/869, annex) prepared by Chad on this issue.

Japan highly values this cross-cutting initiative to
have not only operational discussions on specific issues
such as terrorism, trafficking and cross-border crime,
but also multidimensional and strategic discussions,
keeping in mind a broader perspective on conflict
prevention and resolution.

Japan has been taking the initiative to hold
the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) for more than 20 years, with the
consistent theme of social and economic development
in Africa. One of the main pillars of the TICAD process
has been the consolidation of peace and stability
as a prerequisite for development, in the context of
coping with the so-called root causes of conflicts and
avoiding the recurrence of conflicts by enhancing good
governance. In order to boost that process, Japan held a
workshop in Tokyo last month on regional cooperation
in criminaljustice for counter-terrorism in North Africa
and the Sahel, with participants from the countries of
the region. In ways such as those we have consistently
advocated the importance of establishing peace and
security from a much broader perspective, in order to

promote development in Africa.

Japan supports the idea that the Security Council
should be engaged in strategic and cross-cutting
discussions, as well as in specific and operational ones,
keeping in mind the broader perspective of conflict
prevention and resolution. For example, we are of the
view that discussions should review the possible links
that activities on the ground, such as peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, could have
with other specific United Nations operations. Such
an approach would enhance the effectiveness and
efficiency of United Nations actions generally, thus
maximizing our efforts. We therefore support the idea
of conducting a strategic review, as suggested in the
concept note (see S/2014/869, annex), and we would
hope that it would be practical and productive rather
than conceptual, thus enabling us to make a concrete
difference on the ground.

In that context, I would like to inform the Council
about a concrete project that my Government is
undertaking on the ground and that could stand as a
good example of a project with a multidimensional and
cross-cutting effect. Controlling borders in Africa,
especially in the Sahel region, is not an easy task for
anyone; owing to the presence of the Sahara Desert,
it resembles trying to control a border at sea, creating
a problem that goes beyond border countries' lack of
capacity, which is a factor that we should take into
consideration. Japan has been promoting the concept in
Africa of a one-stop border post, aimed at eliminating
cumbersome daily border procedures through an
efficient high-technology system that encompasses all
border procedures, such as customs, immigration and
vehicle clearance.

The idea is to promote trade by shortening the time
needed for goods to cross the border, by enabling all
the necessary procedures to be done at the same time
at a one-stop border post, instead of stopping twice on
each side for exit and entry. Adapting local systems
to a globalized market has indeed made a difference.
It turns out that improving procedures at borders has
a much broader effect. Measures reinforcing border
procedures can have a positive impact on the fight
against trafficking in drugs, firearms and persons, the
transfer of terrorists, and terrorist financing, while
the reverse can also be true, so that measures against
terrorism and cross-border crime produce a positive
effect by promoting trade and investment.

While it is true that we should tackle and take
operational measures on the issues in question one by
one, it is also true that we should try to implement such
specific measures from a more cross-cutting, bird's-
eye view, in order to maximize the effectiveness and
efficiency of our efforts. I believe that taking a broader
perspective through our one-stop-border-post project is
a good example of such an approach, and Japan hopes
that that way of thinking will be mainstreamed in future
Council discussions.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan's
resolve to fight any problem that could undermine
international peace and security, including terrorism
and cross-border crime. As a responsible member of
the United Nations, we will continue to play an active
role in discussing more effective and efficient ways
to fight such problems together with the international
community.

