Mrs. Bannis-Roberts (Dominica): I also wish
to recognize the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica
again expresses its continuing concern regarding the
ongoing occurrences in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and their disturbing potential outcomes.
The Commonwealth of Dominica also associates
itself with, and reiterates, the sentiments of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) on this matter.

The Commonwealth of Dominica strongly upholds
the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs
of every sovereign State. We continue to promote and
uphold the principle of article 21 of the Charter of the
Organization of American States, which recognizes
territorial inviolability, as well as the principles of
human rights, international law, the rule of law and
the sanctity of national sovereignty, and the pivotal
principles of peace, dialogue and compromise as an
essential basis for the preservation of the dignity and
worth of the human person.

We believe that to peacefully and sustainably resolve
the situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
there must be meaningful dialogue and diplomacy
among all parties that is geared at reaffirming the right
of the people of Venezuela to peace and democracy.
Every effort should be made to help build peace,
promote reconciliation and find an amicable and lasting
resolution to the situation.

Dominica fully supports and endorses the
Montevideo Mechanism, which comprises four major
phases - the dialogue phase, the negotiation phase,
the commitment phase and the implementation phase.
Dominica strongly believes that, on the basis of that
approach, there will be a peaceful and sustainable
resolution to the situation in Venezuela. Our region is
widely known as a zone of peace and all necessary and
precautionary measures should be taken to ensure that
our region continues to enjoy peace and tranquillity.
It is Dominica's desire for an amicable and lasting
resolution to the situation.

