Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would first like to thank our colleagues
from Cote d'Ivoire for their principled position and for
convening an urgent meeting of the Security Council at
the request of Serbia and Russia in connection with the
gross violation of resolution 1244 (1999), as a result of
the Pristina Assembly's adoption of a package of laws
on the transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into
fully fledged armed forces.

We are grateful to the Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his briefing and assessments. We also
listened carefully to Mr. Hashim Thaci's statement.
We welcome the participation in today's meeting of
the President of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Alexander
Vucic', and we share his serious concerns about the
situation in Kosovo and the illegitimacy surrounding
the decision to establish the so-called Kosovo armed
forces. We are referring not only to the illegitimacy
relating to the decision itself, but also with regard to
the assessments of it, such as we have already heard
in the references to the statement of the European
Union (EU) eight, and which I think we will hear about
more than once at this meeting, from those for whom
international law no longer exists. They are now acting
on the basis ofa so-called rules-based order into which
they fit any illegitimate decisions, adapting them to suit
political expediency. Today we will hear painstaking
explanations of why resolution 1244 (1999) has nothing
to do with the so-called sovereign decision by the
Parliament of a so-called sovereign State.

As the years have gone by, we have often warned
that rather than being resolved, the problems in
Kosovo, alas, are accumulating. We have constantly
pointed out that the situation in the region is extremely
unstable and could spin out of control at any moment.
We have demanded intensive international monitoring
based on the Security Council's direction. Our calls
have been ignored. They have regularly covered up
for Pristina, and as a result, the situation has taken an
explosive turn. Pristina's provocative, five-year refusal
to fulfil a key agreement with Belgrade on the creation
of a community of Serbian municipalities of Kosovo
has been compounded by other gross violations. The
decision to transform the Kosovo Security Force into the
Kosovo armed forces is a blatant violation of resolution
1244 (1999), which, as the Secretary-General has again
underscored, remains the fundamental international
legal basis for the Kosovo peace settlement. The
resolution includes a totally clear requirement that all
Kosovo Albanian armed groups must be demilitarized.
The only presence on Kosovo's territory that it authorizes
is that of exclusively multinational contingents under
international control.

No progress is being made in Kosovo on creating
conditions conducive to a political settlement. The
EU mediation mission is getting no practical results.
Unlawful incidents and violent raids by the Kosovo
police special forces on the Serbian population in the
north have become more frequent. Ensuring reliable
protection for Orthodox buildings in Kosovo is a
major problem, and the takeover of Serbian Orthodox
Church property by Kosovars continues. The region
is still an attractive area for recruiting radicals, and
terrorists from Syria and Iraq have been fleeing there.
Refugees and internally displaced persons are still
returning to the region at unsatisfactorily low levels. A
genuine humanitarian crisis threatened when Pristina
introduced punishing customs duties on goods from
central Serbia. Against that backdrop, the emergence
of the Kosovo Armed Forces represents a threat to
peace and security in the region through a relapse into
armed conflict.

Resolution 1244 (1999) is being flouted knowingly
and with the support of leading Western countries
as well as through their direct connivance, including
through the Kosovo Force (KFOR), whose international
security presence in the region is based on that same
resolution. We have been compelled to conclude that
the Kosovo Force takes an exceedingly selective
approach to implementing its mandate. Only a few
days ago, on the pretext of ensuring security in the
Serb-populated northern regions of Kosovo, KFOR
conducted large-scale exercises there using dozens of
armoured vehicles. What it looked like was another
episode of the intimidation of Kosovo Serbs, while
there have been no such exercises in Albanian areas
even in cases of overt provocations and violence, such
as on 7 and 8 September, when Albanian radicals
blocked roads with barriers in order to prevent Serbia's
President Vueic' from visiting Serbs in a village in the
area. KFOR failed to respond adequately to that clear
violation of freedom of movement, not to mention the
fact that it involved a high-level official.

Under KFOR there has been a long-standing policy
of providing systematic training for Albanian personnel
in the Kosovo Security Force that exceeds KFOR's
remit. We are not talking about dealing with problems
in the areas of rescue or civil defence but about training
and instruction of a purely military nature. This goes
on at Camp Bondsteel, among other places, which was
originally established for peacebuilding purposes as
part of the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Its operations are totally untransparent. We insist
that KFOR present the Council with a comprehensive
and complete report on how Camp Bondsteel is being
used, as well as on the personnel deployed there and its
material and technical resources.

The European Union's position is extremely
disappointing, in that on the one hand, it claims that it
is an objective mediator, and on the other, it pretends
to ignore the unlawful creation of a Kosovan army.
The EU's response to Pristina's latest decision can only
be called toothless. Its irresponsible, two-faced policy
has crossed a dangerous line. The emergence of a so-
called Kosovo army is an existential danger to Serbs.
And we can see why. Suffice it to say that the ranks
of the Kosovo Security Force include more than a few
former militants from the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA) responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity during the conflict, whose victims were
Serbs, minorities and dissenting Albanians. Those who
committed crimes that included kidnapping people
and removing their organs in order to sell them on
the black market are still avoiding accountability. It is
increasingly difficult to take seriously the promises we
keep hearing year after year that the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers for prosecuting the KLA'S crimes will
supposedly ensure the triumph of justice.

What is particularly worrying is the possibility
that armed Kosovo-Albanian units could invade
Serb-populated areas in the north in order to enforce
Pristina's control over the entire territory of Kosovo.
Such a scenario could lead to bloodshed and become
a real disaster that could send the Balkans back into
a period of turmoil and kill the efforts to stabilize the
region that the international community has made in
recent decades. Unfortunately, we have no confidence
in the international security presence's ability and
preparedness to prevent such a blitzkrieg.

We have taken note of the continuing highly
responsible and restrained response on the part of
the Serbian leadership in urging Kosovo Serbs to
remain calm and not react to provocations, as well
as its efforts to reduce tensions solely by diplomatic
means. However, we also believe it is essential to take
extremely seriously the Serbian Ieadership's message
that if the Kosovo-Albanian security forces invade the
north or attempt pogroms against Serbs in other parts
of Kosovo, Belgrade will protect them. In our View,
the international security presence bears the chief
responsibility for providing that protection.

In addition, in accordance with paragraph 9 (b) of
resolution 1244 (1999), the Kosovo Force is obliged to
take immediate and thorough measures to demilitarize
and disband any armed Kosovo-Albanian units. As
for the decision on creating the so-called Kosovo
Armed Forces in violation of the resolution, it should
be immediately rescinded. We hope that within the
framework of its mandate, the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) will continue to play an active
role in ensuring the conditions for a peaceful and
normal life for all of Kosovo's residents, protecting and
promoting human rights and facilitating the political
process. We also hope that the European Union will use
its capabilities, including its presence in Kosovo and
the mechanisms of its Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Pristina, to prevent the situation
from deteriorating further, and will help to enable
the revocation of the Kosovo-Albanian authorities'
provocative decisions on trade tariffs and armed forces.

In conclusion, we should point to the
counterproductive attempts by Pristina's patrons to
conceal the deteriorating situation in Kosovo from the
international community and create obstacles to the
regular consideration of the Kosovo problem in the
Security Council. And that kind of policy is one of the
reasons for the current crisis situation there, because
it gives the Kosovo authorities a feeling that anything
is permitted and no one is accountable. The Council
must continue to be focused on the situation in Kosovo.
The quarterly cycle for the Secretary-General's reports
on UNMIK's activity should be strictly observed.
We cannot exclude the possibility that if the adverse
trends escalate it could be necessary to convene new
emergency meetings of the Security Council. God
forbid that should be the case, needless to say.

We would like to draw the Secretariat's attention to
the importance of carefully monitoring the developing
situation and reporting on it to the Security Council.

