Mr. Moussa (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
should like to extend our congratulations to you, Mr.
President, on France's assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the first month of the new
year. France will thereby shoulder its share of
responsibility for addressing the grave situation in the
Middle East - a historic role that will also resonate in
the region. I should also like to express our
appreciation for the efforts of French President
Sarkozy to urgently and seriously address Israel's
grave and indiscriminate acts of aggression against the
Gaza Strip without distinction between civilians and
non-civilians. I would also like to commend the former
President of the Council on his presidency.

As many speakers before me have stated, it has
now been 11 days since Israeli occupation forces began
the aerial, naval and ground bombardment of the Gaza
Strip that has resulted in an extremely tense and
dangerous situation. A military occupying force is
attacking a territory under its own occupation,
blockading it and isolating its population on the pretext
that the Palestinian resistance is launching rockets that
threaten the security of the inhabitants of southern
Israel - as if the people of Gaza were not themselves
also endangered by weapon fire.

Today we learned of the bombing of a Palestinian
school where Palestinians had taken shelter, and of the
resulting dozens of deaths. We also heard the briefing
by Mr. Maxwell Gaylard, United Nations humanitarian
coordinator for the Palestinian territories, who stated
that

(spoke in English)

"People could not reach available food. Children
are hungry, cold, without electricity and running
water. And above all, they are terrified. That, by
any measure, is a humanitarian crisis".

(spoke in Arabic)
Can the Security Council remain silent in the face
of such a situation?

While reaffirming its well-known position on the
need to provide protection for civilians in time of war,

the League of Arab States would also like to reiterate
that it is keen to provide protection for Palestinian and
Israeli civilians alike. However, we would also like to
put things in their proper perspective. We are
essentially dealing with a situation of Israeli military
occupation of Palestinian territories and its
consequences vis-a-vis the rejection of that occupation
by the population. As part and parcel of the occupied
territories, Gaza has suffered long and
disproportionately under the strangulating aerial, naval
and ground blockade that has led to the complete
destruction of its infrastructure. That is in addition to
the repeated starvation campaigns resulting from the
closing of crossing points between Israel and Gaza and
the ongoing refusal to allow basic goods to enter Gaza.

If we allow the Israeli propaganda machine to
describe the situation regarding the psychological
repercussions suffered by some inhabitants of southern
Israel because of Hamas rocket attacks, how can we
possibly ignore the humanitarian tragedy to which the
entire population of Palestine is subject due to the
military Israeli occupation and the complete blockade
within which millions of Palestinians have to live?

Furthermore, if the Israelis reassert the claim that
their armed action is being carried out in self-defence,
to combat terrorism, and that what is happening now is
actually part of the war on terror, then the time has
come to denounce this untrue claim. The whole
situation is due to the occupation. The whole world
wants to see an end to that occupation, which has led to
an extremely unstable situation. Continued Israeli
aggression and actions against civilians have generated
tension and rage in the Arab and Islamic world as a
whole. This situation will not be helped by efforts that
do not put an end to the events taking place in Gaza.

Once again, I would like to repeat the Arab
rejection of attacks against innocent civilians on either
side. The facts indicate that civilians on the Palestinian
side are the primary victims not only of the most recent
events, but also of the situation that prevailed before
the current hostilities. I reiterate that the facts indicate
that civilian Palestinian victims are in the hundreds as
compared to one victim on the Israeli side.

Occupation is not the only reason for the current
hostilities. There is also the failure of the peace
process, the slightest progress in which would have
calmed the situation. The lack of such progress has
created a feeling of frustration and despair. We hope
that 2009 will mark a new beginning for the peace
process that will enable us to address seriously and
sincerely the most important problem - the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories and its rejection of the
establishment of a Palestinian State.

The time has come to put an end to all
procrastination and delays, which will only lead to
further humanitarian and material losses. The time has
come to put an end to the siege, to aggression, to the
confiscation of land and to its partition by Israeli
settlers, none of which can lead to a healthy situation.
The events in Gaza today as a result of this unhealthy
situation is proof of that. The may actually spin out of
control if we cannot put an immediate end to it through
this Council.

The Security Council is the main body of the
United Nations entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. The credibility of the
Council in shouldering its responsibilities and the
credibility of the United Nations are both at stake
today. The Security Council should deal with such
situations firmly, justly and objectively in a manner
that furthers the goal of maintaining international
peace and security.

Here, I would like to pay tribute to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and express to him our deep
appreciation for his important statement today and for
his position on the aggression against Gaza. I would
also like to pay tribute to the United Nations entities
that are working in extremely difficult circumstances
over there, in particular the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

We have repeatedly complained of the Security
Council's failure to swiftly take a firm position in
addressing extremely serious situations that may
threaten international peace and security. A serious
precedent was set in 2006 when Israel attacked
Lebanon and the Security Council did not take action
for over a month, hoping that Israel would achieve its
goals if given enough time. When that did not happen,
the Security Council had to act. Israel had already
stopped fearing the consequences of its continued
aggression. We do not want a repeat of that tragedy.

The high-level Arab delegation is here for the
next few days, and we are more than willing to help the
Council if it is ready to shoulder its responsibilities.
However, we cannot give Israel enough time to achieve
its objectives; that is something that we cannot accept
or be part of.

Here, I would like to mention a statement made
yesterday by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel.
Israel called upon the world to allow it to work to
achieve its objectives until it declares to have done so.
This was printed today in the New York Times. This is
a clear message addressed to the Security Council. It
must be clear that all these messages are addressed to
us and we must react to them.

We have therefore insisted on presenting to the
Council the draft resolution mentioned by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya, His
Royal Highness the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Saudi Arabia and the President of Palestine.

The fact is that the Council has come under
attack. Certain unusual remarks have been made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel describing
Security Council resolutions as "dead letters". Many
might support her in her opinion, and that would be
confirmed if the Security Council should fail to stand
firm and address these threats to international peace
and security. As stated by the Arab Group's
representative on the Security Council, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, we are
submitting a draft resolution in this regard, because the
situation cannot wait any longer.

We have expressed our support for the initiative
enunciated by President Mubarak and President
Sarkozy. We see no contradiction between that
initiative and the work of the Security Council. In fact,
they complement each other. President Mubarak has
stated that Egypt, which has opened the door to peace
in the Middle East, cannot accept a continuation of the
current situation, including procrastination by the
Security Council in shouldering its responsibilities.
Because the Security Council refuses to take action, the
Egyptian and French Presidents have had to act, not to
confront the Security Council, but rather to
complement what we do here, since our objectives are
the same.

Therefore, we support the initiative of the two
Presidents while also insisting on formally making the
position of the Arab Group very clear before the
Council. We call for an immediate and lasting
ceasefire, an end to all hostilities, violence and rocket
attacks, a withdrawal by the Israeli forces, an end to
the blockade and the opening of the crossings between
Israel and Gaza. We demand that Israel, as the
occupying military Power of the Palestinian territories,
allow for the safe passage of humanitarian assistance,
medical aid, food and fuel to Gaza. We call for the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism to provide
protection to civilians, for a ceasefire and for
restoration of calm in general.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we have
carefully listened as every speaker has highlighted the
importance of ensuring that the events in Gaza are not
repeated in the future and of the absolute need to move
effectively and quickly to end the crisis and to resume
negotiations towards a solution to the Israeli/Palestinian
and Israeli-Arab conflict.

We hope that, with a new Administration, this
year will augur well for the peace process. We have
seen certain progress on that track, and we in the Arab
League will always be prepared to participate in any
peace effort that represents a true move towards the
objective sought by all of us, which is being impeded
by Israeli practices in the occupied territories in
complete disregard of Arab and international appeals.
Here, I would also like to object to what was stated by
our colleague from Israel that the world is divided
between moderates and extremists. Yes, we agree.
However, we may disagree over who are the moderates
and who are the extremists. We also believe that there
are even more divisions within those divisions - that
is, between those who respect the provisions of
international law and those who do not.

