Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement to the Security Council on behalf of
His Excellency Mr. Faiez Serraj, President of the
Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord of Libya.

"At the outset I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank you for
convening this meeting on the maintenance of
international peace and security, with special
focus on trafficking in persons in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank Mr. Filippo Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
and Mr. William Lacy Swing, the Director General
of the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) for their briefings. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity
to take the floor before the Security Council.

"I have followed with extreme concern various
media reports that - if proven authentic - show
that some illegal migrants of African descent are
being traded for financial gain. Regardless of the
veracity of the reports, we condemn those actions
strongly, and we reject them regardless of the
nationality of the perpetrators, be they Libyans or
non-Libyans, and regardless of where the events
took place, be that inside or outside our country,
because they are not aligned with our values,
religions or national laws. Nor are those actions in
line with international law, humanitarian law and
the relevant conventions on human rights. They
cannot be dismissed. I have issued directives to the
competent security bodies in order to authenticate
the recording. If the recording is indeed
authenticated, then the authorities concerned will
pursue the criminals and will bring them before
justice as soon as possible.

"We would also like to confirm that any
violations against or any mistreatment of illegal
immigrants are isolated, individual actions that
are in no way systematic. The Government of
National Accord would also like to emphasize that
the perpetrators of those crimes will not enjoy
impunity. We ask all parties, be they inside or
outside Libya, to submit any information regarding
such crimes to the office of the prosecutor, which
has initiated an investigation.

"We would like to point out that Libyan
laws on illegal migration criminalize trafficking
in persons and stress the need to treat illegal
immigrants humanely. Moreover, Libyan laws ban
and criminalize slavery and enslavement. That has
been the case since Libya's independence by royal
decree and in accordance with the provisions of
the penal code, to which Libya abides. Moreover,
such actions are not in line with the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. Libya has ratified the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, and the law will definitely
punish Libyans and non-Libyans alike who have
broken this law on Libyan territory.

"Moreover, the crime of human trafficking is
considered a form of organized crime that is being
perpetrated by transnational criminal networks,
especially in areas that are undergoing conflict
and instability. The international community must
arrive at a holistic and effective way to confront
this in the countries of destination and origin,
and not simply in the countries of transit. If those
criminal networks were not present in the countries
of origin and destination, then transit countries
such as Libya, which is going through a difficult
time of instability that has affected its citizens,
would not have fallen victim to these large flows of
human migration, especially in the absence of the
capabilities that would allow them to confront and
prevent this phenomenon and protect its borders.

"Therefore, we ask the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to undertake its responsibilities
and to help uncover the networks responsible for
the smuggling of and trafficking in persons in
all countries - countries of origin, destination
and transit - according to the provisions of the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons.

"The problem of migration is a multifaceted,
international one, and it is not simply limited to one
country or region. Transit countries, like Libya,
cannot bear the main burden for them. In order to
deal with this problem, we must focus on the root
causes, and not merely the symptoms. We must
establish genuine development in the countries of

origin with the help of the countries of destination.
We must also help the countries of origin to deal
with the real reasons for migration and to confront
the organizations and gangs in the countries of
origin and destination that are involved in the
smuggling of migrants. We must arrive at effective
solutions to the problem in its current state in a
preventive and sustainable way. I would like to
emphasize the following with regard to the role of
countries of origin and countries of destination.

"First, with regard to countries of destination,
any arrangements or plans to prevent the arrival of
migrants to countries of destination and to force
them to return forcibly to Libya is simply a shirking
of responsibility according to international law
and international humanitarian law. That would
jeopardize those migrants, especially in States
experiencing instability. Moreover, it would place
new burdens on Libyan authorities, which need
logistical assistance in order to deal with the
burdens of this phenomenon at present. It also
needs technical assistance in order to protect its
borders in a sustainable manner. We would also
like to reaffirm our rejection of any attempt to
resettle illegal migrants in transit countries like
Libya, because that would have repercussions on
the demographic composition, as well as on the
social and cultural fabric, of society. It would
also undermine national sovereignty, laws and
international law. We ask the European Union to
review its relevant policies in that regard.

"Secondly, with regard to countries of origin,
we ask those countries and neighbours of Libya to
work on controlling and monitoring their borders
and to prevent the flow of hundreds of thousands of
their citizens through their borders to Libya, which
puts them in danger. We ask that they do so instead
of shirking their responsibilities and attempting to
throw the burden on Libya, as an unstable transit
country. That is one of the burdens caused by
the huge flows of illegal migrants. We ask those
countries to work on repatriating those who have
sneaked into Libya to their original countries in
order to spare them these very dangerous illegal
migration trips through desert and sea.

"Libya is currently the victim of a large-scale,
false media campaign of defamation that tries to
portray it as a racist country. We would like to
recall that a large portion of our citizens, especially
from the south, are dark-skinned. In the past Libya
has absorbed more than 2 million foreign labourers
from African and Arab countries for projects in the
private and public sectors, and they were treated
well. Moreover, as soon as Libya stabilizes and
establishes sustainable peace and security, it will
absorb a similar number of our African and Arab
brothers in order to work on stalled reconstruction
and development projects by way of legal contracts
and agreements that would guarantee the rights
and responsibilities of both parties, that is, foreign
labourers and Libyan authorities.

"In conclusion, if the international community
were indeed serious about confronting illegal
migration, or at least lessening its impact, it would
stand united in confronting illegal migration and
adopt an effective approach that would deal with the
root causes, instead of resorting to further media
escalation and defamation of Libya. Moreover,
we support any measure that would impose
international sanctions on smugglers and human
traffickers, provided that they covered all of those
involved, both inside and outside Libya, including
the countries of origin, transit and destination.
Moreover, we call for effective support to Libya's
stability, be it political, security or economic. We
also ask that the Government of National Accord
receive assistance in order to exercise its control
over all Libyan territory and to protect and monitor
its borders.

"We call on the African Union, for its part, to
work with the African countries of origin to stop
the huge illegal migration flows to Libya, which
now count hundreds of thousands of people, and to
repatriate detained migrants to their countries of
origin. Moreover, we are waiting for the European
Union to assume its responsibilities under
international law and international humanitarian
law and not to hold Libya responsible. Libya is
experiencing a period of instability, and it should
not be held responsible for the effects of an
international phenomenon that it did not cause, but
of which it has been the primary victim."

That concludes the official statement of the
President of the Presidency Council. I would like to
make the following observations in my capacity as
Charge d'affaires.

Having just read out the official statement of the
President of the Presidency Council of the Government
of National Accord, I would like to express my country's
appreciation for the noble humanitarian role that is
being played by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in helping illegal migrants.
However, I would like to point out that today we are
discussing illegal migrants, who are risking their lives

for economic reasons in search for a better life, and not
refugees. There is a difference between illegal migrants
and refugees according to United Nations terminology
and international conventions that address these issues.
I would also like to reiterate the importance of the
cooperation that exists between the Government of
National Accord and the International Organization for
Migration in order to help illegal migrants and arrive at
appropriate solutions to their status.

The meeting rose at 11 am.
