Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me first to congratulate you, Sit, on your

assumption of the presidencyof the Council for this
month. [wish you every success in your work. Allow me
also to extend my thanks to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, for his excellent
work, in particular with regard to the item under
consideration today. I would also like to take the
opportunity to express our deep appreciation to all the
members of the Security Council, and in particular to the
Ambassador of Egypt, for the valuable meeting that we
held this morning with President Yasser Arafat.

The Government of Israel, the occupying Power,
decided on 26 February 1997 to build a new colonial
settlement in the area of Jabal Abu Ghniem in the
occupied Palestinian territories. This area is situated
within the territory which Israel annexed and considers
part of the extended municipal boundaries of the city of
Jerusalem. This decision is illegal and in blatant violation
of international humanitarian law and relevant Security
Council resolutions. It provides for the building of 6,500
housing units on land that was confiscated in 1991 and
1992. This decision, which will bring approximately
25,000 new Israeli settlers into the area, will isolate areas
of Arab Jerusalem from 'the southern part of the West
Bank in pursuit of a long standing Israeli plan to build
settlements around those Arab neighbourhoods and to
completely isolate them from the rest of the West Bank,
thus creating new facts on the ground. The Israeli
Government took this decision despite the efforts of the
Palestinian side to prevent it and in disregard of the
advice of a number of its friends, as well as in flagrant
defiance of this Council, which sought to avert the taking
of such a decision and avoid its great inherent dangers.

This Israeli measure follows a series of others
regarding Jerusalem that constitute a clear policy aimed
at the Judaization of the city of Jerusalem and at changing
its legal status and its demographic composition. These
measures have included the destruction of a building
belonging to an Arab association in the Old City in an
attempt to confiscate the land beneath it. We raised this
matter in our letter to the President of the Security
Council of 27 August 1996, contained in document
S/1996/699. On 23 September 1996 the Israeli authorities
also opened the entrance to the tunnel in the vicinity of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, creating further changes in the
nature of the city. In this instance, Israel refused, as
usual, to abide by the Council's resolution 1073 (1996),
which, in its first operative paragraph, called for

"the immediate cessation and reversal of all acts
which have resulted in the aggravation of the
Security Council 3745111 meeting
Fifty-seemid year 5 March 1997

situation. and which have negative implications for the
Middle East peace process." (res. 1073 (1996), para.
1)

This resolution has yet to be implemented.

The Israeli Government also declared, during the
second week of December 1996, its intention to implement
a plan for the building of a colonial settlement composed of
more than 132 housing units for Jewish settlers in the heart
of East Jerusalem. If implemented, this plan would place
the new colonial settlement inside the original and
recognized frontiers of East Jerusalem in the populated
Arab quarter of Ras al-Amud, which would also overlook
AI-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

The Israeli authorities are also continuing to deprive
the Palestinian inhabitants of Jerusalem of their natural and
inherited right to live in their city as did their ancestors.
Israel treats them like foreigners and has pursued all kinds
of illegal manoeuvers and measures to deprive them of their
right of residence. This includes, for example, its attempts
to enforce this measure on all who are living temporarily
outside Jerusalem or who have acquired a second
citizenship.

Furthermore, Israel has long enforced the isolation of
East Jerusalem from the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territories and kept the Palestinian people out of the city,
despite the fact that it is their economic, cultural and
religious centre. This constitutes yet another Israeli attempt
to impose a de facto situation with regard to Jerusalem. It
is a blatant violation of the rights of the Palestinian people
and defies the will of the international community.

All of these actions represent flagrant violations of
several Security Council resolutions on the question of
Jerusalem, which is of central importance to the Palestinian
people, the Arab world and Islamic Ummah. Jerusalem was
the first Qiblah and is the third Holy Sanctuary; it is of
great importance to the followers of the three heavenly
religions and to the whole international community. The
Security Council's relevant resolutions, including
resolutions 252 (1968), 271 (1969), 298 (1971), 478 (1980)
and 672 (1990), clearly affirm that any action or measure
taken by Israel to alter the legal status and the demographic
composition of the city is null and void and has no legal
validity. These resolutions also call upon Israel to cease all
such actions and measures. The international community
has categorically rejected Israel's positions on Jerusalem
and has always affirmed that East Jerusalem is part of the
territories occupied since 1967. Furthermore, it has never

recognized Israeli sovereignty over West Jerusalem. We
call upon the international community to defend and
uphold its decision and to compel Israel to cease ignoring
these decisions and violating international law.

The Israeli violations in Jerusalem come in the
context of the resumption by this Israeli Government of
its colonial settlement campaign in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Government has taken a
number of decisions and actions resulting in actual
construction in many places. In several letters addressed
to the Council, we have drawn attention to this matter and
to the extremely dangerous situation it produces. Once
again, this general Israeli policy, which has been
confirmed by the guidelines of the present Israeli
Government, clearly and grossly violates the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, which this Council has
repeatedly validated in many of its resolutions ... 24, to
be exact --- reaffirming its applicability to all territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem. The policy also
violates several Security Council resolutions dealing
specifically with settlements, including resolutions 446
(1979), 452 (1979) and 465 (1980). We once again
reaffirm the illegality of the colonial settlements and
reject any attempt by the Israeli Government to make a
distinction between old and new settlements. We also
reject all the ramifications of the new construction.
including Israel's confiscation of additional land, the
establishment of bypass roads, the theft of water and the
confiscation of our natural resources. -

The historical shift that followed the signing of the
Declaration of Principles in 1993 and of the Interim
Agreement on the West Bank and Gaza Strip in 1995
between the Government of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization has resulted in positive changes
in the Middle East region. The benefits of peace began to
appear on the horizon for the peoples of the Middle East
in particular, and for the whole world in general.
Unfortunately. this Israeli Government began to pursue
policies that ran counter to the spirit and the logic of the
peace process and began to take decisions and actions that
were in gross violation of the agreements reached. Such
policies, measures and actions are aimed at continuing to
alter the situation and the status of the city of Jerusalem
and to continue the colonial-settlement campaign in the
occupied territories. It was agreed in the Declaration of
Principles that the issue of Jerusalem and the settlements,
inter alia, would be negotiated in the final stage. This
naturally implies that all parties should create no new
facts on the ground that would pre-cmpt the negotiations
and render them useless. If the peace process is to
Security Council 3745th meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

 

continue and succeed, these Israeli policies and actions
cannot continue; such policies and actions would guarantee
the destruction of the peace process.

The Government of Israel must understand that it is
impossible to return to, its the practices and behaviour of
occupation without creating dangerous repercussions. It
must also understand that it is impossible to continue
occupying and confiscating land and to pursue the peace
process at the same time, and that it is impossible to
occupy and claim sole ownership of the city of Jerusalem
if it is to establish and maintain peaceful and natural
relations with its neighbours and the world. The city of
Jerusalem does not accept Israel's exclusive ownership, and
there will be no peace in the region without the attainment
of Palestinian and Arab rights in the Holy City.

The General Assembly ended the deliberations of its
fifty-first session with a clear position regarding all issues
related to the question of Palestine and the situation in the
Middle East, including Jerusalem and the question of
settlements. The General Assembly adopted 19 resolutions
on Palestine by an overwhelming majority, which is a
genuine reflection of the position of the international
community. We believe that the Security Council must take
this into consideration.

Israel, the occupying Power, must cease construction
on the colonial settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim and
promptly cease all settlement activities and confiscation of
land, as well as any actions that would change the facts on
the ground, especially in occupied East Jerusalem. Further,
we believe that the Security Council must take the
necessary action by adopting a clear resolution in order to
guarantee respect for its relevant resolutions and for
international law and to save the peace process. Such goals
fall within the Council's responsibility to preserve
international peace and security, in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter. Since the start of
the peace process, in accordance with its duties and
responsibilities, the Security Council has intervened on
several occasions to save this process and provide clear
support to its sponsors. We appreciate the Council's
position and hope that it will be able to play this role once
again. We look forward to the establishment of a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East region.
When that comes about, we will all be ableto stop coming
to this Council to discuss this issue and to request that
actions be taken.

