Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): Three years
ago, peaceful protesters thronged the streets of Sana'a,
seeking to fulfil their aspirations for a more open and
democratic Government. On Yemen, the Security
Council has been able to consistently speak with a
strong and clear voice. Together, we have welcomed the
efforts by President Hadi Mansour and the people of
Yemen to implement meaningful reform, and we stand
firmly committed to supporting Yemen throughout the
transition process.

We underscore our continuing support for the
leadership of President Hadi Mansour and reform-
minded leaders within the Government and civil
society. We recognize their significant contributions
in forging consensus during a challenging period, and
we encourage the Yemeni Government and all Yemeni
stakeholders to continue moving ahead with the political
transition in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) initiative and implementation
mechanism.

The Council has been assertive in supporting
Yemen throughout its transition. With resolution 2014
(2011), we sent a clear signal of international support
for an orderly political transition on the basis of the
GCC initiative, which led to a peaceful change of
leadership. In resolution 2051 (2012), we supported
the full and timely implementation of that initiative,
and also called for a fully inclusive, participatory
and transparent National Dialogue Conference. In a
presidential statement last year (S/PRST/20l3/20), the
Council warned potential spoilers not to stand in the
way of the progress, helping to enable the necessary
conditions for the launching of a successful conference.

And today we welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2140 (2014) on Yemen, which welcomes and
celebrates the conclusion of Yemen's historic National
Dialogue Conference. The resolution underscores the
importance of turning the page on Saleh's presidency
to meet the aspirations of the Yemeni people, including
guarantees for the representation of women in
Government.

The Council has made clear that we remain firmly
committed to supporting Yemen as it implements
subsequent steps in the transition process, including
constitutional reform and national elections. With
today's resolution, the Council has taken the forward-
leaning step of setting up a committee that is prepared
to sanction individuals for impeding the ongoing
transition in Yemen. With the establishment of that
mechanism, the Council is better equipped to respond
in a timely manner to those who seek to derail progress
for the Yemeni people.

