Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his updates on
the situation in South Sudan, which, along with the
briefing by Special Representative Patten, reminds us
why the international community needs to strengthen
calls for accountability for horrific atrocities. We thank
them very much for their work and for giving a voice to

those who cannot always speak for themselves. We also
greatly welcome the briefing by Ambassador Wronecka
and thank her for her tireless work on the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), on South Sudan sanctions, which now, more
than ever, is a key pillar ofthe Council's commitment to
peace in South Sudan.
Let me begin by commending the Council for
reaching consensus on the Security Council press
statement of 7 December (SC/13611) regarding the
horrific sexual and gender-based Violence in northern
South Sudan. The United States remains deeply
concerned, particularly by the inadequate response
from the Government of South Sudan. Although those
incidents of coordinated sexual violence occurred
weeks ago, the Government has neither condemned the
attacks nor held anyone accountable.

Three months since the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan, the international community and, most
important, the South Sudanese people have seen some
progress on the implementation of pre-transitional
arrangements. As we said last month in this Chamber
(see S/PV.8403), we welcome the reduction in
violent clashes and the formation of some of the
pre-transitional committees. We are pleased to observe
some confidence-building measures between the
parties, including at the local level. The inclusion of
women's groups, civil-society organizations and other
stakeholders in the implementation is a positive step,
and we urge the effort to continue and to be even more
expansive. However, the United States is concerned that
the parties have shown little progress in negotiating
a solution on security arrangements. We call on the
leaders of South Sudan to commit fully to making
those tough decisions, which proved to be a significant
obstacle to the implementation of the previous peace
agreement.

In the spirit of implementing the peace agreement,
the United States reiterates its call for the release of
those who have been arbitrarily detained and the
prisoners of war. Many individuals, including Peter
Biar Ajak, remain imprisoned without the ability to
seek legal review of their detentions. The failure to
release all political detainees runs counter to the letter
and spirit of the latest peace agreement and previous
agreements.

The United States strongly condemns the
bureaucratic and physical impediments imposed by
the Government of South Sudan, opposition forces and
others that prevent the United Nations and humanitarian
and development actors from providing life-saving
assistance and security to the most vulnerable. Even one
incident of the Government restricting the movement
of United Nations personnel is one too many. But 19
incidents, as reported in the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2018/1103), is completely unacceptable. The
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
must have full and unrestricted movement throughout
South Sudan, in accordance with the status of forces
agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of the Republic of South Sudan concerning
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.

With nearly 2 million South Sudanese internally
displaced and over 6 million facing food insecurity,
denying access to those working to protect and save
lives is unconscionable. Most parts of the country will
continue to face severe hunger through January, with
famine a real possibility in many conflict-affected areas,
should insecurity or access denial continue to disrupt
the delivery of emergency assistance to people in need.
We call on the Government and opposition groups
to provide the United Nations, ceasefire monitors,
humanitarian actors and development partners with
free and unhindered access throughout the entirety of
South Sudan in order to provide life-saving assistance
to all those in need.

South Sudan's taxation policies present another
impediment to humanitarian and development actors.
We noted the recent taxation circular published on
5 December, and we urge the Government to institute a
temporary waiver on taxes and fees for all international
staff of humanitarian and development organizations
for the duration of the crisis.

If the recent peace agreement is to have any chance
of success, South Sudan's leaders must be willing to
break the cycle of impunity for those responsible for
atrocities, as well as any actors who fuel the conflict
in South Sudan. In support of the commitment of the
United States to peace and stability in South Sudan, on
14 December the United States Government imposed
sanctions on three individuals. Sanctions were imposed
on Israel Ziv and Obac William Olawo for their roles in
expanding or extending the conflict, and on Gregory
Vasili for actions that have undermined peace, stability
and security in South Sudan.

We commend regional actors for their leadership
and commitment to supporting peace in South Sudan,
and we are counting on the region to maintain pressure
on the parties to implement the peace agreement and
uphold the United Nations arms embargo aimed at
preventing the flow of weapons into South Sudan, which
would further destabilize the country and the region.

In conclusion, the United States continues to
support the people of South Sudan and their aspirations
for freedom, peace and prosperity. We call on South
Sudan's leaders to make those aspirations a reality by
implementing the revitalized Peace Agreement, ending
the cycle of impunity for perpetrators of atrocities and
allowing UNMISS to operate freely, in accordance
with its mandate.

