Mr. Mantaha (Singapore): Our thanks go to
Ambassador Valdivieso for his presentation. We look
forward to the presentation to be made later on by
Ambassador Menkerios.

My delegation would like to thank the Committee
of Experts for having provided the Council with a
comprehensive analysis of the subject and for having
made concrete and realistic recommendations to
strengthen the implementation of resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1333 (2000). We note that the Committee
has considered a whole spectrum of options on how to
monitor the implementation of the arms embargo, as
well as the closure of terrorist training camps in
Afghanistan. We are gratified that in making its
recommendations, the Committee has given emphasis
to the need for the proposed mechanism to be not only
effective but also affordable and realizable. We
therefore believe that the recommendations of the
Committee merit serious consideration.

We look forward to working with other members
of the Security Council to consider how we can take
the process forward, drawing from the Committee's
recommendations. We also agree with the views
expressed by others that we should expedite that
process. My delegation would like to note, however,
that any decision of the Council emanating from the
report of the Committee should, insofar as this is
possible, be taken by consensus.

We will be commenting on the specific
recommendations of the Committee in greater detail in
subsequent discussions of the Council. But permit me,
at this juncture, to make a few general points.

First, like others, my delegation is of the View
that the Council cannot proceed with the
implementation of the recommendations of the
Committee without adequate consultations with the
countries that have specific involvement in the
implementation of the Council's resolutions. Singapore
has noted with deep appreciation that the six States that
share borders with Afghanistan have stated their
intention to abide by the resolutions of the Council.
The Council will now have to work very closely with
them to find the best possible way of helping those
countries implement the decisions of the Council. The
Committee was right when it asserted that

"enforcing sanctions must rely on the will and
initiative, primarily, of the countries bordering
Afghanistan". (S/2001/511, para. 90)

As the Committee also noted, in paragraph 21 of its
report, those countries

"stressed the fact that without a stable
Afghanistan their own stability and security was
threatened".

Secondly, in creating the mechanism to monitor
the implementation of the resolutions against the
Taliban, the Security Council should not unwittingly
institute measures that would impede the ability of
humanitarian agencies to bring aid and relief to the
Afghan population. I note that the delegations of
Ireland, Norway and others have also made that point.
This applies in particular to the monitoring of flights in
and out of Taliban-controlled territories. The Council
should ensure that the frequency and viability of
humanitarian flights, which are crucial for dealing with
the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan, are in no way
adversely affected.

Thirdly, on the proposal by the Committee that
the proposed monitoring mechanism for Afghanistan
serve as the nucleus for future sanctions-monitoring
requirements, we would counsel some caution. The
Council's approach towards the issue of Afghanistan is
governed by a set of political and strategic
considerations that may not apply in other cases and
issues. We should be slow to regard the proposed
mechanism, if it is eventually adopted, as a general
template for other situations.

Fourthly, with respect to the Committee's
recommendation on measures to enforce the arms
embargo, we agree with the views expressed by others
at the meeting held yesterday between the sanctions
Committee and the Committee of Experts that, where
relevant, the Council must consider the
recommendations within the framework of existing
international mechanisms. The Security Council should
take into account the international debate on the control
of the illegal trade in small arms. The United Nation
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects will be held in New
York next month. It should give us an indication of the
extent to which there is an international consensus on
this issue.

Fifthly, my delegation is pleased that the
Committee has expanded the scope of its work to
investigate the connection between the illicit drug trade
and the financing of arms purchases and terrorist
camps in Afghanistan. This is a very important
dimension of the problem, and it deserves our
attention.

Let me conclude by highlighting paragraph 89 of
the Committee's report. I think it is important enough
for me to read it out to the Council.

"The sanctions imposed on the Taliban must
be seen and implemented as part of an overall
package pursued by the United Nations to ensure
peace and stability in Afghanistan. Thus, the
sanctions, the search for a political solution, and
the humanitarian and economic efforts all need to
be taken as a whole and pursued as parts of an
integrated strategy leading to a broad based and
responsible government in Afghanistan."

My delegation looks forward to future opportunities to
exchange views with Council members, and also with
Afghanistan's neighbouring States, to see how we
could best find a well-defined, long-term,
comprehensive strategy to bring peace to Afghanistan.

