Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Given the lateness
of the hour, I shall be brief. I should just like to
highlight a few points that were raised and several
questions that were asked.

First of all, we are satisfied to see that there is a
consensus on the two principal objectives: the
protection of civilians and support for humanitarian
access to benefit those most in need of it. I believe that
that will be reflected in the draft resolution that the
Council will adopt shortly. Nevertheless, on the second
point, humanitarian access, I wish to stress that the
humanitarians with whom I recently met mentioned
difficulties related to the risk of kidnapping in
particular. As members are aware, there are currently
three cases of kidnapping, concerning three different
non-governmental organizations. Thus, necessarily, the
access of humanitarian workers to the most remote
places is sometimes difficult. Obviously, when we have
our full capacity, we will be able to help them more,
but this is a difficulty I wanted to highlight.

Secondly, with regard to the political process -
which was frequently mentioned - we thank everyone
for their support for Mr. Bassole and his work. Indeed,
there was praise for the efforts of Qatar; for the efforts
of Libya, which have also made it possible to bring
together a number of the rebel groups; and for the
efforts of Egypt, which is once again contributing to the
peace process, whose discussions will be continuing,
for the moment, in Doha, Qatar. Obviously, we are
pleased that all of those initiatives are coming together.

I have noted - and I think it is important to
note - that the efforts of all those who have influence
over the rebel groups are important if this dialogue is
to be inclusive. In particular, we know very well that,
despite all the attempts made, Mr. Abdul Wahid's
movement refuses to participate in the negotiations. I
believe it is important that pressure continue to be
exerted on him to join the negotiations, as other rebel
groups have done.

The regional dimension was brought up several
times. With regard to Chad and the Sudan, the United
Nations obviously continues to call for maximum
restraint and to urge that no intervention take place
from across the border.

Concerning the capacities and the deployment of
the mission - which were frequently referred to - I
should just like to make several clarifications and to
emphasize that 12 of the 18 battalions are already in
place and five others have already begun to arrive: a
second Ethiopian battalion, a second Egyptian battalion
and battalions from South Africa, Tanzania and
Burkina Faso. Some of them have already arrived, and
the rest will arrive in the coming weeks and months.
The same is true for the police units.

There was also a question about capacity, apart
from numbers. It is true that some 103 Canadian
armoured personnel carriers (APCs) were recently
withdrawn and that 62 Nigerian APCs remain at Port
Sudan. At the recent Tripartite Committee meeting, the
Sudanese authorities promised to lift all customs
restrictions on those APCs, but as we speak they
remain at Port Sudan. I appeal to the Sudanese
authorities to expedite their release, which would be
very important for the mission's capacity.

The Tripartite Committee has also considered the
question of visas. Let me review the figures we have.
Just before the Tripartite Committee meeting, 961 visas
had been issued. Two days ago, another 120 were
issued; the backlog consists of 327 visas - 197 for
police, 47 for observers and the remainder for
international staff. As to the timeframe for those 327
visas, we had fresh assurances from the Sudanese
Government at the Tripartite Committee meeting that
they would expedite the Visa-issuance process. In the
light of all the nationalities involved, it is very
important that no distinction be made among
nationalities so that the deployment of all UNAMID
personnel - civil, military and police - can take
place as soon as possible.

Mr. Mbeki's report was also mentioned. Let me
clarify: Mr. Mbeki has indicated that his report would
be available in September, and it will then be possible
to comment on it.

The representative of Austria asked about the
possibility of more border monitoring. For now, from
the standpoint of United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
UNAMID, that was not a direct part of our mandate;
also, the border is extremely long. We do not think that
either MINURCAT or UNAMID has sufficient capacity
to monitor the border properly. We know too that both
the Chadian and the Sudanese authorities see this as an
issue of national sovereignty. I do not see how
UNAMID and MINURCAT could carry out strict
monitoring of the border.
On the other hand, on something that is indeed
part of our mandate, we are increasing patrols along
the border to avert the risk of incidents. But, again, we
do not have the capacity for complete border
monitoring, and politically speaking it is not the desire
of either the Sudanese or the Chadian authorities.

Let me conclude by thanking the Council once
again for the support expressed today for UNAMID.

