I would like to thank Ms. Helen La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary General for Haiti, and Mr. Jacques Letang for their briefings. Estonia is concerned about the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Haiti, where the humanitarian situation is already serious. We welcome measures taken by the Government of Haiti to combat the pandemic, especially the formation of the multisectoral commission for the management of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, more action and a coordinated national response to the pandemic are needed. The key elements to control the spread of the virus in Haiti are first, raising public awareness of COVID-19 and, secondly, addressing the dire situation in prisons and detention centres. It is distressful that gains in the political process have been marginal. More effort and responsibility is required to solve the current political impasse. The people of Haiti deserve better and more stable lives. We encourage all to take the political process forward. It is important to pursue open and inclusive dialogue and demonstrate the necessary political will to find solutions to the most pressing constitutional reform issues. Furthermore, additional clarity regarding the electoral calendar is needed. Creating conditions conducive to the holding of the upcoming legislative elections is of the utmost importance. The ongoing political crises and socioeconomic challenges have a worrisome impact on the security situation, as they pave the way for increased criminal activities and violence. Gang-related crime still remains of great concern. It is encouraging that the Haitian National Police has demonstrated growing professionalism and restraint in enforcing public order. During the reporting period, the number of human rights violations, abuses and killings increased. Efforts to combat impunity are required, as no progress has been made on any cases since the drawdown of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, including with regard to the events in La Saline and Bel Air. In addition, 74 per cent of detainees are still waiting for trial due to lengthy and complicated judicial proceedings, which has also led to the overcrowding of prisons. We stress the importance of enhancing accountability and ensuring that all cases are properly investigated and the perpetrators are brought to justice. Finally, I would like to thank Special Representative La Lime and her team for their work. We remain hopeful that their continued efforts will bring a better future for Haiti. I also request that we be updated about the alarming situation in Haitian prisons. What steps have been taken by the authorities to remove the deficiencies in the judicial system? What are the prospects, in the view of the mission, for improving the Haitian judicial system?
