Ms. Striim: As you said, Mr. President, I shall
deliver a briefing on behalf of my Permanent
2
Representative, who unfortunately is not here because
he is attending the annual ambassadorial meeting in
Stockholm. I shall now read out his statement.

"I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to participate in today's
meeting on Burundi in my capacity as the Chair
of the Burundi country-specific configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission. As members
know, Sweden recently assumed the chairmanship
of the Burundi configuration. We very much
welcome this opportunity to engage with the
Security Council.

"Since the last Peacebuilding Commission
briefing on Burundi to the Council, on 22 May
2008 (see S/PV.5897), there have been a number
of positive developments, including the cessation
of hostilities. At the same time, the peace process
continues to face significant challenges, which
require national stakeholders to show willingness
to compromise and which illustrate the need for
coordinated and robust additional support from
regional actors and the international community.

"On 23 June, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Government of Burundi
undertook the first biannual review of the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding. Drawing
on a comprehensive progress report, that
landmark meeting resulted in concrete
recommendations to all the relevant stakeholders
on a number of issues, such as the
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement between the Government of Burundi
and the PALIPEHUTU-Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL), security, justice and the
promotion of the rule of law, land reform, socio-
economic recovery and the gender dimensions of
peacebuilding.

"In the area of good governance, the
biannual review focused on creating the
conditions for free and fair elections in 2010.
Those elections representamilestone in the
consolidation of democracy and peace in
Burundi. The biannual review recommended that
the revised draft legal framework for the
elections reflecting Burundi's political reality
should be presented to the National Assembly by
December 2008. The Peacebuilding Commission
also called on all political parties to promote
08-4905]
constructive dialogue, to adhere to the electoral
code of conduct and to respect the democratic
principles enshrined in the constitution. In that
regard, we welcome the resumption of work at
the level of the National Assembly.

"The review meeting also stressed that the
establishment of the national independent
electoral commission was essential for the
preparations for the elections, and recommended
that the commission should be operational by the
first half of 2009. In that regard, I am happy to
note the 18 June presidential decree establishing
a permanent national independent electoral
commission. I would also like to encourage the
Government of Burundi to consider soliciting
support from the international community,
including the United Nations, in the preparation
and conduct of the next elections.

"In the past few weeks, the Government of
Burundi has demonstrated a commitment to
follow up on those recommendations. The
Peacebuilding Commission stands ready to
provide continued support to the Government and
all other stakeholders for the 2010 elections,
including by supporting the development of a
road map for their preparation.

"The biannual review meeting stressed the
importance of the implementation of the 2006
Ceasefire Agreement between the Government
and the PALIPEHUTU-FNL in accordance with
the timeframes outlined in the revised programme
of action to take forward the Burundi peace
process. The return of the PALIPEHUTU-FNL
leader, Mr. Agathon Rwasa, to Bujumbura, the
signing of the Magaliesburg agreement on
ll June 2008 and the meeting between President
Nkurunziza and Mr. Rwasa on 18 August are
important steps forward in the peace process.
That positive momentum must be seized upon,
and every effort should be made to finalize the
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement by
the end of 2008, well in advance of the 2010
elections, in order to avoid the convergence of
those two critical processes. The international
community must continue to support the Regional
Initiative, the South African Facilitation, the
Political Directorate and the Group of Special
Envoys for Burundi in their efforts to assist the
08-49051

Government and the PALIPEHUTU-FNL in
implementing the Ceasefire Agreement.

"The successful implementation of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement would
constitute a vital step towards peace
consolidation that would enable Burundi and its
partners to focus on other critical challenges,
including combating poverty, security sector
reform, good governance, democratic
consolidation and the fight against impunity. The
Peacebuilding Commission will continue to
support the Government of Burundi in mobilizing
adequate resources to meet those challenges.

"Sweden, together with the other members
of the Peacebuilding Commission Burundi
configuration, will continue to build on the
excellent initiatives undertaken by the previous
Chair, Norway, under the untiring leadership of
Ambassador Johan Lovald. We look forward to
further interactions with the Security Council and
other relevant actors, including the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, on the
developments in Burundi. In preparation for the
next biannual review of the Strategic Framework,
we will continue to hold thematic meetings,
including a planned meeting to discuss the
preparations for the elections in 2010. I also hope
to Visit Burundi in the near future to gain first-
hand perspectives and establish constructive
working relations with the Government of
Burundi and other key stakeholders.

"In conclusion, allow me to commend the
Government and all the national stakeholders for
their constructive engagement in the
implementation of the Strategic Framework and
the first biannual review meeting. Let me also use
this occasion to thank the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB) for
assisting the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Government of Burundi so ably in this regard.
The integrated structure of BINUB and the
strategic leadership of the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General will
continue to be important for effective United
Nations support for peacebuilding in Burundi."

