Mr. Vrailas: I wish at the outset to extend warm
thanks to India for having taken this very important
initiative and to Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
his presentation.

The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.

The European Union (EU) remains fully committed
to the fight against piracy. It is not acceptable that
criminal gangs are continuing to take international
shipping lanes hostage and bring suffering to seafarers
and their families.

However, we see positive signs. Somali piracy is at
its lowest levels since 2008, and the progress noted in
the second half of 2011 has continued in 2012. For the
first time, the number of disruptions by naval forces
and other military units is higher than the number of
attacks. The efforts of the European Union Naval Force's
Operation Atalanta and others are commendable, as is
the cooperation with other partners in full adherence to
the principles of international law.

Nevertheless, despite the recent success achieved
in the fight against piracy, we believe that this is not
the time for complacency. Key capabilities of criminal
networks remain, and current trends can easily be
reversed. We should exploit this moment of opportunity
and further reinvigorate our counter-piracy efforts in a
twin approach, at sea and on land.

The EU has launched EUCAP Nestor, a new
regional maritime capacity-building mission which
aims to strengthen the capacity of States in Somalia
and the Indian Ocean to govern their territorial waters
effectively and to reinforce their ability to fight maritime
crime. The mission complements other programmes in
the region.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General's
observations and see the need to increase support to
programmes and initiatives that will limit the ability of
groups of pirates to operate from land while maintaining
the pressure at sea. Key to this will be the ability of the
Somali Government to regain control of its territory,
to which the EU is contributing in a variety of ways,
including by providing training to the Somali defence
forces.

We look forward to close cooperation with the new
Somali Government in ending the culture of impunity.
The international community should increase its
efforts to build law-enforcement and justice capacity
in Somalia, and assist in promoting the growth of
economic opportunities. Piracy networks can operate
only if they are given the necessary space on land,
and we need to provide incentives to communities to
deprive them of that possibility.

Efforts need to continue to pursue piracy network
leaders, financiers and instigators and to track and
disrupt financial flows. Their "risk/reward" ratio needs
to increase, and the underlying business model needs
to be broken.

The EU is actively supporting INTERPOL in its
work to improve the evidence base and capacities of
the countries in the region to investigate crimes of
piracy. EU member States, supported by the European
Police Office, are also active in investigations and in
prosecution efforts.

The effectiveness of international efforts to counter
piracy depends also on full respect for the applicable
international law and the flag State jurisdiction in
international waters.

We remain deeply concerned by a specific case
of disregard of basic principles of international law
concerning the status of military personnel in action
duty as vessel-protection detachments in an official
counter-piracy mission, and the flag State jurisdiction
in international waters.

Finally, allow me to re-emphasize that the EU is
convinced that only the establishment of the rule of
law and economic development will undermine the
breeding ground for organized crime in Somalia.

Although there are differences in methodology-
pirates in the Gulf of Guinea focus more on cargo than
on hostage-taking - the destabilizing and detrimental
effects on the fishing, trade and development activities
of the local population are similar. Through the
Critical Maritime Routes programme, the European
Union is supporting countries in the Gulf of Guinea
in their efforts to establish regional maritime security
mechanisms, share information and coordinate law
enforcement.

In conclusion, none of the actions described can
solve piracy on its own. There is no silver bullet. The
European Union supports an integrated approach.
Continued containment and deterrence by naval forces,
appropriate measures to provide protection to merchant
shipping, actions to end impunity, building regional
capacities and forging solutions on land all need to come
together. The key issues here are timing, sequencing
and coordination.

