Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Menkerios, President Mkapa,
Ambassador Osman on behalf of Foreign Minister
Karti, Minister Deng Alor Kuol, and the representative
of President Mbeki for their very encouraging
comments here today. We deeply appreciate their
ongoing dedication to the cause of peace in the Sudan.

After decades of conflict, the images of millions
of Southern Sudanese voters deciding their own future
was an inspiration to the entire world and another step
forward in Africa's long journey towards justice and
democracy. Now all parties have a responsibility to
ensure that this historic moment of promise becomes a
moment of lasting progress. On behalf of the people of
the United States, let me again congratulate the people
of South Sudan on a successful and historic referendum
in which the overwhelming majority of voters chose
independence.

We welcome the announcement of the final
referendum results and the Government of the Sudan's
acceptance of that outcome. We thank the Secretary-
General's Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, led by
President Mkapa, for its crucial role in the process. We
are grateful that the entire process was peaceful, and
we commend both parties. Respecting the referendum's
outcome is our best hope for preventing renewed
conflict, and we appreciate the positive statements
made thus far by the Sudan's leaders and by
international actors.

We call special attention to the African Union's
intention to recognize the referendum's outcome and
its call on all States to do likewise. Official recognition
of the new State will be crucial and, as President
Obama has announced, it is the intention of the United
States to formally recognize Southern Sudan as a
sovereign, independent State in July 2011.

By summer, the international community will
welcome a new nation - the Republic of South Sudan.
That nation will face the task of providing security and
stability for its people after decades of war. The
international community came together in support of
the referendum, and this broad multilateral unity was
essential to the process' success. It is now time to
support the people of the Sudan as they move into a
new phase of their history. The people of all parts of
the Sudan need to know that they have our full support
during this critical period.

With the referendum process completed, it is
more important than ever that outstanding issues, such
as the status of Abyei, be resolved as quickly as
possible. We are pleased to note the 21 January
meeting of the presidency, at which the Sudan's leaders
agreed to continue to discuss ways to swiftly resolve
the Abyei impasse. We urge that these negotiations
continue at the highest level. We appreciate the parties'
efforts over recent weeks to maintain calm on the
ground in Abyei, and it is imperative that a
compromise be found to break this impasse and
maintain peace in that very tense region.

We are deeply grateful to Special Representative
Menkerios for his leadership, and we look to him and
the United Nations to continue to play a very active
role. As long as Abyei's status remains unresolved, it
could indeed trigger further instability across the
Sudan, so his work and that of others in that regard is
very important. We also consider peaceful and
inclusive popular consultations in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan states that reflect the will of the
people to be essential components of implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). We urge the
parties to ensure that these processes are completed
before the interim period ends.

Beyond resolving outstanding CPA issues, we
hope that the parties will also work to quickly complete
post-referendum arrangements. We urge the parties to
swiftly resolve the remaining issues of citizenship,
security, water, debt and assets, currency, oil
management and wealth-sharing. Resolving these
issues will facilitate international assistance to the

Sudan, both North and South, and help to ensure a
peaceful post-CPA transition. Alternatively, leaving
them unresolved is but an invitation to trouble.

We believe that the United Nations should
continue to play an important role in assisting the
parties to implement their CPA-mandated
responsibilities, and we urge the parties to consider
ways that a United Nations peacekeeping presence
might help their peace efforts and support post-CPA
agreements, especially on security. The African Union
(AU) is also actively engaged on these issues, and we
fully support the work of the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel and its Chair, President Thabo
Mbeki, including his engagement in Darfur.

The United States remains strongly committed to
ensuring lasting resolution of the Darfur conflict, and
we are deeply concerned about the region's
deteriorating security situation. United States Senior
Adviser for Darfur, Ambassador Dane Smith, will work
with all parties to ensure justice and accountability, and
to reach a comprehensive political solution. We will
also persist in our efforts to improve security and
humanitarian conditions for the people of Darfur.

We continue to condemn in the strongest possible
terms the Government of the Sudan's use of aerial
bombardment, and we also ask Council members to
join us in doing so. Ending aerial bombardment and
ensuring full freedom of movement for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and humanitarian aid workers are essential
steps that would clearly demonstrate the Government
of the Sudan's commitment to ending the violence in
Darfur.

The renewed fighting in December, chiefly
between the Government of the Sudan and the Minni
Minnawi faction of the Sudan Liberation Movement,
displaced tens of thousands of civilians. Regrettably,
the Government of the Sudan continues to refuse
UNAMID full freedom of movement. This Council has
had numerous discussions on this issue, including last
week with Joint Special Representative Gambari. We
have a responsibility to the civilians of Darfur who live
under the continual threat violence to press UNAMID
to fully implement its Chapter VII mandate. We call on
the Government of the Sudan and rebel movements to
reach an immediate ceasefire agreement and to engage
seriously to find a political solution to a conflict that
has lasted far too long. The United States has
repeatedly made clear that if its relationship with the
Government of the Sudan is to reach its full potential,
as we fervently hope it will, the Government of the
Sudan must bring peace to Darfur, fully cooperate with
UNAMID, provide unrestricted humanitarian access to
Darfur, implement a comprehensive peace agreement
and contribute to efforts to achieve accountability,
justice and reconciliation, while upholding
international law and complying with all Security
Council resolutions.

This is, at its essence, a moment of hope after a
long time of trial. The Sudan has suffered far too much
for far too long. Now that the referendum has passed,
we will continue to work closely with the Sudanese
people in the North and the South to ensure that the
referendum is not the end of a process but the
beginning of a better future for both nations.

