Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the delegation of Italy for
convening this important open debate and for its efforts
resulting in our adoption of resolution 2388 (2017) this
morning. In that regard, I thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, as well as Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, United
Nations Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially in women and children; and Mr. Smai'l
Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their briefings before the Council
this morning.

I also like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the
readiness ofmy delegation to cooperate with the Council
towards the fulfilment of our commitments under
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women
and Children, and to put an end to such heinous crimes.

The heinous images and recent news of African
refugee victims make a clear statement about a horrific
crime that should be uprooted by the international
community. I would like to take this opportunity
to assure those present of the support of my country
for the call made by the head of the African Union to
undertake a neutral and immediate investigation of that
atrocious event.

I would like to reassure members of the Council
of the support of the Sudan for all other international
efforts related to human trafficking, given the threat
it poses to international peace and security. As we are
all aware, the number of victims of that phenomenon
is on the rise. Many criminal networks are profiting
from and exploiting humanitarian crises to implement
their criminal schemes, making use of vulnerable
environments that give rise to conflict. Those networks
also exploit vulnerable groups, especially women and
children, to serve their own purposes, such as sexual
exploitation, forced labour, organ trafficking, servitude
and all other heinous crimes, as reiterated in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/939) on trafficking in
persons in armed conflict.

We confirm that combating all forms of
transnational crime, which is used by human
trafficking groups, requires international, regional and
bilateral cooperation, especially in terms of exchanging
information and monitoring suspect financial flows, as
well as building the capacities of individual countries to
address such crimes. In that vein, we must not neglect
the economic, development and social dimensions in
addressing the root causes of the crime, namely, poverty.
This will further require that we adopt an integrated
approach that includes international and regional
partnerships and the measures necessary to prosecute
and punish human traffickers and protect victims, in
addition to providing them with psychological and
health-care services.

The unprecedented massive movements of
refugees and migrants from neighbouring countries
transiting my country have led to enormous challenges
and developments that the Sudan has had to address,
including mixed migration flows, illegal immigration
and refugees fleeing the countryside to cities. Such
incessant demographic mobility includes the smuggling
of women and children. We are sparing no effort to
combat human trafficking and transnational organized
crime, in accordance with our international and
regional commitments. In that regard, we recall certain
achievements that we have accomplished in the Sudan.

First, we enacted an anti-human trafficking law in
October 2014, and established a national committee to
combat human smuggling and trafficking. Upon the
law's enforcement, police forces were able to liberate
thousands of victims of smuggling, especially women
and children, on their way to Libya, and thence to
Europe as the final destination.

Secondly, we amended the refugee law of 1974 in
2014 so as to align it with regional and international
developments, including with new provisions regarding
human trafficking. Thirdly, we amended our passport
law in line with current challenges.

Fourthly, in October 2014 the Regional Ministerial
Conference on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in
the Horn ofAfrica was held in Khartoum in conjunction
with the African Union and the European Union, as
well as other international partners and neighbouring
countries, including Eritrea, Ethiopia, Egypt and South
Sudan. The outcome of the Conference is known as the
Khartoum process. That was followed by a conference
in Rome. In that regard, we urge the international
community to seriously honour its pledges and
commitments of the Khartoum process.

Fifthly, the Government of the Sudan has signed
a number of conventions and agreements with
neighbouring countries for border control. There is a
tripartite agreement among the refugee commission,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
International Organization for Migration to combat
the crime of human trafficking, especially in eastern
Sudan where most of the victims of that crime reside.

Sixthly, the Government of the Sudan set up
shelters for the protection of victims and is currently
in the process of providing them with psychological
and healthcare services in order to integrate them
into society. In that vein, we are developing mechanisms
for documenting and verifying the identity of the victims
and for prosecuting the perpetrators this heinous crime.
In addition to and in recognition of the positive efforts
to control their borders, the countries of the region
agreed that Khartoum would host the regional centre
for anti-human trafficking processes.

In conclusion, my country's delegation would like
to reiterate its determination to continue its cooperation
with the international community and the United
Nations and its agencies in order to address the human
trafficking phenomenon. In that regard, we urge the
international community to provide technical support
to the competent authorities in the Sudan. We also
call for this crime to be addressed in an integral and
comprehensive manner, encompassing the development
of measures to uproot it. In the same vein, we must raise
awareness about the victims and their human rights.

