Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the
briefers for the information they provided and for the
efforts they have made in support of peace and security
in the Central African Republic.

The Central African Republic is experiencing
a moment of change following the success in the
negotiations between the Government and the 14 armed
groups held in Khartoum, which resulted in the signing,
at Bangui on 6 February, of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic - a momentous event for the consolidation
of peace and stability in that country. In that regard,
we congratulate the Government, the African Union,
the international partners, the United Nations,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and all the entities involved for the great
efforts to make the agreement a reality.

We hope that the parties can fulfil their commitments
in the implementation of the agreement. In addition, we
highlight the role played by the Sudan in support of the
agreement, as well as the commitment of neighbouring
countries. We believe that implementing the peace
agreement constitutes a great challenge, for which we
urge the parties to do so in a transparent manner, with

the participation of civil society and the young people
and women of the Central African Republic.

We View with optimism the beginning of the
preparations for the elections scheduled for 2020-2021.
We believe the elections will be a great challenge in
upholding the commitments assumed. We call on
MINUSCA and the international community to deploy
logistical, financial and security efforts for the holding
of the elections.

We express our deep concern about the vulnerability
of the Central African Republic with regard to security.
We urge armed groups to refrain from all forms of
violence and destabilizing activities and to surrender
their weapons, in accordance with the provisions of the
peace agreement. In that connection, we welcome the
Government's national disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme, which marks
a step towards the reintegration of ex-combatants into
society. We therefore encourage the parties to continue
with the effective implementation of that programme.

The Dominican Republic condemns human rights
violations perpetrated by armed groups, such as
arbitrary killings and conflict-related sexual violence
in camps for internally displaced persons, health
centres and places of worship. In that regard, we urge
the international community to continue to support
the efforts of the Government of the Central African
Republic to consolidate a judicial system that ensures
due process of law in the fight against impunity,
without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court over crimes committed in Central
African territory. We highlight MINUSCA's efforts
in that regard, as well as the implementation of the
national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme last December.

With regard to humanitarian access, we call on
all parties to the armed conflict to ensure full, safe,
sustainable and unhindered passage for the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners, including
child protection advocates, so as to enable them
to provide timely humanitarian assistance to the
affected population.

The recruitment of children by armed groups
remains a major concern. Despite major efforts to
separate children from such groups, there are still
instances ofrape and killings of children. Millions have
been left without schools, and cases of malnutrition have
been documented. Those circumstances make them
vulnerable to disease, abuse and exploitation, and many
are displaced or take refuge in neighbouring nations.
We urge the Central African Republic to criminalize
the recruitment of children by armed groups under
national law, in accordance with its obligation under
the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. In that regard, we urge the international
community to provide MINUSCA the necessary
resources to carry out effective monitoring, reporting
and response activities, and to increase dialogue with
the parties to the conflict, with a view to ensuring the
release of children and the development of action plans
to prevent serious violations.

Finally, I would like to acknowledge and support
the role of MINUSCA, the African Union and all the
actors that are working alongside the Central African
Republic to achieve lasting peace and stability.

