Mr. Annabi: I think the first question relates to
Jacobus Bere, who is a former member of the Laksaur
militia group and is suspected of having been
responsible for the killing of Private Manning of the
New Zealand contingent last July. Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello has written to the Indonesian authorities
requesting his extradition, or at least his transfer, to
East Timor so that he can be prosecuted. He has done
that under a memorandum of understanding that was
signed between the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
Indonesian authorities last April. We understand from
statements made in Jakarta by Indonesian officials that
they will not be prepared to respond positively to this
request. They have pointed out that this person is in
detention and is still undergoing trial in West Timor,
and that for that reason they will not be able to respond
positively, at least at this stage.

Turning now to the issue of the tax regulations
that are considered to be a bit of a problem by some of
the non-governmental organizations on the ground, I
would like to point out that under the regulations that
are in place in East Timor, promulgated by the
Transitional Administrator, non-governmental
organizations are not subject to income tax unless they
make a profit. They are entitled to import goods free of
taxes for educational purposes, health purposes and
other humanitarian endeavours. This allows the vast
majority of them to operate free of any taxes on their
activities. Some of them employ local personnel, and
when they do, they have an obligation to withhold tax
on behalf of their employees. My understanding is that
they generally do not object to the withholding of taxes
from their local staff. It is the withholding of taxes
from the international staff of non-governmental
organizations that seems to be the problem.

UNTAET and the East Timor Transitional
Administration are very aware of this problem, and a
working group has been established, which includes
representatives of both non-governmental organizations
and the East Timor Transitional Administration
officials. This working group is going to try to prepare
what are normally called country agreements; in other
words, a draft of the kind of agreement that is normally
signed between a non-governmental organization and
the local government. This group has been meeting on
a weekly basis and is expected to report to the Cabinet
soon, where, hopefully, a draft agreement regulating
these issues can be worked out and adopted. This is an
issue that is under active consideration. I would like to
add one point, however, that has been made to us by
Mr. Vieira de Mello. While he will of course do what
he can to ensure that this process is successful and
reaches a positive conclusion, he will not want to go
against the wishes of the East Timorese who now form
a majority of the Cabinet. But hopefully a draft
agreement will be worked out that will regulate the
conditions under which non-governmental
organizations can function, and their obligations and
privileges in East Timor.

The last two questions related to the recent
incidents and the reasons behind them, and to the
possible implications of Xanana Gusmao's resignation
from the National Council. As I indicated in my
briefing, some of these incidents were created by
groups of youths with no political motivation. I have to
say that the Timorese are prone to getting excited

rather quickly when there is an incident - it can
quickly turn into a mob scene. Some of these
incidents- probably all of them, in fact - have

evolved in that way. But some do not have any political
motivation. Others were probably provoked, aided or
encouraged by people who had some political
motivation - that was the case with one of them. In
this pre-electoral period, when 14 different political
parties have been formed, some may be - and
probably are - trying to take advantage of the
disillusionment that is prevalent among unemployed
people to derive political gains from some of these
situations.

Of course, both the police and military
components of UNTAET have been trying to draw
lessons from these incidents. To be quite frank, I think
that if we had had better information on the situation in
some of these communities, and better knowledge of
these communities - which are not always very easy
to penetrate when we do not speak the language or
know the culture - we could perhaps have avoided
some of the violence or been able to keep it under
better control. But UNTAET and the East Timor
Transitional Administration are looking at what
additional measures can be taken, including increased
patrolling and showing a stronger presence to try to
prevent incidents rather than having to react to them.
We are also sending experts from New York, both
military and civilian, to discuss the best way of
approaching possible situations of civil unrest in the
run-up to the elections, and I am confident that the
necessary measures will be taken.

As regards the resignation of Xanana Gusmao, I
was discussing the matter this morning with Sergio
Vieira de Mello. He feels strongly that this should not
be dramatized. Apart from the immediate reason for his
resignation, which was his disappointment at the fact
that the National Council failed to adopt the regulation
on the creation of constitutional commissions to try to
discuss the future draft constitution, he feels that there
are too many demands on his time right now and that
he needs some distance. The possibility cannot be
excluded that he is somewhat unhappy with the current
differences of opinion that are being voiced by the
different political parties and that he sees a trend which
is not good. I think that this is probably also a way, on
his part, to try to send a message that the Timorese
should avoid such differences, or at least discuss them
in a more constructive spirit, both inside the National
Council and in the streets.

Incidentally, the National Council is a very
dynamic and sometimes difficult body - I experienced
that myself when I met with it. I received some
compliments about UNTAET's work, but had to face a
barrage of criticism by some of its most active
members, who - again, probably for political
reasons - are critical of UNTAET and consider that
we have not done enough for the Timorese, especially
in reactivating and reinvigorating the economy.

I think that a lot of progress has been made, as
can be seen when we measure the difference between
the situation in November 1999, when I was last there,
and now, and that can be seen not only in Dili but in
Suai. When I Visited Suai in November 1999, there was
not a roof on a single house in that city. Today, I think I
can say that probably about three quarters of the roofs
are back in place. It can be seen in the market place
that activities are picking up and things are better. But
obviously, some of the Timorese would have liked us
to be able to do more for them, as is understandable;
and some of them will possibly exploit this for political
purposes.

