The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I
should like to invite the representatives of Denmark,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Norway, the Philippines, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
Somalia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates and the United Republic of Tanzania to
participate in this meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, and request the Protocol Officer to escort
him to his seat at the Council table.

Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 39
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Augustine P. Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, to participate in this
meeting. On behalf of the Council, I wish to welcome
Mr. Mahiga, who is joining today's meeting via video
teleconference from Mogadishu.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Boubacar Diarra, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union for Somalia, to participate in this
meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
I recognize the presence at this meeting of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and the Minister for Africa of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, His Excellency
Mr. Henry Bellingham MP.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/ 114, which contains a letter dated
3 March 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, containing a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

The question of Somalia involves the peace and
security of the Horn of Africa, the African continent
and the whole world. In recent years, thanks to the
joint efforts of Somalia and the international
community, and the United Nations in particular,
progress has been made towards the settlement of the
question of Somalia. But formidable challenges remain.
This open debate of the Security Council is aimed at
urging the international community to give greater and
more sustained attention to the question of Somalia and
to formulate and implement a comprehensive strategy
for the realization of peace, security and development
in Somalia.

I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.


