Ms. Tshabalala (South Africa): We thank
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of
the European External Action Service, and Mr. Matias
Matondo, African Union Special Representative
and Head of the African Union Office in the Central
African Republic, for their briefings on the situation in
the Central African Republic.

I would like to raise three key issues in response to
the briefings today, regarding political developments,
the negative activities of some armed groups and the
role of the region and the international community in
the Central African Republic.

At the outset, we reiterate our support for the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and welcome the
progress that has been registered since its signing four
months ago. We fully support the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, especially the role played by the African
Union (AU) and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS). In that regard, South Africa
commends the cooperation between Ambassador
Mr. Sma'i'l Chergui, the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Special Representative Ndiaye
and Ambassador Adolphe Nahayo of ECCAS on
initiating consultations among the signatories to the
political agreement in order to resolve the political
stalemate and avert the nascent political agreement's
potential collapse. We reject any external interference
or attempts by anyone to fight their own regional issues
by using Africa as a playing field at the expense of
African lives.

We are encouraged by the national efforts aimed at
promoting peace, including the adoption of the electoral
code establishing the legal framework for the elections
in 2020 and 2021, the signing of a peace deal in Bria
by six armed groups and the creation of 26 peace and
reconciliation committees in various prefectures. We
are also encouraged by the progress registered within
the inter-ministerial committee for the follow-up of
the sanctions regime in the Central African Republic,
whereby the Government has elaborated a work plan
for monitoring and following up the implementation of
the benchmarks, demonstrating its political will with
regard to progressively easing the sanctions regime.

It is our considered view that if fully implemented,
the political agreement will assist the Government
of the Central African Republic in focusing on its
quest for economic and social recovery by addressing
the existing gaps in the State's authority and, most
fundamentally, the capacity of the security sector to
protect the people of the Central African Republic, the
country and its borders.

South Africa notes that the military confrontations
that characterized the peak of the transhumance period
in late 2018 subsided during the period under review.
However, some armed groups continued activities
that violate the provisions of the political agreement,
including attacks on civilians, peacekeepers, United
Nations personnel and humanitarian workers, and
that continues to be a concern for my delegation. We
commend the efforts of MINUSCA and the Central
African Armed Forces in addressing the threat posed
by those groups, which have improved the security
situation in some areas. We also recognize the role
of women as essential agents of peace in the broader
nationwide reconciliation efforts. We call on all
signatories to refrain from acts thatjeopardize the spirit
and letter of the political agreement and to commit to
the political process as a whole.

Continued cooperation and coordination between
the AU, ECCAS, the United Nations, the European
Union and all other bilateral and multilateral partners
within the International Support Group of the Central
African Republic remain important for the country's
security and development. That cooperation is critical
to ensuring the successful implementation of the
political agreement and the Central African Republic's
national recovery and peacebuilding plan. We commend
the critical role that MINUSCA has played in bringing
peace, stability and development to the Central
African Republic. South Africa supports MINUSCA's
continued presence in the country and underscores the
importance of strengthening the Mission's resources so
that it can discharge its mandate effectively.

The prevailing situation in the Central African
Republic provides the United Nations with a significant
opportunity to align and synchronize its peacekeeping
with the peacebuilding activities of the European
External Action Service peacebuilding activities. In
that regard, there should be greater involvement and
prioritization of development and recovery activities on
the part of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. In that context, we
want to thank the configuration's Chair, Ambassador
Omar Hilale of Morocco, for his good work in helping
the Central African Republic authorities to address
their challenges. The Security Council should also
address the ongoing illegal exploitation and trade of the
Central African Republic's natural resources.

We are of the firm view that it is imperative for
the international community, through the United
Nations, the AU, ECCAS and international partners,
to continue to maintain solidarity with the people of
the Central African Republic and provide it with the
political, financial and other support it needs to ensure
that there is no reversal of the gains made so far. We
look forward to receiving the Secretary-General's
next report on the situation in the Central African
Republic and the activities of MINUSCA, especially
his recommendations on the scope of MINUSCA's
electoral mandate.

