Mr. Bessho (Japan): Allow me to begin by extending
my deepest appreciation to the Government of Sweden
for its leadership in convening this open debate and
to the Permanent Representative for remaining in the
Chamber during lunch to listen to the statements of
countries that are not members of the Security Council.
It is not always done. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their insightful presentations.

It is deeply regrettable that the number of violations
against children in armed conflicts has increased
greatly over the previous year. The Government of
Japan strongly condemns the perpetrators of such
violations against children and calls for accountability
to end impunity.

The international community must protect children
affected by armed conflicts and prevent future Violence.
It is crucial to ensure humanitarian access and long-
term support for these children - not only to heal their
wounds but also to give them hope for a peaceful future.
It is in that belief that the Government of Japan became
the first donor to the humanitarian window of the Fund
to End Violence against Children, launched by the
Secretary-General in 2016. By supporting the Fund's
12 projects in Nigeria and Uganda, we hope to serve the
human security interests of children by protecting and
empowering them. Let me share a story of a child who
receives assistance through one of the Fund's projects
in Uganda.

As described in the report of the Secretary-
General, many children have been recruited and used
in the armed conflict and numerous cases of rape and
other forms of sexual violence against boys and girls
took place in South Sudan. Unaccompanied children
have fled their homelands, among them a 17-year-old
girl and her 15-year-old sister, who fled South Sudan to
a refugee camp in Uganda. Having lost her father and
having been abandoned by her mother, she is now seven
months' pregnant and soon to be a single mother. Stress
from displacement and her situation has also deprived
her of schooling, and she now suffers from hepatitis B.
She sells her own food to take care ofmedical expenses.
A skill-development activity in the project aims to
provide her with a stable income for her baby, her sister
and herself. Regular home visits by the project staff
allow her to share her struggles and concerns.

This is just one of so many children suffering
the consequences of violence in conflict settings.
By creating safe environments, supporting parents
and ensuring adequate incomes through vocational
education, the Fund is also preventing future violence.

The Government of Japan calls on others to
join the Global Partnership to End Violence against
Children and invest in solutions to address violence
against children in armed conflicts through the Fund.
We should have faith in the strength of children and
empower them as our partners in the peace process.
Together, we must end the cycle of violence and build a
peaceful and sustainable future.

