Mr. Kishida (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this timely
meeting on the denuclearization of North Korea. I
wish also to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
informative briefing.

The threat posed by North Korea's nuclear and
ballistic-missile development has reached a new level.
Since January 2016, it has conducted two nuclear tests
and at least 30 ballistic-missile launches. This threat
is not just hypothetical. For ordinary citizens, it is
only too real. On 6 March, North Korea launched four
ballistic missiles, three of which landed within Japan's
exclusive economic zone. There was no advance notice,
and the consequences of these reckless launches could
have been catastrophic for innocent fishing boats, sea
vessels and aircraft.

These launches are an intentional provocation, as
evidenced by North Korean media reports stating that
the North Korean units responsible for striking United
States bases in Japan in contingencies were involved.
It is therefore increasingly important for the countries
in the region to strengthen deterrence so as to ensure
peace and security.

Now is a good time to recall the commitments that
North Korea has made on denuclearization in the past.
In 2005, North Korea, together with China, Japan, the
Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the
United States,

"unanimously reaffirmed that the goal of the six-
party talks is the verifiable denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula in a peaceful manner"

in a Six-Party Talks joint statement. All parties expect
North Korea to remain committed to this position.

There is no doubt that dialogue is necessary to
achieve the peaceful denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula. However, in the current situation, in which
North Korea continues to advance its nuclear and
ballistic-missile programmes, a meaningful dialogue is
clearly not possible. In order to bring North Korea back
to the negotiating table, the international community
must send a strong message that provocation comes at a
high price and that no bright future awaits North Korea
without its denuclearization.

With this in mind, Japan calls on all Member
States to increase pressure on North Korea through
the vigorous and thorough implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Japan has been
implementing additional measures against North Korea
that go beyond its obligations under Security Council
resolutions aimed at severely restricting the flow of
people, goods and funds, including a total ban on exports
and imports. Japan has also actively assisted with
capacity-building in the countries of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations in order to enhance the
effectiveness of Security Council resolutions. No
State should allow itself to become a loophole in the
Democratic Republic's of Korea's sanctions regime.
Japan calls on all States Members of the United Nations
that have not already done so to submit national
implementation reports to the sanctions committees
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea as
required by Security Council resolutions. Any further
provocations, including nuclear tests should be met
promptly by even more stringent Council resolutions.

The Democratic Republic of Korea has defiantly
dismissed Security Council resolutions as illegal and
refused to be bound by such obligations. That has real
humanitarian consequences. The regime's pursuit of
nuclear weapons and ballistic missile development
comes at the expense of the welfare and basic needs
of the people in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Those people include international abductees.
In the past, agents of the Democratic Republic of Korea
infiltrated Japan and abducted a number of Japanese
citizens, including a girl as young as 13 years old.
Abductees' futures have been stolen, and their families
torn apart. Japan attaches the utmost importance to the
abductions issue, which undermines the sovereignty of
Japan and casts fear over the lives ofour citizens. Victims
of abduction are not limited to Japanese citizens. It is a
universal issue facing the international community and
a violation of fundamental human rights. In urging the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to take concrete
action on that issue, Japan asks for the international
community's support and understanding.

Regrettably, the possibility of further provocations
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is high.
The Council must send a clear message that such
actions will lead only to more rigorous responses
from the international community. Japan strongly
urges the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
demonstrate its seriousness, as well as concrete actions
on denuclearization. Japan looks forward to continuing
to work closely with all of our colleagues here today on
this matter.

