Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to provide the Security Council with an
update on the humanitarian situation in Syria.

Years of conflict have caused immeasurable
human suffering and left countless civilians dead,
injured or missing. The United Nations estimates
that 13.1 million people are in need of protection
and humanitarian assistance, including 6.1 million
people who are displaced within the country. Another
5.5 million people have fled the conflict across borders
into neighbouring countries. The Council will have
heard at first-hand the account of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator in his statement to the Security Council on
22 January with regard to his visit to Syria, in which
he highlighted the plight of the Syrian people. During
the visit, he heard individual stories from some of the
people caught up in the violence and conflict. In Homs,
he saw entire districts of the city reduced to rubble. The
visit was the first for an Emergency Relief Coordinator
in more than two years. It was an important opportunity
to see ways in which the United Nations can support
people in need. It was also a chance to hold discussions
with the Government of Syria and our humanitarian
partners on how to address some of the most pressing
humanitarian needs.

As fighting continues, I am particularly concerned
about the safety and protection of civilians caught up in
the violence in north-west Syria, where hostilities have
reportedly caused numerous deaths and injuries. Air
strikes and fighting in southern Idlib and northern Hama
have resulted in more than 270,000 displacements since
15 December 2017, driving people from their homes
to other areas of Idlib. Camps for displaced people are
overstretched, forcing most of those displaced to seek
shelter in some 160 makeshift settlements. During the
cold and wet winter months, many families have nothing
else but improvised tents, which they share with others.

Attacks on medical facilities and vital infrastructure
continue, with reports of at least 16 attacks on health-
care facilities during the month of December alone.
Yesterday Medecins Sans Frontieres reported that air
strikes had hit a hospital it supports in the Saraqib
district of Idlib, causing five deaths, injuring others and
seriously damaging the facility, which is now closed.
That was the second reported strike on the facility in
nine days.

Further north, in Afrin, in Aleppo governorate, the
United Nations is carefully monitoring the situation
of over 300,000 people living in the district, which
is experiencing fighting. We have reports of civilian
casualties and that approximately 15,000 people have
been displaced within the district, with another 1,000
displaced to Aleppo governorate. We have also received
reports that local authorities inside Afrin are restricting
civilian movement, particularly for those who want
to leave.

I am also concerned about the situation in eastern
Ghouta and areas of Damascus, where civilian deaths
and destruction of civilian infrastructure continue to
be reported. In the first 10 days of the year, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights documented at least 81 civilians killed in the
enclave, including 25 women and 30 children. Scores of
residential buildings in the area have been damaged or
destroyed in recent weeks. I also note with concern that
shelling continues from eastern Ghouta into Damascus,
resulting in civilian deaths and injuries.

Although 29 patients in urgent need of medical care
were allowed out of eastern Ghouta in late December,
hundreds more, most of them women and children,
require immediate medical attention. So far, there have
been 21 civilian deaths among those waiting for and
needing medical evacuation. Their needs are critical,
and the law is clear. I urge all parties, and all those
with influence over the parties, to see to it that all such
medical evacuations take place without conditions
or delay.

With reference to all of the flashpoints I have
highlighted, I call on the parties to ensure the protection
of civilians and civilian and medical infrastructure,
in line with international humanitarian law, and to
ensure the safe, sustained and unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all in need.

I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
my concern about the protection situation in the city of
Raqqa, where returns continue despite the widespread
presence of explosive remnants of war. Nearly 60,000
individuals have reportedly returned since the end of
hostilities in October 2017. However, humanitarian
partners continue to emphasize that, given the high
prevalence of landmines, booby traps and unexploded
ordinance, Raqqa is not safe for civilian returns.

Deaths and injuries due to explosions have been
reported with alarming frequency, and trauma cases
nearly doubled in recent months. More than 534
civilians have been injured in blasts since the expulsion
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant from the
city in October 2017, of whom 112 people died. Each
week, between 30 and 50 civilians continue to arrive
at trauma centres in Raqqa after being wounded by
improvised explosive devices concealed in their homes
and neighbourhoods. Risk from explosive hazards
is not limited to Raqqa; there are indications that
substantial contamination also exists throughout Deir
ez-Zor governorate, where there has been little or no
mine surveying or clearance.

Despite the desperate humanitarian needs in many
areas in Syria, the United Nations and humanitarian
partners continue to face serious challenges in
accessing those in need. Last month, I briefed the
Council that none of our cross-line convoys were able
to reach besieged locations and that only two convoys
had accessed hard-to-reach areas. This month, the
United Nations and its partners have had no access to
any such locations at all. Not one convoy has been able
to deploy. Discussions about convoys have stalled over
requirements to lower the number of beneficiaries and
about splitting convoys in a way that would not allow us
to provide food or other essential items. Our deliveries
must continue to be based on humanitarian principles
and international humanitarian law, impartially based
on civilian need.

At the same time, the United Nations is also seeing
access to areas previously reached under regular
programming coming to a halt. Local authorities in
north-east Syria have twice held humanitarian convoys
at the checkpoint with Government-controlled areas
in eastern Aleppo. Furthermore, local authorities have
requested changes related to the operations of our
non-governmental partners, which in turn has blocked
our assistance delivery to much ofnorth-east Syria. The
situation has been further compounded by the refusal of
the Governor of Hassakah to issue facilitation letters for
our deliveries. While the cross-border operations of our
partners continue, such assistance is not sufficient to
meet the needs in the north-east. To solve the situation,
I call on all parties and those with influence over them
to engage now to see that access to those areas resume.

Finally, due to insecurity in the north-west, which
has included numerous rocket attacks from within
Syria into Turkey, on 20 January the United Nations
temporarily suspended cross-border deliveries at the
two authorized border crossing points in Turkey. The
United Nations remains in discussion with Turkish
authorities on restarting operations as quickly as
possible to ensure the continued delivery of assistance,
which hundreds of thousands of Syrians rely upon
every month.

Those access challenges underscore the importance
of using all the modalities of delivery at our disposal.
Despite prevailing challenges, the United Nations and
its partners have continued to reach millions of people
in need each month. For example, in December, regular
programming from within the country resulted in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to millions of
people, including over 3 million people who received
food assistance through 1,500 deliveries. The United
Nations and its partners also provided health, protection
and education services. Cross-border assistance also
continued to reach hundreds of thousands of people in
need, as 653 trucks delivered food assistance to more
than 500,000 people, health assistance for over 600,000
treatments, as well as other support for hundreds
of thousands.

After almost eight years of conflict, people's needs
are as vast as they are critical. The United Nations
and its partners will continue to deliver to millions of
people in need. The United Nations also stands ready to
bolster such support, but requires efficient and effective
mechanisms to ensure the safe and rapid delivery of
aid. To that end, the Emergency Relief Coordinator
has identified five areas where the United Nations is
looking to make concrete progress.

First, we need to finalize the United Nations
humanitarian response plan for 2018, for which we will
be seeking $3.5 billion to meet the needs of more than
13 million people in all parts of Syria.

Secondly, it is important that there be an agreement
on medical evacuations for hundreds of critically ill
people trapped in besieged eastern Ghouta. People in
other besieged areas should get the same assistance.

Thirdly, humanitarian access needs to improve.
The United Nations has requested agreement for three
to four United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent
inter-agency cross-line convoys each week. We need
consistent access to all people in need.

Fourthly, we must reach agreement on the United
Nations-supported aid convoys from Damascus to
Rukban in south-eastern Syria. While the exceptional
delivery of assistance from Jordan in early January
was a positive development, a sustainable solution
is required.

Fifthly, more effective arrangements are needed
to enable the United Nations to support the work of
Syrian non-governmental organizations and to enable
international non-governmental organizations to perform
the stronger role they can, and are ready to, play in
relieving the suffering.

I hope that we will be able to report to the Security
Council next month on real progress achieved in those
five key areas, and that, month after month, we will
move forward until they are all fully addressed.

