Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Over
the last 30 years, in the countries of the Great Lakes
region, especially in those where conflicts have broken
out, per-capita income has decreased and the
population has continued to grow. The result has been
the widespread pauperization of the peoples of the
countries of the Great Lakes region in which conflicts
have arisen. Indeed, roughly 80 per cent of people in
those countries live on less than $2 a day. Thus there
has been no growth of a middle class but, rather,
impoverishment and an absence of development.

That process of impoverishment has taken place
against a backdrop of considerable natural wealth
which has benefited only businesses and autocratic
Governments. In recent years, due to the explosive
population growth and to the ensuing social demands,
those autocracies collapsed, resulting in the
disintegration of the social fabric of those countries
and in the emergence of factional struggles among
illegal armed groups, which have been, and are still,
trying to appropriate the countries' natural resources
for themselves.

Against that backdrop of conflicts among illegal
armed groups over the ownership of natural resources,
continuing population growth and a poverty rate of 80
per cent, it is very difficult - let us be candid here -
to ensure the sustainability of democracy. Please do not
misunderstand me; electoral processes aimed at
rebuilding those countries are indispensable in order to
give legitimacy to national reconstruction in those
countries. However, they cannot suffice in a context of
social disintegration.

We have to acknowledge that, thus far, in the
Great Lakes region we have been building democracies
on weak and fragile foundations. For those reasons,
many post-conflict transitions are but the early stages
of fresh democratic crises.

The primary task at hand if democracy in the
Great Lakes region is to be rendered sustainable is
urgently to administer what one might call
"international economic intensive care" to those
countries where electoral processes have taken place or
where they are about to be undertaken. We must
forgive those countries' debt, increase official
assistance, give them access to markets without
reciprocity, and ensure that the international private
sector, on the basis of the Secretary-General's
Compact, invests in those countries and modernizes
their primary economies in order to ensure their
competitive integration into the global economy. We
have to understand that democracy is not sustainable
when nearly 80 per cent of the population is poor and
when it is surrounded by rich natural resources that are
in the hands of illegal armed groups. Moreover, the
region's natural resources by themselves cannot help
these countries emerge from their poverty. The main
feature of underdevelopment is to have natural
resources and to export commodities, which
historically bring low prices, impeding development.

The greatest international economic intensive
care in the Great Lakes region must be focused on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is the
strategic epicentre of the entire region. Without
stability in that country, we will not have stability,
peace or democracy in the region. In order to build
peace and democracy in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we need a robust United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) that would deter and dissolve the
illegal armed groups. We also need a national armed
force that would centralize the use of force, a well-
trained police force that would provide security for its
citizens and, lastly, a State that would be in a position
to provide basic public services. Today the Democratic
Republic of the Congo sometimes cannot cover, from
its budget, basic public services such as health,
education and, above all, civic security. In these
conditions, stability and democracy could revert to
crisis in the Great Lakes.
Here, I would like to pay tribute to the Blue
Helmets who have sacrificed their lives, and in
particular to the Guatemalan peacekeepers who were
ambushed a few days ago by the Lord's Resistance
Army. Such events show that the Security Council
must closely follow developments regarding these
illegal groups, especially the Lord's Resistance Army,
which has ravaged northern Uganda and which has a
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in southern Sudan. My delegation will give due
attention to proposals that may be made with a view to
bringing pressure to bear on these armed groups.

Likewise, we have to be especially vigilant when
it comes to the sanctions regime, to enable the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the support of
MONUC - and above all of neighbouring States - to
control its territory, as well as land and air access, to
prevent the smuggling of arms and natural resources.
We should consider whether MONUC could also have

a regional mandate to address security needs at the
borders.

No democracy can be sustained in the Great
Lakes region without basic economic viability. Hence,
natural resources should once again be under the
jurisdiction of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
so that the new Government to be elected next June
will have the resources to govern.

The matter of national reconstruction in the
countries of the Great Lakes region must be tackled in
a comprehensive fashion. We must promote democracy
and organize elections. But at the same time we have to
provide urgent international economic intensive care in
order to begin to reduce poverty, which, I repeat,
affects 80 per cent of the population. I know that this is
a major challenge but, as I said, democracies are not
sustainable without basic economic viability and social
peace.

For these reasons, Peru supports the proposed
Security, Stability and Development Pact for the Great
Lakes region. We believe that the International
Conference on the Great Lakes should be convened
without delay, and we hope that the recently
established Peacebuilding Commission will include
security and development in the Great Lakes region as
one of the priority issues on its agenda.

