Mr. Vassilenko (Kazakhstan) (spoke in French):
I join previous speakers in thanking the Ukrainian
presidency, through you, Mr. Foreign Minister, for
organizing today's debates.

I would also like to express the gratitude of the
entire Kazakh delegation to the briefers for their far-
reaching briefings.

(spoke in English)

We fully support the agenda and priorities of
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres on the prevention
of conflicts, which is more effective than crisis
management. My country stands united with the
international community in efforts to strengthen the
work of the United Nations and the Security Council.
We support Member States in our common efforts to
constructively transform conflict into peace, advance
security and development, protect human rights and
promote the rule of law.

The European security environment has changed
dramatically in recent years. Stability on the continent
has been impacted by contemporary security
challenges, including unconventional terrorism,
irregular migration and organized crime, such as arms
and drugs trafficking, as well as trafficking in persons.
Last but not least is the expanding atmosphere of fear
and distrust. All of those affect negatively both the
social and political structure of European societies, as
well as international peace and security, and challenge
our common fundamental values and principles.

In his address to the General Assembly at its
seventieth session, the President of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, said:

"Humankind needs to shift its focus from
routine conflict prevention and post-conflict
rehabilitation to a new development strategy
that would make such conflicts meaningless."
(A/70/PVJ3, p. 47)

To that end, Kazakhstan has consistently advanced
an international agenda that seeks to help resolve
conflicts before they arise and, if that is no longer
possible, to mediate between conflicting parties with
the aim of creating conditions for lasting peace. Our
efforts, through hosting several international meetings
in Astana and Almaty on Syria and Iran's nuclear
programme, which have a direct bearing on security in
Europe, are a case in point. I would like to take this
opportunity to inform the Security Council that the
most recent meeting of the Astana process on Syria
ended with a decision on the modalities of the joint
operational group to monitor the ceasefire. We are
prepared to continue offering the Astana platform in
search of lasting solutions to this conflict.

Kazakhstan has always been and will continue to be
a strong advocate for peace and security, both globally
and in our own region. Thus, in 2010, thanks to President
Nazarbayev's personal engagement, following a major
upheaval, it was possible to stabilize the situation in
our brotherly neighbour Kyrgyzstan. Our approach,
based on seeking mutual understanding and restoring
trust among nations, was perhaps most notable during
our chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2010.

At the Astana Summit of the OSCE in 2010, all of
its participating States recommitted themselves to

"the vision of a free, democratic, common
and indivisible Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
security community stretching from Vancouver to
Vladivostok, rooted in agreed principles, shared
commitments and common goals".

That commitment is as critical and relevant now as it
was then, and Kazakhstan remains strongly committed
to strengthening the OSCE further in order to help
the organization better meet the swiftly changing
challenges of our times.

The position of my country regarding conflicts
in Europe that, unfortunately, continue to take place
without durable solutions, is well known. Kazakhstan
maintains friendly relations with all the countries
involved in those conflicts, without exception. With
respect to virtually all of them, we have both bilateral
and multilateral formats of mutually beneficial
cooperation within integration initiatives and regional
organizations. That is why we believe that the Astana
platform can serve as a much-needed additional venue
for restoring confidence and reconfirming commitment
to the basic principles of international law and respect
for the national interests of the parties involved.

The peaceful resolution of conflicts in Europe
requires practical action at several levels: between major
Powers, regionally and locally. It is also important that
the Security Council and other partners redouble their
efforts to forge political agreements.

Bringing an end to the conflict in eastern
Ukraine should be our utmost common priority. Our
President has consistently worked to help put an end
to hostilities, contributing to the eventual conclusion
of the Minsk Agreements. We have repeatedly called
for strict compliance with resolution 2202 (2015) on
those agreements, which we consider the only viable
existing mechanism for the resolution of the conflict in
a peaceful way. We welcome the results of the Trilateral
Contact Group's meeting in Minsk on 15 February, as
well as the most recent announcement on 18 February
of an agreement to implement a ceasefire.

It is of special importance for our multi-ethnic
country that Ukraine remains sovereign, stable
and independent, with diverse multi-ethnic and
multi-confessional society in which all human rights are
upheld. We believe that the full-fledged normalization
of the situation in that country can be achieved only
with economic recovery. We therefore call for the
establishment of confidence-building measures in the
economic dimension. We certainly should not allow a
further escalation of tensions.

Regarding the situation in Georgia and the Nagorno
Karabakh issue, we call on the OSCE to redouble its
efforts - which we stand ready to help - to achieve
progress towards their resolution through diplomatic
ways.

Kazakhstan further welcomes the ongoing dialogue
on Cyprus, which sends a strong message and much
hope that the parties will come to a possible agreement
to reunite the country. We believe that the role of the
Secretary-General and the unity shown by the members
of the Security Council at this delicate stage of peace
negotiations are of crucial importance to reaching the
eventual solution of the Cyprus issue.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina also needs
the continued attention of the Security Council. Our
priorities in that direction should be to keep promoting
dialogue between the parties, confidence-building
measures in the political-military, economic-
environmental and human dimensions, in compliance
with resolution 2315 (2016).

With regard to developments in the further
implementation ofresolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999), the Council
should promote further the dialogue process between
the parties to the conflict, under European Union
auspices, so as to maintain peace and security.

In his policy address at the beginning of our
country's membership of the Council, our President
stressed Kazakhstan's determination to work with
fellow members to promote consensus to strengthen
peace and security. As he said, progress through
preventive diplomacy, democratic processes, arms
control, confidence- and security-building measures,
the promotion of human rights, and security in the
economic and environmental dimensions lie at the heart
of Kazakhstan's vision for effective global security and
safety.

I would also like to call the attention ofthe Chamber
to the manifesto of President Nazarbayev, entitled "The
world, the twenty-first century" (S/2016/317, annex).
This is an official document of the Security Council,
and it sets out a step-by-step plan for ending conflicts
and violence. It also attaches strong importance to the
strengthening of the United Nations through enhanced
cooperation among collective regional security
organizations in Europe, the Americas, Asia and
Africa, as well as a determined focus on achieving the
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.

With this in mind, I hope that our discussions today
will provide positive food for thought for all of us taking
part and galvanize the efforts of the global community
to end conflicts and promote peace.

