Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
As this is the first time that I am speaking in a public
meeting this month, I should like first to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to echo the sentiments that you
expressed about our colleague Ambassador Tafrov,
whose presidency during the month of December was
deeply appreciated. I should like also to welcome the
newly elected members of the Council.

I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
briefing you have just given us in your capacity as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). We
listened to it with great interest, as it reflects very
dedicated and productive efforts, for which we thank
you and which, I am certain, will collectively benefit
us all.

Today we have all reached the same
conclusion - namely that the multifaceted threat
posed by Al Qaeda and the Taliban persists. The
centralized organization that planned the attacks of 11
September has given way to local groups - separate
but following the same ideological approach - which
are increasingly aiming at so-called soft targets. That
network exploits Member States' systemic weaknesses,
and no country today is safe from it.

To combat the Taliban and Al Qaeda, we have
been developing, since 1999, a sanctions regime
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). We can see that
that regime has, year after year, gradually been
strengthened, but the main problem - as underlined
today by the Chairman of the Committee - is the lack
of, or insufficient, cooperation by many Member
States. I am really quite surprised to see that fewer than
half of the States Members of the United Nations have
met their obligation to respond set out in resolution
1455 (2003) of January 2003. That is a real problem.
Each one of us must recognize the importance of these
reports in intensifying the fight against Al Qaeda. As
the Chairman told the Council, the Committee, for its
part, stands ready to help Member States that are
encountering special difficulties. It can respond on a
case-by-case basis to questions on the implementation
of the sanctions regime and on how to prepare and
submit reports.

For its part, the Security Council must ensure that
the sanctions regime and conditions for its
implementation advance in a regular fashion. The
Council's dialogue with Member States, visits on the
ground by you, Mr. President, and by the Chairman of
the Monitoring Group and analysis of the threat's
developments provide the Council with information on
areas where progress is required. In that regard, I wish
once again to thank you and the Chairman of the
Monitoring Group for your recommendations to
improve the present mechanism.

We believe that such modification of the
sanctions regime on a regular basis is vital to making
its action as effective as possible. For that reason, we
unanimously agree to take the time, once a year, to
reconsider in a serious and thorough manner the
mechanism to fight Al Qaeda. Obviously, it is not a
question of freezing it in place but of improving it on
each occasion. That is the sense of operative paragraph
2 of resolution 1455 (2003). The contacts we have had
reveal that most members we have contacted wish to
maintain that agreed language. That is a very good
thing for the effectiveness of the fight against
terrorism.
A discussion is now going to be undertaken to
review the sanctions regime. It is our wish that the
discussion should focus on concrete issues in order to
improve effectiveness through implementation of
resolution 1267 (1999), in the determined fight against
Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

