Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Since this is the first
time that I am speaking to the Council under your
presidency, Sir, I would like to congratulate you on
your leadership of the Council this month and pledge
our full cooperation. I would also like to acknowledge
the role of your predecessor in leading the Council last
month.

It has been a while since I addressed the Security
Council on the tragic situation afflicting my country.
I take this to be a good sign of improvement of our
situation and our relations with the United Nations
and the Security Council following the conclusion
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, brokered by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
We welcome today's renewal and extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS ) for 90 days, during which the Mission is
called upon to conduct an evaluation of how best to
improve the mandate in light of the recently signed
peace Agreement. This is a welcome move.

Our consistent support for the extension of the
UNMISS mandate is an indication of our appreciation
of the contribution the Mission is making in our
country. Despite differences on some issues and the
manner of implementation of the mandate, we have
always recognized that we share the same objective
of consolidating peace, security and stability in
our country as prerequisites to the reconstruction,
rehabilitation and socioeconomic development of a
country that has been devastated for far too long by
chronic wars.

It was our hope that at this critical juncture, when
the peace Agreement is bringing the warring parties
together and gaining the support of the international
community, the Security Council and the international
community will engage the Government of South
Sudan constructively on all matters related to peace,
security, the protection of populations, human rights
and humanitarian issues, and promote close cooperation
with the peacekeepers. In this connection, we recall
resolution 2086 (2013), which reaffirms the basic
principles of peacekeeping that require impartiality
and the consent of the parties. It is in this light that
we hope that the Council will seek the consent of the
Government of South Sudan during the implementation
of some of the provisions of the mandate adopted today.

These issues naturally call for close consultation
between the United Nations and the Government,
and that is precisely what the Government requested
of the United Nations. It is therefore unfortunate that
the resolution has been adopted without consultation
with the Government. It is particularly regrettable that
issues on which the South Sudan Government had made
its position clear have been adopted without regard to
the Government's point of view. I refer specifically to
operative paragraph 10, which

"Requests the Secretary-General to prioritize
the complete deployment of UNMISS personnel
to the authorized military and police strength,
including tactical military helicopters and unarmed
unmanned aerial vehicles".

It is well known that the Government considers
these to be contested issues, and to include them
without consultation with the Government is to
invite controversy and potential disagreement and
hostility, when harmony and cooperation are what the
situation calls for. Furthermore, they undermine the
lofty principles expressed in the second preambular
paragraph, which states that the Security Council is

"Reaffirming its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of the Republic of South Sudan,
and recalling the importance of the principles
of non-interference, good-neighbourliness and
regional cooperation".

The Government of South Sudan reaffirms its
commitment to working with UNMISS and the
international community at large. We would like
to thank the troop-contributing countries and all
the men and women of the civilian, military and
police components of UNMISS for their tireless and
courageous efforts to execute their mandate even
under difficult circumstances. South Sudan also deeply
appreciates the support that the international community
rendered in its liberation struggle, which culminated in
independence, and the goodwill demonstrated by the
United Nations and many nations that resulted in the
creation of UNMISS.

The Government of South Sudan is most grateful
for the efforts of the "IGAD-Plus" initiative, which
has resulted in the signing of an agreement, as well
as for the role that the Chama Cha Mapinduzi, the
African National Congress party and other friends of
South Sudan have played in reunifying the Sudanese
People's Liberation Movement. We call on the Council,
the international community and all friends of South
Sudan to support the parties rather than making threats
and proposing punitive measures, which, as we have
repeatedly stated, only aggravate the situation and may
tend to harden positions in the direction of confrontation
rather than cooperation.

South Sudan now desperately needs the support of
the United Nations and the international community if
it is to achieve credible implementation of the peace
Agreement. It is also time for them to focus once again
on the initial objective of providing South Sudan with
a comprehensive programme of assistance in a variety
of areas related to peacebuilding, including ensuring
security, building governance capacity, delivering
essential services and generating socioeconomic
development. That was indeed the message of the
high-level side event organized by the Secretariat
on 29 September 29 and chaired by the Secretary-
General and Deputy Secretary-General. It is time for
the United Nations and the international community
to engage with the Government of South Sudan on
that positive, constructive agenda, instead of making
negative threats of sanctions and punishment, which
can only undermine cooperation and the possibility
of our country's optimistic march towards peace and
reconciliation.

I am a strong believer in cooperation rather than
confrontation. I also believe in the power of optimism
rather than pessimism. We hope and trust that there
will be much improvement in the efforts to achieve a
more effective, constructive dialogue with UNMISS
and the Security Council in the implementation of the
Mission's vitally important mandate.

