Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab J amahiriya ) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
meeting. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the subject. In addition, I also
wish to thank Mrs. Hannalore Hoppe, Director and
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs for her briefing this morning.

Today, the Security Council is discussing the
subject of small arms and light weapons and illicit
arms, as it has for eight consecutive years. This shows
the interest that the Council has manifested in this
issue, an issue linked to international peace, security
and stability. Indeed, those weapons stir up conflicts
and have negative repercussions on development in all
regions of the world, in particular on the African
continent. The most recent studies have, in fact, shown
that the cost of armed conflict in Africa is currently
exceeding $18 billion. This indeed is a considerable
cost to the continent.

We are deeply concerned by the continued annual
production of huge amounts of small arms. According
to the report of the Secretary-General, more than
1,000 firms are manufacturing those arms in more than
100 United Nations Member States. The number of
small arms produced annually is estimated at about
7.5 million units, a figure which, we believe exceeds
States' needs for legitimate self-defence and prompts
us to wonder about this surplus of weapons and the
responsibility of arms-producing countries in the illicit
spread of small arms.

Prohibiting the illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons would have beneficial results: it
would halt armed conflict and stop terrorism and
organized crime. These are factors that could ensure
stability in the developing world. As was stated by the
representative of Costa Rica, this is first and foremost
a question of political will on the part of States.

While we are grateful to the Security Council for
having dealt with the question of illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons within the framework of
its mandate to maintain international peace and
security, we need to take into account the broader
dimensions of the issue. What is needed is to promote
synergy among the various bodies concerned, in
particular the General Assembly and the Peacebuilding
Commission, as noted by the Secretary-General in his
recommendations. Member States should cooperate
and collaborate in order to deal with this issue.

Libya believes that the ability of the United
Nations to deal successfully with the risks involved in
small arms and light weapons hinges on consensus -
on the consideration of the implementation of the
Programme of Action on Small Arms, which the
General Assembly adopted in 2001 by consensus. The
Programme of Action includes numerous important
measures and is underpinned by a number of
principles, which provide a legal and legitimate basis
for it, such as the right of States to self-defence, the
right of all peoples to self-determination and the right
of peoples under occupation to resist. Thus, we all need
to cooperate and show the necessary political will to
ensure the success of the review conference on the
implementation of the Programme of Action to be held
in July of this year.

Libya supports all initiatives aimed at ensuring
the tracing and marking of illicit small arms and light
weapons to ensure credibility and verifiability. We
therefore support the adoption by the General
Assembly in December 2005 of an international
instrument to this end. Although that instrument is
non-binding, it is our hope that member States will
implement all of its provisions.

Cooperation among States in the area of tracing
illicit small arms and light weapons is vital to success
here. My country complies with international marking
standards in order to make clear both the country that
produces the weapons and the country to which they
are being exported. Appropriate and strict control
measures and national laws are being implemented in a
regulated framework to govern the use of arms by the
competent authorities. This is our contribution to deal
with illicit trafficking in these weapons.

At the regional level, coordination among Arab
States is exercised through regular meetings of the
focal points in charge of identification and tracing of
small arms and light weapons, to ensure an exchange
of data and experience and to analyse regional and
international developments related to this issue. The
secretariat of the League of Arab States is also a
depositary of the texts of laws and regulations on small
arms, which become a data base that makes full use of
the capacity of the States in the region.

Accordingly, our delegation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General encouraging
States to collect, maintain and share data on small
arms. Combating the proliferation of small arms
requires that we pool our efforts and engage in
coordination at the bilateral, regional and international
levels.

Finally, it is our hope that the international
community will be able to implement international
priorities with respect to disarmament, nuclear
disarmament and the destruction of weapons of mass
destruction and to the regulation of the genuine root
causes of armed conflict.

