Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to say to you, Mr. President, that we feel
honoured by your presence and participation here to
preside over this special meeting. We also feel
honoured at your presence as a representative of our
Latin American and Caribbean region.

The Security Council has already pronounced
itself on this subject. In the second half of last year, it
expressed various very pertinent points regarding the
use of early-warning, preventive diplomacy, preventive
deployment, preventive disarmament and the
consolidation of peace as complementary and
interrelated measures in a comprehensive strategy to
prevent conflicts. In addition, the Council expressed
the need to revamp and develop a culture of conflict
prevention. My delegation agrees with these
conclusions. Moreover, we share the view that it is the
task of the Security Council to endeavour to act in
situations that call for preventive action in order to
avoid an open conflict.

In his report to the Millennium Assembly
(A/54/2000), the Secretary-General also makes a
number of observations regarding the need to prevent
conflicts and, above all, to face up to not only the
symptoms of those conflicts, but their root causes as
well. In the times in which we live, during which
peacekeeping operations have multiplied, the
limitations of an approach that focuses more on
symptoms than on causes- and which does not
always contribute to solving conflicts - are becoming
apparent.

We have already reached a point in the evolution
of civilization in which it no longer makes sense to talk
about just wars. In this regard, the General Assembly
last year adopted the important Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. My
delegation is convinced of the importance of promoting
a culture of peace and of an educational effort for
peace that will one day lead us to the establishment of
a true right to peace.

The public diplomacy of the Security Council is
an effective prevention mechanism. Contact between
the members of the Council and regions in which it is
possible to prevent a conflict or the exacerbation of an
existing conflict can be effective if it is done with a
dose of consensus. Prevention measures have more
weight if they come from the Security Council and if
they are applied in conformity with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.

In order to prevent the resurgence of conflict, my
delegation believes that the Security Council should
give special attention to the related aspect of
monitoring respect for peace agreements and
consolidating peace after a conflict.

Poverty is a factor that threatens peace because,
among other things, it makes countries more vulnerable
to any threat or conflict. As the Secretary-General
states in his report to the Millennium Assembly, most
of the wars taking place at the moment are wars
between poor peoples. The reason for this is complex
and has to do with poverty, the weakness of institutions
and the lack of opportunity. But the search for
international peace and security require the eradication
of poverty and the attainment of development. The
dilemma between the cost of peacekeeping operations
and the need to invest in development continues to
prevail.

In this connection, there is one aspect to conflicts
to which my delegation believes the Council should
give particular attention. That aspect is the economic
reasons for certain conflicts. I refer once again to the
Secretary-General, who says that

"Whereas war is costly for society as a
whole, it nevertheless may be profitable for
some." (A/54/2000, para. 205)

In some cases, the illegal exploitation of resources is a
central element of conflict. The Security Council
should seek innovative measures to deal with these
situations.

Disarmament must also be a part of a
comprehensive conflict-prevention strategy. The
international community has turned its attention to the
problem of small arms and light weapons. These are
the types of weapons that are being used in today's
conflicts - the ones that are causing so many deaths.
There is a very close relationship between the
uncontrolled proliferation of weapons and conflict
situations. There is no doubt that conflict situations are
fuelled by the illicit arms trade, against which
embargoes are not always effective. Other measures
will therefore have to be found. The Security Council
must also take into consideration disarmament
measures within the context of a broad conflict-
prevention strategy.

As an instrument of justice, the International
Court of Justice will contribute to conflict prevention.
In this respect, all States, and in particular those that
are members of the Security Council, must support and
ratify the Statute of the Court.

By its very nature, the Security Council tends to
take action in situations of urgency and is thus perhaps
seen as a mechanism applicable in the short term. As a
political body, it often requires a political impetus in
order to act. Prevention does not necessarily give rise
to the political awareness that the resolution of a
conflict provides. It is for that reason that prevention
requires breadth of vision and humility, as well as the
ability to obey the dictates of one's conscience without
expecting recognition.

