Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Mahiga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, for his briefing. I
would also like to welcome to this meeting His
Excellency Mr. Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President
of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.

The Somali peace process is at a key stage. We
welcome the steady progress made in implementing the
road map on ending the transition period, the headway
made in efforts to draft a constitution and hold
parliamentary elections, the military gains that have
been achieved and the noteworthy improvement in the
humanitarian situation in the country. We also note that
the peace process continues to face many difficulties.
Tensions have increased within the Transitional Federal
Parliament, with and adverse impact on the
implementation of the road map. The potential for new
conflicts is emerging in various regions. And the
humanitarian situation in Somalia continues to be
fragile.

China believes that national reconciliation is the
only way to restore peace and stability in Somalia. We
support Somalia in continuing to implement the
Transitional Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement,
the Kampala Accord and the Garoowe principles, as
well as in fully implementing the road map and ending
the transitional period on time. We hope that the parties
in Somalia will place the interests of the country and
its people first and, in a spirit of solidarity and
reconciliation, overcome differences through dialogue
and consultation as soon as possible, so as not to
unnecessarily disrupt the peace process.

We support the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in further enhancing capacity-building in order
that it can govern effectively the entire territory of
Somalia as soon as possible. We hope that the parties
in Somalia will reject violence and join the peace
process unconditionally at the earliest possible moment.

In the current circumstances, the international
community should continue to support the mediation
efforts of the United Nations, the African Union (AU)
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
support the TFG in strengthening capacity-building,
and encourage the parties to implement the road map in
good faith. China welcomes the AU report published
on 20 March on its Mission in Somalia. We hope that
the United Nations will continue to strengthen its
logistical support to the Mission and to effectively
implement resolution 2036 (2012). We welcome the
successful London Conference on Somalia and look
forward to the same positive results at the conference
to be held later this month in Istanbul.

