Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank Special Representative
Hanna Serwaa Tetteh and Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed
for their briefings this morning. I would also like to
commend and thank South Africa for having organized
the recent visit to Addis Ababa and for facilitating the
discussions that took place there.

As the Secretary-General's latest report rightly
points out (S/2019/759), the strategic and operational
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union remains essential on several levels. In
the context of peace and security, common approaches
by both organizations can make a difference, as
demonstrated by the finalizing of peace agreements
in the Central African Republic and the Sudan. With
regard to conflict prevention and peacekeeping, we
welcome the joint horizon-scanning meetings and joint
technical Visits, which have already demonstrated their
added value and will have another opportunity to do
so over the coming months in Cameroon and Burundi.
The partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is equally important to peacekeeping
operations and peace support operations. We take
note of the critical role played by the joint review of
the African Union Mission in Somalia in the context of
revising the Mission's mandate.

With regard to peacebuilding and partnership
within the context of the rule of law, cooperation on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration also
remains crucial, not only between the United Nations
and the African Union but also with other partners,
such as the World Bank. While the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union is robust, it
remains crucial that we strengthen it further. We wish
to make a few remarks on that matter.

First of all, as we witnessed once again during
our recent visit to Addis Ababa, the African Union
is building an impressive Peace and Security
Architecture, which must be adequately funded and
based on the revitalization of the Peace Fund and the
critical framework of ensuring respect for human
rights. African Union peace operations must ultimately
be able to benefit from more predictable, sustainable
and flexible funding.

Moreover, coordination and collaboration between
the United Nations and the African Union and their
respective institutions must be strengthened at the
thematic level, as demonstrated in the recent debates
and discussions on the role of youth and women, as well
as the link between climate and security. Coordination
and collaboration must also be strengthened at the
operational level. The agendas of both Councils could
be better coordinated, while the management of the
conflict cycle and an integrated approach should be
better harmonized between the two organizations.

Elections will be held in 14 African countries in
2020. In that context, we are pleased to note that the
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union is excellent. However, we believe that
it could be strengthened still further. On the one hand,
in terms of the electoral process, the African Union
Commission has a higher level of convening power
than the United Nations. On the other hand, the United
Nations still has a comparative advantage in the context
of an integrated approach.

The United Nations and the African Union remain
major partners. Let us not forget that that partnership is
above all based on common values, including respect
for the rule of law, democracy, human rights and respect
for our fellow citizens. Let us strengthen them all.

