Mr. Prosor (Israel): Thank you, Madam President,
for convening this debate and bringing awareness and
attention to an important subject. Ambassador DiCarlo,
may I also add, on a personal note, that it is my distinct
pleasure to give this statement while you are presiding
over this meeting.

So far this year, 26 journalists have been killed and
175 imprisoned trying to do theirjob. Instead of telling
the story, journalists are increasingly becoming the
story itself. We must be united in our condemnation of
those who seek to silence the press and hide the truth.

As we speak, the Middle East is in flames. From the
Straits of Gibraltar to the Straits of Hormuz, people are
crying out for democratic reforms and freedoms. The
facade of the so-called Arab Spring has fallen away.
In its place remain the repression, chaos and confusion
that have long defined the region. Attacks on the media
are increasing all over the world, but nowhere is it more
dangerous to be ajournalist than in the Middle East.

Every day, people all over the globe turn on
televisions, open newspapers and browse the Internet
to follow events unfolding in the Middle East. That
information comes to us from the brave men and women
who put their lives on the line to document the bloody
insurgencies and revolutions erupting throughout the
region. Not only do journalists have to contend with
censorship, intimidation and abduction, they are now
becoming the deliberate targets of violence. From
Baghdad to Damascus and from Tehran to Khartoum,
journalists are being beaten, raped, tortured and killed.

Journalism is the public loudspeaker for the
brave men and women who have taken to the streets
demanding to be heard. Yet, in much ofthe Middle East
their voices and stories are being stifled. By restricting
those voices, the Arab States are restricting their ability
to develop their societies and improve the lives of their
citizens. The scrutiny that goes hand in hand with an
independent media is essential to holding Governments
accountable to their citizens. Every voice must have the
chance to be heard, especially the voices of dissident
and marginalized members of society.

In Israel, freedom of the press is woven into the
very fabric of our democratic society. As the Council
knows, we have no shortage of media outlets that report
on every facet of society and very often make demands
of our Government and our leaders. Our commitment to
the free exchange of ideas has made Israel a destination
of choice for many reporters. Journalists in Israel do
not have to fear the arbitrary arrests, imprisonment and
executions common in the totalitarian States that make
up the rest of our region. The very liberties that Israel
provides are both a blessing and a curse. While we are
immensely proud of our democratic institutions, they
often result in the burden of condemnation falling on
Israel. After all, foreignjournalists would much sooner
face news cameras in Tel Aviv than bullets in Damascus
or torture in Tehran. Some reporters choose to focus
their scrutiny on the Middle East's only real democracy.
Rather than risking their safety, they flock to Israel
in the knowledge there will be few repercussions and
quite possibly a Pulitzer Prize for their efforts.

But despite all the challenges that go hand in hand
with an independent media, there is no doubt in my
mind that the benefits outweigh the costs. As Thomas
Jefferson said, "Our liberty depends on the freedom
of the press, and that cannot be limited without being
lost". Freedom, democracy and tolerance are a heavy
burden, and Israel is very proud to carry them. With
more reporters and human rights activists per capita
than anywhere on the planet, Israel understands that a
society cannot truly be free until its citizens have the
right to ask questions, challenge the status quo and
openly speak their minds.

Democracy, with all its drawbacks, is worth far more
than any dehumanizing and destructive dictatorship.
Attacks on journalists are not simply attacks on
individuals; they are attacks on freedom - on freedom
of speech, freedom of expression and freedom of the
press. Those who try to silence journalists are in fact
trying to silence the voices of millions of people whose
stories deserve to be told.

