Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your country,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and wish you success.
As we mentioned during the breakfast meeting, your
tasks will not be easy, but we have full trust that you
and your team will be able to accomplish them.

I would also like to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its outstanding presidency of the
Council during the month of August.

As Chair of the Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, I am very pleased that
you have decided that the meetings will be open. This
is unusual from a permanent Member State. Member
States usually permanent prefer closed meetings,
so your move is truly unprecedented on the part of
a permanent member State. I assure you that we
support transparency and will continue to support you
throughout your presidency of the Council.

Ofcourse, it is always better to adopt the programme
of work by consensus, in conformity with established
practice. It is also unusual to discuss the provisional
programme of work in an open meeting. Differences do
exit and what matters is that we must spare no effort to
reach consensus on the provisional programme of work.

Regarding the situation in Nicaragua, and
even the situation in Iran at the end of the month,
these are contentious issues, as we have heard from
other representatives. As a Member State, we consider
the Articles of the United Nations Charter to be sacred,
in particular those related to the non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries and respect for their
sovereignty, while we must discuss only those matters
pertaining to international peace and security.

However, there are other Articles of the Charter
that should also be taken into consideration, such as
Article 34, as mentioned by Mr. Allen, which is quite
clear. The Secretary-General may also, if he wishes,
bring any matter to the attention of the Security
Council, pursuant to Article 99.

One of our priorities, as States members of the
Council, is the issue of preventive diplomacy and the
prevention of conflict. There can be no doubt that the
regional dimension, especially the role played by regional
organizations, is very important. We appreciate the role
played by Peru and its proposal to discuss this matter
in the context of regional peace. What I would like to
underscore is that the unity of the Security Council is
very important. If we are to contribute to addressing the
situation, I believe that we must be united. Sometimes,
differences and the discussion of a contentious issue
do not positively contribute to improving the situation.
That is a very important matter.

