Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today, 29 April, is the deadline of the
nine-month time frame set for reaching an agreement
between the Palestinians and Israelis. From the
beginning, we have supported that new round of peace
talks on which, despite all the foreseen challenges, many
hopes were laid. It is unfortunate that our worst fears
have been realized. Once again, the monopolization
of the negotiation process between the Israelis and
the Palestinians by the United States of America was
unjustified; the achievement of positive results in such
circumstances was not possible.

Serious differences on final status issues concerning
the Palestinian territories were reaffirmed and the key
problems remain the status of Jerusalem, the borders of
the future Palestinian State, Israeli settlement activity
and the Palestinian refugees. In that context, we are
concerned about the decision of the Israeli Government,
taken several days before the agreed deadline, to cease
dialogue with the Palestinians. My country can only
regret that such a decision was linked to the right of
Palestine, as a non-member observer State of the United
Nations, to participate in several international treaties
and conventions. In addition, another reason cited by
the Israelis for its decision was an agreement among
Fatah, Hamas and other Palestinian organizations to
form a national unity Government.

In that context, of extreme importance was the
statement made by Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of
the State of Palestine, at the meeting of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization on 26 April in Ramallah,
to the effect that the future technocratic Palestinian
Government will adhere to the principle of the rejection
of violence, the recognition of the State of Israel, and
respect for previous agreements on the Middle East
peace process.

We in Moscow have always believed that, without
the consolidation of the Palestinian ranks in line with
the Palestine Liberation Organization platform and the

Arab Peace Initiative, it will be impossible to realize
the legal aspirations of the Palestinian people for a
fair and lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue.
Overcoming the Palestinian divisions is a goal that the
international community has hoped for in calling for a
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
We are convinced that, without Palestinian unity, any
agreements achieved between Palestine and Israel will
not last.

The national unity of the Palestinians should not
be jeopardized. At this crucial moment, it is extremely
important to not allow the Palestinian and Israeli
issue to be derailed. To that end, the two parties must
refrain from any provocative actions that would cause
a deterioration in the situation, first and foremost in
terms of settlement activity and the freezing of customs
fees and duties to Palestine. We strongly condemn
rocket launches against Israeli territory and any other
terrorist acts, which cannot be justified. In the current
situation, we consider it to be of prime importance
that all parties practice zero tolerance for such actions
and any other actions that could be an obstacle to the
negotiating efforts.

Despite the complexity of the situation and the
Middle East peace process, the Russian Federation is
strongly convinced that it should not be abandoned, and
will continue endeavour to resume the peace process,
both bilaterally and in international forums, first and
foremost within the Quartet. We note with satisfaction
the recent increased activity of the Quartet, in
particular its 2 April meeting in Jerusalem with special
representatives. They hold regular teleconferences,
and we are maintaining our contacts with both Israeli
and Palestinian partners. The mechanism for Russian/
Palestinian consultations for exchanges of views on the
situation concerning the Palestinian track of the Middle
East peace process is functioning. We are convinced
that the main task remains a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue on the basis
of the well-known international legal framework, with
the goal of ensuring a peaceful and safe future for the
peoples of Israel and Palestine.

On the Syrian crisis, we see no alternative to a
political and diplomatic settlement on the basis of the
2012 Geneva communique of the Action Group for
Syria (S/2012/522, annex). We are in favour of rapidly
launching a third round ofinter- Syrian talks, especially
because the agenda has basically been agreed. As is the
case with the Palestinian and Israeli negotiations, we
should seize any opportunity to find a political and
negotiated solution in the Geneva framework.

We consider terrorism to be the main threat, in
the context of the Syrian conflict, and the so-called
moderate opposition should decisively dissociate
themselves from terrorist organizations such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, J abhat al-Nusra and
the Islamic Front and should broaden their negotiating
delegation to include the patriotic forces and internal
opposition.

An important task, in our view, is to unite the
Syrian forces to prevent the creation, in their country,
of a stronghold of global terrorism and extremism. We
note with satisfaction that the Syrian authorities at
this point have been able to remove over 92 per cent
of the chemical agents from their country under the
programme for the elimination of the Syrian chemical
programme despite the serious challenges in the area of
security, which have been deliberately ignored by many
external players over the past several months.

We hope for the successful holding of presidential
elections in Lebanon. That would enable the effective
functioning of all State structures to continue and for
the Lebanese society to consolidate in the interests
of stabilizing the situation and reducing inter-faith
tensions. We strongly support the Lebanese people, as
once again shown at the meeting held in Moscow last
week between the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation and Lebanon.

