Ms. Anderson (United States of America): The
United States thanks Nigeria for organizing this
meeting and welcomes Minister Odein Ajumogobia to
the Council today. I would also like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for
their remarks.
Conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement
of disputes are among the founding purposes of the
United Nations and the pillars of its Charter. They are
an important focus for our work here in the Council.

In our interconnected age, conflicts that start in
fragile States can drag entire regions into violence, and
such conflicts can turn already fragile States into
incubators of transnational threats, including terrorism
and trafficking in arms or drugs. Development and
security are inextricably linked, and to stave off
conflicts and bolster fragile States we must work with
partners, including the United Nations, regional and
subregional groups, development banks, donors and
non-governmental organizations. In short, we must
sharpen and strengthen our instruments to prevent
conflict and settle disputes.

We must also tackle the underlying factors that
fuel all too many conflicts: discrimination, corruption,
lack of accountability, poverty, economic disparities
and threats to the rule of law.

With this in mind, I would like to make five
points today.

First, we need to continue to improve early
warning capabilities and ensure that they inform and
drive preventive action to prevent conflicts and save
lives. This means enhancing both intelligence
gathering and analysis, including monitoring trends,
spotting triggers or accelerators of conflict and
understanding local contexts and cultures.

We are getting better at gathering this
information, but there remain significant gaps between
on-the-ground reporting, political analysis and
decision-making. To close these gaps, we need to link
the best available information to the best possible
analysis. This will require having the right United
Nations country team on the ground, with the right
training and the right resources. It will also require
better real-time communication and stronger
coordination among reporting entities and political
analysts so that decision-makers have a range of
creative and credible options from which to choose.
Lives could also be saved through closer cooperation
between the United Nations and regional early warning
systems, such as the one being developed by the
African Union.

Secondly, multilateral mechanisms must be better
equipped to respond effectively to potential and

emerging crises. Among the most effective ways to
prevent violence and halt escalation are international
mediation and preventive diplomacy, backed by a
readiness to use other tools. The United States is
working to advance multilateral diplomatic initiatives
to reinforce the foundations of peace, security, human
rights and development.

For its part, the United Nations has produced
useful innovations, such as the Department of Political
Affairs Mediation Support Unit, and its standby panel
of mediation experts. But these teams are not used
enough, and they lack sufficient resources. They also
need the full support of local and regional actors, as we
saw in the effective international response to the
violence after Kenya's 2008 elections.

Secretary-General Ban and his predecessors have
used their good offices to help end many conflicts over
the past 20 years. But regional and subregional
organizations have important roles to play as well. The
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States have helpful mediation capacities, and
we encourage them to do more to resolve conflict. We
also encourage such regional groups to deepen their
cooperation with the United Nations.

Thirdly, the recent creation of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN Women) and resolutions 1325 (2000),
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) remind us
all of the struggles that women face in times of armed
conflict, including rape and sexual violence. We must
include women in peace processes and give them
significant decision-making roles in conflict resolution.
Mediation efforts that exclude women's perspectives
are likely to neglect issues vital to securing a lasting
peace.

Fourthly, enhancing multilateral capacities to
stave off conflict also means strengthening the
international community's ability to support peace in
fragile States or ones where newly reached peace
agreements have yet to take hold. The most accurate
means of predicting future armed conflict is looking at
places where armed conflict has recently ceased.
United Nations peacekeepers have proved that they can
help prevent further violence in the wake of bloody
conflicts, but only if they have adequate resources,
proper training and clear mandates. Civil society has an
essential role in building the institutions that make a
society resilient at times of crisis including
communities, churches, mosques, synagogues, temples,
schools, a vigorous free media, human rights groups
and other strong organizations.

But in some situations, atrocities will unfold so
quickly or massively that they can be quelled only by
the swift arrival of people to keep the peace. In such
cases, the United Nations must continue to work with
local Governments and regional organizations,
including the African Union, the European Union and
NATO, to ensure that it has both the political will and
the logistical capacity to deploy quickly.

Finally, let me say a few words about
peacebuilding. The past decade has witnessed
important innovations here, including the creation of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission, but we
still have much to do. We need more flexible
development funds that arrive sooner, early
investments in the core capacities of the struggling
State and international support for national efforts to
reinforce the rule of law, to demobilize ex-combatants
and to reform State security services. We also need to
provide lasting support to the victims of sexual
violence and the victims of other human rights abuses.

Just because an armed conflict stops does not
mean it will not start again, and the international
community must continue to enhance the tools at its
disposal to prevent the recurrence of armed conflict
and cement durable peace and lasting reconciliation.

We share a common responsibility to do
everything in our power to develop the mediation tools,
the warning mechanisms, the multilateral institutions,
the effective peacekeeping forces and the strong
communities to prevent conflict and avoid the shedding
of the blood of the innocent.

