Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Wane for his extensive briefing. We
are grateful for this important update on the joint force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
I would like to take a moment to express Japan's
heartfelt condolences to the families and Governments
of all victims of Sunday's heinous terrorist attack in
Burkina Faso, as well as yesterday's attack on the camp
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission (MINUSMA) in Mopti, Mali,
and its headquarters in Timbuktu. These incidents
clearly demonstrate the deepening threat facing all
Sahel countries. With that in mind, Japan would like
to underline a few priority areas for the joint force, in
particular regarding cooperation with MINUSMA.

The first area is ownership. We commend the
committed efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries to
operationalize the joint force and restore peace and
security in the region. This is a prime example of
regional ownership, which will be a critical factor in
the success of the G-5 Sahel.

The second priority area is the pursuit of common
efforts in support of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. The persistent delays in its
implementation are compounded by violations of the
terms of the Peace Agreement and sporadic terrorist
attacks. The joint force's unique role of supporting
effective implementation by isolating armed terrorist
groups is thus especially important. A central focus
on the Peace Agreement at this stage is critical. To
that end, we underscore the importance of enhanced
coordination among the joint force, MINUSMA and
French forces.

Finally, I would like to emphasize partnership. The
scale of the challenges facing the G-5 Sahel countries is
vast and wide ranging. Continued partnership with the
international community will be essential to restoring
stability and addressing deep-rooted vulnerabilities.
The Sahel's large youth population requires inclusive
and sustainable livelihoods, which can prevent their
radicalization and underpin social stability in the region.
Together with youth, the role of women in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding is
also critical. We believe that supporting G-5 Sahel
countries through the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is also crucial.

We must work hand in hand with G-5 Sahel
countries to comprehensively address these areas. Japan
looks forward to determined and good faith efforts by
the G-5 Sahel in this joint endeavour.
