Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing today on the humanitarian
situation in the four areas under discussion and for his
personal leadership in the efforts to respond to the crisis.
We have been discussing the humanitarian situation in
each of these countries separately, but today's briefing
gives us the opportunity to have a comprehensive look
at the unprecedented level of the humanitarian needs
and threat of famine facing Yemen, Somalia, South
Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria, which requires a
global response. Unless the international community
takes urgent and concerted action, millions of lives
will be in grave danger. Of course, we realize that the
underlying causes and the gravity of the situation are
not the same in all of these areas. We therefore believe
that the humanitarian response should be tailored to fit
the particularities of each situation.

One thing that couldbe an element common to all four
situations is the devastating impact of climate change.
That, coupled with the ongoing conflicts and violence
in the four areas, has left many people on the brink of
famine. That kind of trend - a conflict-exacerbating,
climate-induced humanitarian crisis - poses
serious threats to global peace and security and to
development agendas. That is why it requires concerted
and urgent global action. Mobilizing the necessary
support to deliver lifesaving assistance to those in need
in the short term and investing to build resilience in the
long term are therefore extremely critical.

Moreover, ensuring safe and sustained humanitarian
access so as to facilitate the delivery and assistance of
aid, and ending armed violence through comprehensive
political dialogue, is crucial, since there is only so
much that humanitarian assistance can achieve in the
absence of peace and security. In that regard, we would
like to stress the importance of ensuring the safety and
security of humanitarian operations and personnel.
Humanitarian actors face enormous challenges,
including risks to their own lives as they provide
support to people in need. Ensuring safe, timely and
unhindered access for humanitarian assistance is
extremely important for the provision of an effective
humanitarian response, and all parties to the various
conflicts should be called on to cooperate in that regard.

While appreciating what the international
community has been done so far to reach out to those
in need of urgent assistance and avert a humanitarian
catastrophe, we realize that a lot more remains to be
done. There is an urgent need to step up efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance in order to save lives
and support the people of Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia
and north-eastern Nigeria. The funding gap in all four
of those areas is huge, and we call on the international
community to provide additional resources and find
funds for the relief efforts. It is also important to ensure
that the commitments and pledges that have been
made in various international forums are honoured
and fulfilled.

Finally, we appreciate the efforts undertaken by
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners in
extremely difficult circumstances. We remain ready to
support the Secretary-General's call for action to avert
famine in conflict-affected countries, and encourage
him to continue to provide early warnings when a
conflict that is producing devastating humanitarian
consequences and hindering an effective humanitarian
response also runs the risk of leading to an outbreak
of famine.

