Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to express once
again its firmest and categorical condemnation of the
use of chemical substances as weapons. This is an
unjustifiable and criminal act wherever and whenever it
happens and Whoever does it. The use ofthese weapons is
a serious violation of international law and international
peace and security. We believe that it is essential for the
perpetrators of these terrible and criminal acts to be
brought to justice and held accountable.

Bolivia once again reiterates, as it has been doing
for several months, that it is not against the renewal
of the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM). On the contrary, we believe that we should
allow the Mechanism to conduct its work in the most
methodical, technical, professional, supported and
depoliticized way possible. The renewal of its mandate
should be considered after its report is issued.

Over the past few months, some technical concerns
and observations have been raised in various ways by
some Council members. We believe that these concerns
should be considered and resolved. That is why we
believe that, prior to the renewal of the Mechanism's
mandate, we need to consider its report. We believe
that, in this case, two days before the deadline of the
publication of the report, time is not really a mitigating
factor since, I reiterate, its publication is only two
days away.

We feel that the Mechanism's work was undermined
at least twice this year - first, when its reports were
politicized through the addition of information to draft
resolutions that were not contained in these reports,
which, on a previous occasion, had been a reason for
a veto of a draft resolution that had been submitted.
Furthermore, another serious issue that weakens the
Mechanism's mandate and the Security Council's
commitment are the unilateral military actions which
are in breach of international law.

This is a fundamental issue for the international
community and for our work. If we clearly state that
maintaining the Council's unity on this situation is
essential, we do not understand why draft resolutions
are designed that we know in advance will be vetoed
for the reasons I mentioned earlier. Why must the
Council consider draft resolutions that are intentionally
designed to be vetoed? What is the political calculus
behind these intentions? We regret that, instead of
coordinating efforts to try to reach consensus positions
on a topic that is clearly in everyone's interest, pressure
is brought to bear on certain members and their image
is maligned before the international community.

Lastly, my delegation wants to state very clearly
that on this and other topics, it will reject all pressure
brought to bear on it by any member of the Council or
Member of the Organization. My delegation's actions
and decisions will be taken based on the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. We
categorically reject any attempt to unduly influence
or put pressure on the Bolivian delegation in its
decision-making.

A vote against draft resolution S/2017/884 is
not a vote against the JIM. A vote against this draft
resolution is a vote against the politicization of the
Security Council. A vote against this draft resolution
is an appeal to make greater efforts so that we may
demonstrate unity on a topic that is so important for the
international community.

