Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I would like to record
Ireland's warm appreciation for the comprehensive
briefings the Council has received this morning from
Judge Jorda, Judge Pillay and Chief Prosecutor Del
Ponte.

Ireland has been following with the greatest
interest the work of both Tribunals since they were
established. We are honoured that an Irish national,
Maureen Harding Clark, has been appointed as a
serving ad litem judge at the International Criminal
Tribunal for Yugoslavia (ICTY). My Government was
pleased to provide financial assistance towards hosting
the second annual retreat of the judges of the ICTY and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
in Dublin last month. The work of both these Tribunals
remains of central importance in the parallel quest for
justice and genuine national reconciliation. The past 12
months have witnessed a considerable increase in the
judicial activity of both Tribunals.

Judge Jorda has advanced interesting and
pragmatic ideas, in the context of developing
circumstances in the region, for possibly spreading the
burden of the ICTY. We look forward to further
development of those good ideas. They could
contribute to ensuring that the overall work of the
Tribunal is completed within a reasonable time frame.
The idea to establish a special court in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a very interesting one, and we look
forward to hearing of further developments in that
regard.

I fully agree with Judge Pillay's emphasis on the
need to maintain an essential balance between
efficiency and the need for thorough judicial process.
Ireland is supportive in principle of the proposal to
establish a pool of ad litem judges for the ICTR. The
appointment of such judges could assist in alleviating
the workload of that Tribunal.

Like others, we have been slightly concerned at
the possible high number of future indictments, as
referred to in the ICTR ad litem judge proposal. It has
been helpful to hear the comments of the Chief
Prosecutor Del Ponte in that regard, as well as the
observations made by President Pillay. At the same
time, I have noted Judge Pillay's understandable and
legitimate desire for an early decision. It would
perhaps be very interesting to hear in more detail, in
due course, about the idea touched on of finding
appropriate alternative judicial locations, which could
contribute to the efficiency of the Tribunal's work and
speed the overall process while ensuring, full judicial
efficacy in all cases. I note that the ad litem judge
proposal could achieve an overall 2007 target for the
Tribunal's work. This is certainly very attractive, if it
could be achieved.

Chief Prosecutor Del Ponte's elaboration this
morning of overall prosecution policy has been very
helpful. It is persuasive and is supportive of the
processes and the proposals described by Judges Jorda
and Pillay. These are complex challenges with
important implications, some of which have been
pointed out by my colleague from Singapore. However,
I believe that today's exchanges will enable further
consideration in a positive and appreciate overall
atmosphere in the Security Council.

