Allow me to first thank the Permanent Mission of Indonesia for having convened this very timely high-level open debate on addressing the issue of linkages between international terrorism and organized crime. I would like to also thank the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations Office for Counter-Terrorism, Vladimir Voronkov, and the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their insightful briefings on the importance of tackling this threat. Afghanistan believes in the imperative need to address the symbiotic relations between these two heinous threats. Organized crime is a broad and complex phenomenon, and its links with international terrorism are evident. As a State that is both the prime victim of terrorism and which finds itself on the front line in the fight against the threat, we are well aware of the ways in which organized crime can strengthen the operational capabilities of terrorist groups and, as part of its activities, further exacerbate insecurity, particularly by enabling a continuous flow of weapons, extremist elements, drugs and dangerous chemical precursors used for the development of explosive devices and other materials. This is a threat that should be analysed not only through a national lens but also with consideration given to the broad regional implications as seen through the nexus of regional and international terrorist groups. Addressing the threat posed by such groups requires effective and cohesive coordination among regional, international and local efforts aimed at preventing terrorist and extremist groups and organized-crime groups from benefiting from any disconnect between our efforts. Even with the ongoing pandemic, at the national level Afghanistan has continued to focus on disrupting that linkage through a multipronged approach that encompasses various areas. As part of that, our country has worked diligently in tackling the illicit drug trade, which has served as a particularly strong source for the funding of terrorist organizations. Our efforts cover an approach that involves tackling the issue at all levels, from eradication to interdiction and, ultimately, the prosecution of individuals involved in the process. In that regard, the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces have conducted efficient operations, which led to the dismantling of numerous drug laboratories and processing facilities. Operations have also taken place at various points of entry in the country, including border crossings and airports. They have prevented 100 tons of illegal substances from entering our country. In parallel, the anti-drug department of the Counter- Narcotics Justice Centre has also played an effective role by ensuring the transparent processing of suspects engaging in the illicit drug trade. In addition to those operations, our National Inter-Agency Task Force on Combating Terrorism continues its work to implement a national framework to counter money laundering and other forms of financial criminal activities. As part of that, the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Afghanistan (FinTRACA) has worked diligently to ensure that Afghan financial institutions are prevented from being used for illegal activities. As part of that work, FinTRACA cooperates with institutions at the regional level in order to effectively comply with the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Crime and the United Nations Convention against Corruption. Afghanistan has also engaged with regional platforms, including the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in order to further complement efforts to address the linkage between organized crime and terrorist organizations through efforts in line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the relevant Security Council resolutions on the matter. Nevertheless, a stronger focus on that, particularly with regard to monitoring the movement of those under United Nations sanctions regimes and their backers, must remain an important priority in our fight to effectively diminish this threat. In conclusion, I would like to once again thank the Permanent Mission of Indonesia for hosting this valuable meeting and to reiterate the full collaboration of Afghanistan in continuing to work on this issue.
