Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me begin by welcoming
the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and by expressing
Poland's full support to him and his Office in their
endeavour to relaunch the political process in Yemen. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock for his comprehensive briefing
on the humanitarian situation in the country.
First, I would like to underline the urgent need to
resume the political process in Yemen. Poland is deeply
convinced that the primary responsibility of the Security
Council is to pave the way for a peaceful solution to
the conflict. Let me echo what has been said by many
speakers. Only a genuine, inclusive, intra-Yemeni
political process can bring about long-standing peace
and put an end to the tremendous suffering of civilians,
who continue to bear the brunt of ongoing hostilities.

We perceive Mr. Griffiths's assumption ofthe post of
Special Envoy as a unique opportunity to resume peace
negotiations, which should be carried out with the full
participation of all relevant parties and stakeholders,
as well as all groups of Yemeni society, including
women and youth. We encourage actors in the region
with influence on the parties to the conflict to convince
them to engage constructively with Mr. Griffiths and
his Office and to participate in the United Nations-led
process in good faith and without preconditions.

Let me turn to the humanitarian situation. I would
like to express Poland's highest appreciation to the
Governments of Sweden and Switzerland, which,
together with the United Nations, hosted the high-level
pledging event for Yemen earlier this month. Like other
members of the Council, we welcome the outcome of
that event, which confirmed the commitment of the
international community to alleviating the suffering of
the Yemeni people.

As we have heard from Mr. Mark Lowcock, despite
some positive developments, the humanitarian situation
in Yemen remains desperate. The widespread fighting,
severe economic decline and food insecurity continue
to take an enormous toll on the population. We believe
that, in order to improve the situation of civilians, it
is essential to ensure that public sector salaries are
paid across Yemen in order to enable the resumption
of essential public services, including health care and
education. Sustained deliveries of humanitarian and
commercial goods, including food, fuel and medical
imports, must be guaranteed. Therefore, we urge all
parties to the conflict to fully comply with the provisions
of the presidential statement adopted by the Council on
15 March (S/PRST/2018/5) and ensure that all Yemeni
ports remain open and fully functional. We also urge the

parties to facilitate access for humanitarian operations
across the whole territory.

With regard to the ongoing hostilities in Yemen,
we again call upon the parties to refrain from taking
action that might lead to the escalation of fighting.
Poland strongly condemns all indiscriminate attacks,
including air strikes, which have a disastrous impact
on civilians. We also strongly condemn ballistic-
missile attacks carried out by the Houthis against Saudi
Arabia. All parties are obliged under international
humanitarian law to ensure the protection of civilians
and humanitarian infrastructure. We also call upon all
sides to fully cooperate with the group of international
and regional eminent experts on Yemen to allow for a
comprehensive examination of all alleged human rights
violations and abuses. Finally, we reiterate the call for a
cessation of hostilities in Yemen.

