Mr. Mercado (Philippines): We wish to thank the
Brazilian presidency for convening this important
meeting to discuss the situation in Cote d'Ivoire. The
presence this afternoon of the Secretary-General
himself underscores the importance of the crisis in
Cote d'Ivoire. We welcome the comprehensive briefing
made by Deputy Foreign Minister Aziz Pahad, and we
thank Mr. Alan Doss, Principal Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Cote
d'Ivoire, for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2005/186).

The Linas-Marcoussis and Accra III Agreements
showed signs of promise, namely, that a peaceful
settlement could be reached in the situation in Cote
d'lvoire. However, intervening events, in particular the
attacks of November 2004, have halted the positive
momentum of those Agreements. The peace process is
still experiencing serious setbacks. The implementation
of the parties' commitments has been delayed.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes have yet to begin. And the threat of
insecurity continues to rise as both sides to the conflict
continue to violate the ceasefire. Meanwhile, the
economic situation is declining steadily. Those
developments raise the question of whether the
elections scheduled for October will take place, a
situation that the country can ill afford.

My delegation believes that those delays have the
potential to create a serious crisis that could undermine
the overall stability not only of Cote d'Ivoire but also
of the subregion as well. The problems concerning the
upcoming October elections and DDR have to be
tackled as soon as possible. Preparations for elections,
the composition of the Independent Electoral
Commission and legislative reforms - most especially
the adoption of a revised article 35 of the
Constitution - have to be addressed urgently.
Inasmuch as DDR is closely linked to the elections and
the restoration of security in the country, the
difficulties among the parties in the DDR process must
also be ironed out as soon as possible.

My delegation lends its full support to the
unrelenting efforts of President Mbeki in instituting the
African Union's (AU) plan of action to resolve the
impasse among the Ivorian parties. We thank Deputy
Foreign Minister Aziz Pahad for sharing with us the
AU's mediation road map and the recommendations
contained therein. We note in particular the suggestion
to have an African country supply additional forces to
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) to secure DDR sites. That could be an
important incentive for combatants to begin the DDR
process.

We extend our support to UNOCI and the Licorne
forces in their efforts to provide security in support
with the peace process, and concur with the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend UNOCI's
mandate for an additional 12 months. We value the
continued cooperation among the United Nations, the
AU and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), as well as their contributions to
advancing the peace process under these challenging
circumstances.

The holding of this Council meeting is just one
way to send the message to the Ivorian parties that they
must remain actively engaged in peace negotiations
and that they must bring them to a successful
conclusion. The international community, in particular
the United Nations and the AU, must continue, and
coordinate, its efforts to support the Ivorian peace
process. However, as peace ultimately rests in the
hands of Ivorians, they should be made to understand
that difficult choices and sacrifices have to be made to
put the peace process back on track. Restoring trust is
also a necessity and a priority to move the peace
process forward.

Lastly, we look forward to the next update on the
peace mediation efforts of President Mbeki, in
particular with regard to his meeting with Ivorian
parties in Pretoria.

