Let me join others in thanking Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing to the Council today. It has also been good to hear such broad consensus in the Council, particularly on the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) situation across the region and, as others have mentioned, on the elections in Burundi. First, on COVID-19, it is really encouraging to see, as detailed in the Special Envoy's briefing, renewed regional momentum towards the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region by the countries in the Great Lakes region, particularly over the last year or so. Hopefully, we can continue to capitalize on that. But as others have said, we are meeting during uncertain times because of the COVID-19 pandemic, which will undoubtedly create challenges for maintaining that momentum. The pandemic demonstrates once again the necessity for truly effective regional cooperation. I was very glad to hear the Special Envoy speak about his role in engaging countries to try to address the challenges of COVID-19 together. I think that will be critical. Therefore, we encourage the Special Envoy and his team to consider innovative ways to support the Great Lakes region to ensure there is continued progress during this period. The threat of the pandemic might engender cooperation in combating COVID-19 across the region, in line with the spirit of the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. I was also very glad to hear the Special Envoy talk about how he was seeing real progress, not just in the main conflict areas but in the States across the region, which are trying to do more to enhance their security cooperation as well. The other thing we need to think about in this format is how we come together at some point to begin to analyse the impact that COVID-19 is having and what we can do to address some of the longer-term impacts that it will have on regional stability and on the economic and humanitarian situation. Looking at the security situation specifically, we also think that it is critical to continue to address the underlying security challenges across the Great Lakes region. We have seen increased reporting of cross-border incursions, as others have mentioned, and also other security spikes across the region. I believe that this underscores the need for the full and swift implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. It was very good to hear Special Envoy Xia's list of priorities, focusing on advancing regional security cooperation, including military and non-military measures. While we commend Special Envoy Xia's efforts to promote economic integration, we would just like to reiterate that economic initiatives will be successful only if we simultaneously tackle the underlying drivers of the conflict: challenging aspects, such as the illicit cross-border trade of natural resources and the war economy. Those things should not be overlooked. I want to touch briefly on the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo. The United Kingdom encourages the Special Envoy and his team to work closely with the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to develop a joint strategy on the conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We believe that the Special Envoy can provide an important link between MONUSCO's efforts within the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the regional efforts that need to be built around that. This will be critical to ending the conflict. We had hoped to receive more information in this briefing on the status of the United Nations peace and security strategy for the Great Lakes region. This has been under development for quite some time now, and we would be grateful for more information from the Special Envoy, including whether MONUSCO and the international community will be consulted on the strategy relatively soon. Finally, the United Kingdom is concerned about the electoral environment surrounding Burundi's May elections. It is vital that all political parties be given equal access to the media and that special measures be implemented by the Government in response to COVID-19 to ensure that the elections are fair in that regard.
