Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on assuming the presidency of the Council for the
month of September. We thank you for holding today's
meeting on the situation in Afghanistan. This meeting
comes at a crucially important time as we prepare for
our presidential election and continue to make efforts
to achieve sustainable peace.

IwouldalsoliketowelcomeAmbassadorYamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, here
today and thank him for his comprehensive briefing on
the overall current situation in Afghanistan.

As we meet, my country is taking another historic
step towards strengthening and further institutionalizing
democracy. Later this month, Afghans from all walks of
life will exercise their constitutional rights by casting
their vote to elect their president through a democratic
process. They have eagerly anticipated this important
national event as a measure to once again defy terror
and extremism, determine their political destiny and
secure the future of the country.

The Afghan Government is approaching the
election with a full and unprecedented commitment
to ensure a transparent, free, credible and inclusive
process, in accordance with the strong demand of our
people. Preparations for the upcoming polls are moving
ahead steadily, following the electoral timetable for the
Independent Election Commission. The Government
will spare no effort to ensure the safety and security of
the voters, and will put all the necessary measures in
place in order to ensure the most efficient process.

To that end, voting centres have been allocated
countrywide and, for the first time, voter lists are
available online, and biometric verification will be
used alongside printed lists. Approximately 72,000
security force personnel have been assigned to
ensure the safety of voters. Of those 72,000, almost
9,900 female security officers will be tasked with
the security of women's voting centres. The elections
further underscore Afghanistan's commitment to
taking ownership of strengthening the rule of law and
democracy since, for the first time, the Government has
committed to covering a major part ofthe financial costs
associated with the elections by allocating $90 million
to the process.

Despite all the security threats and challenges,
the people of Afghanistan are determined to hold and
participate in the elections. The casting of each ballot
by a cross-section of our society will yet again signify
our people's firm determination to work towards
stability, democracy and prosperity. Afghanistan wants
to move forward, not backward. We must respect the
desire of the Afghan people and should not prejudge the
credibility of the election or question or underestimate
the turn out. Afghans, again and again, have proven
that despite security threats and being attacked by the
Taliban, they will come out to vote and participate in
the future of their country. Peace and elections have
been equally important to the people of Afghanistan.

My request to the Council and all our international
partners and allies is to support the people of
Afghanistan in their quest for democracy, as they
have always done. This Chamber should also call on
countries that could influence the Taliban to respect the
aspirations of all Afghans and prevent them from being
attacked on election day.

Peace is another top priority for the Government of
Afghanistan. President Ghani has laid the foundation of
a clear path for a carefully calculated and responsible
peace process with the Taliban through various
initiatives over the past two years. That includes
the announcement of unconditional peace talks, the
enforcement of a ceasefire and the release of prisoners
during the Bid festivals last year. Those measures were
reinforced by the holding of a grand consultative loya
jirga for peace in April, at which 3,000 representatives
from across the nation adopted a declaration laying out
the road map for peace.

The Government of Afghanistan has welcomed all
international initiatives in support of our peace efforts
that will lead to a dignified and lasting peace and
preserve the shared gains that we have made together,
including but not limited to strengthening the Republic
and women's constitutional rights. The people of
Afghanistan have also stressed that a real and genuine
pledge to peace by the Taliban should be manifested
in ending violence, as well as engaging in direct peace
talks with the Afghan Government.

The Government of Afghanistan, as always,
remains committed to peace talks conducted on a set
of common principles, in accordance with the demands
and expectations of all Afghans from across the country.
Any potential agreement should be endorsed by the
people of Afghanistan and ensure their mandate of an
immediate ceasefire, a long-lasting peace and stability,
and the preservation of the gains and achievements of
the past 18 years, which include democratic values, the
Republic and, in particular, the rights of women, as
stipulated in our Constitution.
We cannot ignore the meaningful role and
participation of women in Afghanistan. Our women, as
agents of change and a symbol of resilience, play a key
role in the political, social and economic development
of the new Afghanistan. They have the legitimate right
to be an active part of all negotiations and decisions.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
once again thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and her accompanying United Nations
high-level delegation for their visit to Afghanistan in
July, in the context of women and peace and security.
Her recognition of the achievements made by Afghan
women and her echoing of their strong call in the
Security Council for a peace that safeguards their
hard-won rights once again reaffirmed the United
Nations firm pledge to stand by our women and the
progress they have made in our society. I thank her for
her strong support and commitment on behalf of all
Afghan women.

One of the greatest challenges to achieving a
stable and self-reliant Afghanistan is the protracted
war against international terrorism, for which we
continue to pay a very high price. The Taliban and
international terrorist groups continue their attacks on
civilian targets, creating horror and fear. They further
put civilians and civilian infrastructure at risk by using
them as shields while conducting their operations.
Furthermore, the Taliban have also remained hostile
to humanitarian workers and have issued threats to
members of the press. We call on the Taliban to end
the senseless violence, show a true commitment to
peace and respect the pledge they made at the Doha
Intra-Afghan peace conference, when they said that
they would reduce civilian casualties to zero.

Contrary to that pledge, a heinous and cowardly
attack was launched at a wedding hall in Kabul on
17 August and caused the death of more than 70
civilians, wounding 180 others. That was followed by
the attacks of 19 August in Jalalabad, which happened
during our Independence Day celebration, in Kabul by
the Green Village and the 5 September attack, which
caused a high number of civilian casualties.

Additional attacks also took place last week in
Kunduz and Puli-Khumri, but were repelled by the
efforts of our Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. In that regard, allow me to highlight that our
forces, as true allies in the war on terrorism, are fighting
fearlessly at the forefront of international terrorism and
making sacrifices on a daily basis. Their bravery should
be recognized and supported by all of us.
In line with efforts to defeat terrorist groups
militarily, we have also been working on limiting
their operational capabilities, including in tackling
financing that may come from the proceeds of narcotics
operations. To that end, we have conducted counter-
narcotics operations throughout the country, seizing
tons of illicit drugs and destroying hundreds of drug-
processing facilities.

Other efforts have included improved security
at airports and border crossings to detect and deter
any instances of trafficking. Those measures have
concluded with the apprehension of individuals involved
in the drug trade, and our justice system is committed
to holding them accountable for their actions. However,
we must look at the issue of counter-narcotics in broader
terms, including the demand in the supply chain, and
consider it a regional issue. We must also look into a
regional counter-narcotics strategy as an option.

The Government is committed to the realization
of a self-reliant Afghanistan as a hub of regional
connectivity and a platform for global, economic and
regional cooperation. That has been reflected in the
implementation of several regional mega-projects,
which are already paying economic dividends in our
country and beyond. The increased trade, investments,
infrastructure and development brought by those
projects, coupled with other initiatives that have also
enhanced regional efforts on security, especially
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, have shown the
direction of that new Afghanistan as a regional platform
of cordiality and cooperation.

The gains of the past 18 years have left us with
a committed young generation that continues to take
charge of the future of their own country. That includes
men and women who are engaged within the private
sector as innovative and successful leaders in industry
and entrepreneurs and within the public sector as loyal
and dedicated civil servants. Among those, women
have reached new heights, taking leadership positions
in various ministries.

In standing by the re-emergence of our country and
the spirit of that new generation, we thank the United
Nations and our international partners for their support
since 2001. The role of the United Nations and the
international community in helping us get to this point
has been evident through the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the
Security Council and other bodies of the Organization.
As we move forward onto a new chapter in our modern
history, new challenges require that we recommit and
develop our relationship together.

On that point, we hope for a thorough renewal of
the UNAMA mandate that will highlight core priority
issues for Afghanistan's future in achieving a sustainable
and lasting peace agreement but also beyond that, into
a post-conflict development setting. A new mandate
should incorporate updates to the country's situation.
We hope for the mandate to be extended for a year, at
the minimum.

In closing, allow me to reiterate Afghanistan's
gratitude for the Council's tireless work in helping us
make progress towards stability and peace. We remain
focused on facing the challenges ahead of us. We trust
in the support of the Council and our international
partners in meeting them together. As such, the Council
can count on Afghanistan's firm commitment, as a
partner, to the defence of the rule of law, respect for
international rules and obligations and the promotion of
the values of peace and international solidarity.

