Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): In voting for
this resolution, my delegation has also expressed its
support for the request the Council is addressing to the
Secretary-General to appoint independent experts to
prepare a comprehensive report and analysis of the
humanitarian situation in Iraq. We do not expect great
surprises from this analysis because we know that the
sanctions have a negative affect on the humanitarian
situation in Iraq. But an analysis by independent
experts will also shed light on some inexplicable
actions on the part of the Iraqi authorities. My
delegation continues to be puzzled by the Iraqi
Government's recurrent practice to adopt measures that
harm its own people. At first sight such measures may
seem totally irrational, but they probably make some
sense if they are seen in the light of the Iraqi
Government's attempt at convincing the international
community that the only way to improve the
humanitarian situation in Iraq is to lift the sanctions all
together.

The second motive, hardly more rational it would
seem, may be simply to register disapproval of a
country that is trying to help the Iraqi people within the
parameters of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. It is as though Iraq only wants to have
dealings with countries that have shown their
disapproval of resolution 1284 by abstaining on it.

It is surprising to see to what length the Iraqi
Government will go to make this point. Recently, non-
governmental organizations have been prevented from
supplying Iraq with humanitarian goods solely, as we
must presume, on account of their being based in the
Netherlands.

In one such instance a Netherlands-based non-
governmental organization tried to ship 72 tonnes of
dry skimmed milk to Iraq. It was instructed by the Iraqi
Ministry of Health to have the manufacturer indicate a
shelf-life of one year, instead of the customary two
years or more. Upon the consignment's arrival in Iraq,
a sample was taken for testing purposes. Six months
later, the non-governmental organization in question
was informed that the consignment had been rejected.
Counter-checks were made, both in the Netherlands
and in a third country, which showed there was nothing
wrong with the milk powder, but the Iraqi decision was
declared to be final. Due to the arbitrarily reduced
shelf-life and the bulk of the consignment, reallocation
was not an option. The shipment, with a value of about
$300,000, is presumably going to be, or has been,
destroyed.

Other Netherlands-based non-governmental
organizations have had similar experiences. My
authorities are not in a position to tell those
organizations either to give up or to persevere. My
personal guess is that they will keep on trying, for we
all agree that the Iraqi people should not be made to
suffer for the irresponsible behaviour of its leaders.
That is why the Council and the Secretariat, the
sanctions Committee and the Office of the Iraq
Programme, are working so hard to implement the
humanitarian provisions contained in part C of
resolution 1284 (1999), hoping that the Government of
Iraq will soon change its mind and accept the whole
resolution for what it is - that is, the shortest way to a
suspension, and ultimately a full lifting, of the
sanctions.

