Mr. Henze (Germany): As a member of the group of
Friends of the Secretary-General on Georgia, Germany fully
supports and welcomes the draft resolution before the
Council today. This is particularly so because this draft
resolution contains several important messages addressed
directly to the parties, reflecting our grave concern and
sense of urgency over the volatile political situation in and
around Abkhazia, Georgia; the fate of the thousands of
persons who were recently forced to leave their homes; the
lack of tangible progress towards a political settlement; and
the continuing danger which the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UN OMIG) and the peacekeepers of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) are facing on
the ground.

Let me try to elaborate on the messages of the draft
resolution as we see them.

The first message is: The fighting that broke out in
May was a major setback for peace and brought the parties
to the brink of full-scale war. Both parties have allowed the
situation in the Gali region to degrade to this point. It is
now the demand of the international community that they
take determined steps to move back from this brink and
engage constructively in the peace process led by the
United Nations. Germany is willing to render its assistance
to the parties to reach a comprehensive political settlement,
provided they show their genuine commitment to the search
for peaceful options.

The Georgian authorities must step up significantly
their efforts to curb armed groups operating from the
Georgian side of the Inguri River. The reckless attacks of
these groups are not only a serious danger to the personnel
of UNOMIG and of the CIS peacekeeping forces; they are
also seriously disrupting any attempt to peacefully solve the
issues underlying the conflict.

The second and even more important message we see
in the draft resolution is: The Abkhaz side must allow the
refugees from the Gali region to return to their homes
immediately and Without condition. The recent destruction
of houses in the Gali region by Abkhaz forces, in an
apparent campaign to drive out the local population, is
totally unacceptable and a matter of utmost concern. We
welcome that the Council is not afraid to address the facts
in their proper terms and evaluate them accordingly. It is
certainly no coincidence that, in this context, the draft
resolution recalls the declaration of the Lisbon summit of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which refers to related earlier events.

A third and final basic message is also clearly
expressed in the draft resolution: the patience of the
Security Council is running out. Unless there is an
improvement in the peace process and in the security
situation on the ground, a reconsideration of the United
Nations peacekeeping commitment in Abkhazia, Georgia,
cannot be excluded. The last six months have cast serious
doubt on whether there actually exists a serious, ongoing
peace process which has the unreserved support of the
parties. Without such a process it will be difficult to
justify the present level of United Nations engagement.
The parties are responsible for working towards an
effective political negotiating process, through direct
dialogue and in the framework of the Geneva process,
with the assistance of the Russian Federation as
facilitator, the group of Friends of the Secretary-General
and the OSCE.

The other crucial factor in the equation is the serious
risk to which the troop contributors to UNOMIG - and
Germany, along with Bangladesh, is the largest among
them - are being forced to submit their personnel. As I
mentioned earlier, determined steps against the activities
of armed groups and against mine-laying in UNOMIG's
area of operations must be taken urgently. But the
measures already taken by the Secretariat to improve
security conditions, under severely restricted operational
conditions, will not be sufficient to maintain a meaningful
and justifiable mission over a protracted period of time.
We fail to understand why the Abkhaz leadership has
chosen to oppose giving UNOMIG the possibility to
defend itself against persons or groups attacking it.
Germany continues to favour that option, in the form of
a self-protection unit to be added to UNOMIG. We call
upon the Abkhaz leadership to reconsider its initial
reaction and to understand that such a force would be
limited strictly to self-defence, with no motive other than
to ensure UNOMIG's security against banditry or
politically motivated attacks.

Let me end by expressing Germany's deep
appreciation for the dedicated work done by the Special
Representative, Mr. Liviu Bota, and the members of
UNOMIG, in a tense and dangerous environment. I would
like to extend my heartfelt condolences to the family and

 

friends of Ms. Maria Magdalena Wewiorska, Mr. Bota's
secretary, who was murdered on the doorstep of her
apartment in Tbilisi only a few days ago. We also mourn
the members of the peacekeeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States who were the victims
of cowardly attacks in recent days.

