The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister of State of Germany.

Let me start by expressing how honoured I feel
to take part in the deliberations of this organ. When
Germany presented its candidature for a non-permanent
seat, we pledged to be a strong partner in helping to
forge sustainable peace. Germany believes in the
value of long-term engagement by the international
community in conflict situations such as the one that
we are discussing today, that is, Darfur in the Sudan.

Before I turn to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), let me
underline that we cannot address Darfur in a vacuum.
Over the last weeks, we have witnessed significant
developments in Khartoum and in the Sudan more
broadly. Personally, I am impressed by the will and
determination of the Sudanese people to stand up
peacefully for a different future. Germany believes
that the voices of the people need to be heard as the
Sudan charts a new way forward. Therefore, Germany
welcomes the statement by the African Union, which
strongly underlines the imperative of a civilian-led
and consensual political transition in the Sudan. We
echo that clear political message from the region, and
we call upon all actors in the Sudan to move in that
direction with determination, urgency and, above all,
without violence.

As developments unfold in Khartoum, we have
to carefully consider their impact on the situation in
Darfur. It is fair to say that we do not have a clear and
full picture yet. But I believe that we as members of the
Council should carefully monitor the interplay between
political developments in Khartoum and the situation
in Darfur. Reports about recent clashes in camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Darfur, resulting
in a number of IDPs being killed, serve to underline
this point in a most deplorable way.

Turning to UNAMID, let me underline that we
are dedicated to working with the United Kingdom as
co-penholders, and with all of the Council members
here around the table, as well as with our partners in
the African Union, on the way forward for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We
are convinced that it is the joint responsibility of all of
us here in the Council to ensure that the decade-long
international engagement in Darfur and for the people
of Darfur delivers concrete and lasting results.

It is in that spirit that I would like to thank our
briefers today. They shed light on the areas of progress,
but also showed us where more effort is needed. I
would like to refer in particular to reports of sexual and
gender-based violence still being committed in Darfur,
including by Government personnel. Those atrocities
need to be stopped and the perpetrators held to account.
The briefing by Ms. Mueller, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, also highlighted that
we still need to find durable solutions for the almost
2 million internally displaced persons in Darfur. That
speaks to a broader point: we as the international
community need to remain engaged in Darfur and take
a longer-term view. Despite progress made in the last
years, many of the drivers of the conflict in Darfur are
yet to be comprehensively addressed.

We remain concerned about a lack of access to
justice, at security sector that remains largely unchecked
due to weak governance, and continued reports about
human rights violations. Additional factors such as
climate change potentially exacerbate tensions among
the populations in Darfur and impede development
and economic opportunities. Land remains one of
the key issues that has not yet been settled. Not all of
those challenges can be addressed by a peacekeeping
mission, nor should they be. Therefore, the transition
process from peacekeeping to peacebuilding becomes
increasingly important. My Government is committed
to playing an active role in shaping the transition. To us,
that means focusing on the following two things.

First,wehavetodo everything sothatUNAMID-as
long as it is deployed in Darfur - delivers against the
mandated tasks in the areas of mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. We think that the mission has made
progress working together with other United Nations
entities over recent months, including on supporting
capacity-building in the areas of the rule of law and
human rights, as well as in finding durable solutions
for IDPs and host communities. We must keep that
up. We welcome the transition concept and commend
the United Nations on progress on this, in particular
through establishing state liaison functions. We must
continue to work and back it up with the appropriate
financial support.

Secondly, Germany is convinced that, for the
transition to be successful, we need a collaborative
relationship among the decision-making authorities in
the Sudan, the international community and the United
Nations with respect to Darfur. That partnership must
be built on mutual trust and with the common objective
of sustaining peace in Darfur.

Therefore, if we want to develop a way forward
for the planning post-UNAMID, it is essential that we
have an in-depth conversation with the Sudan. That
conversation needs to include the current obstacles
to the functioning of UNAMID, such as access
denials -which have been mentioned. Looking forward,
that conversation also has to do with strengthening
the capacity of rule of law institutions. It has to be
about revitalizing the political process for Darfur and
about cooperating with the international community,
including through a presence of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission.
And eventually it needs to be a conversation about the
Government of the Sudan assuming responsibility for
tasks that currently lie in UNAMID's hands. This is
not a technical exercise; it needs political engagement.
Germany stands ready for that. But clearly, as things
are evolving in Khartoum, we currently do not have a
counterpart on the Sudanese side to engage with in this
important conversation.

That brings me back to my first remark: we cannot
simply de-link the political developments in Khartoum
from ourjoint work on UNAMID. We will have to take
a close look at the time plans. Artificial timelines do not
help the people in Darfur, and blindly following them
might risk our investment as members of the Council.
Our decisions on the future of UNAMID must be
shaped by developments on the ground, not by budget
lines. The Secretariat will present its thinking on this
soon. We look forward to those proposals, carefully
charting our way forward on UNAMID as the situation
continues to evolve in Khartoum.

Lastly, given today's uncertainties, we see it as the
responsibility of the international community, and in
particular the Security Council, to make sure that, once
UNAMID leaves, Darfur does not relapse into conflict.
We must prevent a cliff in terms of political attention,
political support for mediation and practical support
on such key issues as the rule of law, human rights
and peacebuilding. That needs to be avoided because,
frankly, we cannot afford it.
We owe it to the people of Darfur to continue our
support. That is why Germany believes that we should
have a strong United Nations presence in Darfur once
UNAMID is gone. Such a presence, in our mind,
would consolidate and further advance the political,
peacebuilding and development objectives in Darfur.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.

