Mr. Moura (Portugal): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Azerbaijan for its
initiative in organizing today's important open debate
on the Council's working methods.

Improving working methods is a continuing
task. Indeed, there is always room to improve the
transparency of the Council's work and to enhance its
relationship with the broader membership, the General
Assembly and other United Nations organs, as well as
with regional and subregional organizations. That is
what brings us to the Council today.

We welcome the recent measures the Council has
taken to improve its working methods. We also commend
the continuous efforts in the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
led by Argentina. On our part, we continue to support
all efforts within and outside the Council to improve
working methods with the sole aim of strengthening
and enabling the Council to better discharge the role
entrusted by the Charter of the United Nations.

As a member of the recently established
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group, Portugal aligns itself with the statement just
made by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of ACT members. Portugal has considered particular
aspects related to the implementation ofnote S/2010/507
and subsequent notes by the President of the Security
Council. I would like, therefore, to concentrate on four
of those aspects and to suggest concrete measures for
improvement.

The first aspect concerns open debates. Open
debates have become regular features of the Council's
monthly programme of work. We welcome them as they
fit into the trend we expect the Council to follow, which
is to have more open meetings with greater participation
by the broader United Nations membership. However,
open debates are meant to allow the Council to listen
to the broader membership. That is why we suggest
that whenever an open debate is expected to have an
outcome, the Council should consider adopting the
outcome statement at a later time so that it can reflect
on the input of non-Council members, as the Council
deems relevant.

Greater interactivity in open debates could be
encouraged by alternating the statements of Council
members with those of non-members and by promoting
the use ofa summary at the end ofa debate. The Council
has done the latter in the past, and we think that it could
be a useful practice to revive, such as in certain open
debates in which the Council launches discussions on
new themes.

Allow me to point out something that we all, not
only non-Council members, should do. We should
follow note 507 and not exceed five minutes in making
our interventions - a point also stressed by the
representative of the United Kingdom this morning.
That is an effort we encourage all to make for the sake
of efficiency in all open debates.

Secondly, with respect to wrap-up sessions, we see
the practice resumed since January as very positive.
I commend the delegation of Pakistan for kicking off
so promptly and effectively the implementation of the
note by the President of the Security Council contained
in document S/2012/922. Wrap-up meetings have
since been organized as formal private meetings, with
the attendance of interested non-Council members.
Alternatively, some presidencies have opted for
informal briefings to the broader membership at the
end of their respective presidencies. Those have also
proved very useful and have allowed for an informal
exchange of views between non-Council members and
the presidencies on the work done. We strongly suggest
the continuation of such practices. However, with
respect to formal wrap-up meetings, we believe that
they would benefit from being more future-oriented,
more concise or else focused on specific issues of
relevance and timeliness in the Council.

Such formats - both wrap-ups and informal
briefings i should have two aims, namely, more
information and more interactivity. Those two goals
could be usefully combined. For instance, nothing
prevents presidencies, after convening a private wrap-
up meeting in which only Council members speak,
from inviting interested non-Council members to
an informal briefing in another room on the same or
the following day, where interactivity can then take
place. Alternatively, may we suggest that the Council
periodically open up wrap-up meetings for genuine
participation and interventions by non-members. That
would hardly be a first: the Council has done that
successfully before on several occasions.

My two next remarks concern aspects of the
Council's internal work, although they remain relevant
to the implementation of note 507, since they relate to
the transparency, inclusiveness and effectiveness of the
Council's work.

First, with respect to the issue ofpenholders, which
was touched upon by the representative of the Russian
Federation this morning and on which the Informal
Working Group initiated a reflection last year, the
question here concerns the implementation of note 507,
in particular how to give real meaning to the notion of
participation in the preparation and drafting of Security
Council decisions, as called for in paragraph 42 of the
note.

One decisive step in the right direction would be
to introduce the practice of joint-penholdership or
co-penholdership to initiate and chair the drafting
process. Such a practice, in our View, would help
promote broader participation by Council members in
the decision-making process, in particular those from
the same region as that of a particular situation under
consideration who are willing to raise their level of
participation, or those with a special interest in it, for
instance those who Chair the Sanctions Committees or
subsidiary bodies directly related to a given situation.
At the same time, such joint-penholdership would
help share the burden of keeping all Council members
informed about initiatives from the earliest possible
stage.

Finally, with respect to the appointment of
the chairpersons of subsidiary organs, a point just
mentioned by the representatives of Morocco and
Pakistan moments ago, it is important for the Council
to give concrete meaning to the consensus reached
in December through the note by the President of the
Security Council contained in document S/20l2/937,
that is, to establish an informal process with the
participation of all Council members and in consultation
with the newly elected members.

The current practice would gain if such a process
of facilitation were made more participatory and
inclusive. Instead of relying on a single facilitator in the
outreach to and consultation with Council members,
including incoming ones, the Council should usefully
involve other co-facilitators in the process, including
outgoing chairpersons, in order to take advantage
of their experience. That would allow for a more
transparent, inclusive and participatory process leading
to the appointment of chairpersons. Building on last
year's consensus, that could be the next concrete step
towards improving the upcoming process of appointing
chairpersons with respect to transparency and the
participation of all Council members.

Those are just a few concrete ideas. We are
convinced that they would serve to strengthen the
Council's effectiveness by improving its relationship
with the broader membership and by promoting
enhanced participation in its decision-making.

