The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.

China welcomes the presence of Ms. Maria Angela
Holguin Cuellar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, in today's meeting. In January 2016, at the
request of the Government of Colombia and other parties,
the Council authorized for the first time the deployment
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia to support
the advancement of the peace process in the country.
Over the past year, the peace process in Colombia has
made important headway. China appreciates the efforts
of President Santos Calderon and the relevant parties
in Colombia, as well as the Government of Colombia.
We also thank the United Nations Mission in Colombia
and the relevant countries for contributing to the
advancement of the peace process in Colombia.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2366 (2017)
today by the Council on the deployment of the second
mission in Colombia - the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia-once again sends a positive
signal in support of that country's peace process. It will
give strong impetus to the full implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia. The advance
of the peace process in Colombia not only is conducive
to maintaining peace and stability in Latin America,
but also has important reference value to the Council in
promoting solutions to hotspot issues in other countries
and regions.

We hope that Government of Colombia and other
parties will be united in promoting the advancement
of new achievements in the peace process and thereby
set a good example for the international community in
addressing conflicts appropriately. We also hope that
the Secretariat will continue to respect the leadership of
Colombia in the peace process, enhance communication
and coordination with the Government and the relevant
parties, put forward constructive options and proposals
regarding the size and mandate of the Verification
Mission, and make effective preparations for the peace
process in the country to yield greater results.

China will work with other members of the Council
in making new contributions to lasting peace security,
prosperity and development in Colombia.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.

