Mr. Johnson (United States of America): First, we
express our appreciation to the United Kingdom and
Secretary Johnson of the United Kingdom for bringing
attention to this important issue on aviation security. I
thank Secretary Johnson for his leadership on the issue.
I also wish to commend the work of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and its Secretary
General, Ms. Liu, on matters of aviation security. We
are therefore glad that we are having this meeting, and

we welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2309
(2016).

I regard aviation security today as an urgent
matter. The resolution that we just adopted refers to
recent terrorist attacks on civil aviation as a matter of
grave concern. We agree with that characterization.
For us in the United States, the defining moment for
aviation security was 11 September 2001. A whole
new Government agency dedicated to transportation
security, our Transportation Security Administration
(TSA), was created as a result. Today in the United
States, the TSA is the agency of our Government that
interacts most with the public on a daily basis. The
reality is that today there is a continuing international
threat to aviation security, including the terrorist threat.
Recent attacks have demonstrated that the terrorist
threat to aviation security and airport security are as
serious as ever. As noted in the resolution, terrorist
organizations continue to regard civil aviation as an
attractive target for attacks. That is fully consistent
with our own Government's assessment. Terrorist
organizations continue to seek to exploit perceived
gaps in our aviation security.

The good news is that in recent years, the
international community has taken significant steps
to strengthen aviation security and restore public
confidence in aviation. There is still more to do. In
the United States, the TSA, led by Administrator Peter
Neffenger, has rededicated itselfto its aviation security
mission. Our airlines have supported that effort. Two
years ago, we enhanced aviation security measures at
international airports for flights bound to the United
States. I am pleased that other nations have adopted
similar enhancements.

Since last year following the crash of Metrojet
Flight 9268, we have focused on enhanced security
around passengers, luggage, cargo and other items
brought on flights bound for the United States. We
are actively researching and investing in new aviation
security technology to track current threats. Our
Congress has also authorized us to donate aviation
security equipment to other countries.

After years during which we reduced the number of
TSA officers, we have reversed that trend and are hiring
more. We have converted large numbers of part-time
TSA employees to full-time. We are adding more bomb-
sniffing dogs to the aviation security mission. We have
embarked upon a programme called TSA Precheck to

encourage passengers to submit to a background check
in advance of their flight.

Earlier this year, despite increased air travel
volume in the United States and longer lines at airport
screening checkpoints, we refused to shortcut aviation
security. We are seeking more agreements with other
nations to accept air marshals on commercial flights
to and from the United States. We are actively seeking
more preclearance arrangements with Governments
around the world, under which our customs officers are
positioned overseas to screen passengers before they
board flights to the United States.

We encourage other nations to rededicate
themselves to the matter of aviation security. As
Secretary Johnson noted, we all depend on each other on
this issue. We encourage increased information-sharing
on aviation security best practices among nations and
continued investments by other nations in aviation
security technology. Through ICAO, let us continue to
standardize aviation security practices.

The United States of America strongly supports
full implementation of the resolution that we have just
adopted, and we encourage other nations to do so as
well. The resolution provides an important opportunity
to reaffirm our commitment to aviation security and
advance global standards so as to address the evolving
terrorist threat. Resolution 2309 (2016) sends a clear
message, namely, security for international flights
is an issue of concern for the Security Council.
The resolution calls on all States to work with the
established United Nations structures to develop more
effective international standards for aviation security.
The resolution calls on States to urgently address any
gaps or vulnerabilities and to work vigorously and
swiftly to address States' concerns about threats to
international flights. 1 note in particular the provision
in the resolution that calls upon States to ensure that

"such measures take into account the potential role
of those with privileged access to areas, knowledge
or information that may assist terrorists in planning
or conducting attacks" (resolution 2309 (2016)

para. 6 (c))

We will continue to work with the United Nations,
our international partners and ICAO to strengthen
standards that keep the global aviation system safe and
secure.

