Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): I would first like
to begin by expressing my appreciation for the remarks
made this morning by the Secretary-General and by
Ambassador Brahimi, and to say how we salute their
indefatigable efforts in pursuit of peace and stability in
Afghanistan, particularly over the period since ll
September.

This morning's news of the retreat of the Taliban
from the capital, Kabul, is justification itself for the
military strategy which has been pursued. The Taliban
placed themselves at the heart of the evil Al Qaeda
network. They were both its protectors and its
apologists. The Taliban also caused untold suffering to
the people of Afghanistan, denying women basic rights
and basic education; executing women in public;
sponsoring the world's drug trade; ensuring that 90 per
cent of the heroin on the streets of Europe came from
that country; and also, by their appalling
mismanagement of that country, leading millions to
flee it. It is worth remembering that almost all of the
millions of refugees who are collected at, or just
outside, the borders of Afghanistan or who have fled
further afield were refugees before 11 September.

The Taliban are now on the run. With their flight,
the world, and particularly Afghanistan, has taken a
step towards becoming a safer and a better place. But,
as the Secretary-General and Ambassador Brahimi
have warned, this, of course, is by no means over.

The news was dramatic, but I also believe the
news overnight was a great relief, because the capital,
Kabul - the largest city - is of huge symbolic
importance, and the fact that it has fallen with
relatively little bloodshed is important and certainly
beyond some of the possibilities that existed before the
military coalition - before this happened. It is also
welcome that this has happened before the onset of
winter.

But I say, too - and I say this particularly to
representatives of the Northern Alliance - that the
whole world expects higher and better behaviour from
those who are now inside Kabul than happened before.
The world will be watching for restraint by the
Northern Alliance, not only hoping but also monitoring
its behaviour, because here is an opportunity for the
Northern Alliance and for the other non-Taliban parties
to establish a broad-based government which meets the
central tenets of the United Nations and, in doing so,
ensures the readmission of Afghanistan into the
community of nations. But the responsibility of
ensuring that this can happen depends on the deeds,
and not just on the words, of those parties that have
now taken Kabul.

When this conflict began, the Secretary-General
showed great wisdom in appointing Ambassador
Brahimi and in sponsoring intensive discussions in the
international community about the requirements for
stability and security once this conflict had finished.

I think that, in the short space of time since the
original Security Council resolutions, we have
established a very clear international consensus about
the four essential conditions for that stability, peace
and prosperity in Afghanistan.

First, these arrangements have to be achieved
under the auspices of the United Nations. Secondly -
to pick up a phrase used by the Secretary-General in
his address - we have to ensure the end of
interference by external forces, by the countries in the
region and by others with bigger aspirations. But
alongside that end to interference, we have to see the
beginning of sustained, agreed and cooperative support
from the international community for the new
administration and the new government of
Afghanistan.

I think that we in the international community
have particular responsibilities in respect of two
countries which have borne the brunt of refugees from
Afghanistan - namely Iran and Pakistan - and I
certainly welcome the very constructive approach
which has been adopted to Afghanistan by the
Presidents of both Iran and of Pakistan.

Thirdly, we have accepted that, within that
framework of benign but active support from the
international community, it is for the Afghans
themselves to decide exactly how they deliver that
broad-based, representative, multi-ethnic Government.

And, fourthly, in order that that should be
achieved, the international community has to be
committed to Afghanistan for the long term because, to
pick up the point made just a moment ago by
Ambassador Brahimi, I think the Afghans are right to
be very angry that the international community and key
countries in the international community have in the
past gone into Afghanistan and then walked away. The
consequences of that were left with the Afghan people,
and not principally with the countries that walked off.

There are, I believe, four immediate points that
we have to focus on in the Council today. First, there
needs to be a very early gathering of the internal
Afghan parties, as Ambassador Brahimi has suggested.
Certainly, we in the United Kingdom stand ready to
provide whatever assistance we can to assist with that
process. That is an essential first step to the
establishment of a broad-based Government under
United Nations auspices. I was very pleased and
interested to hear from Ambassador Brahimi about the
detailed steps that he proposes should be taken to get
that civil administration and broad-based Government
established.

Secondly, we have to get humanitarian aid into
Afghanistan in greater measure for those who have
suffered and starved under the Taliban rule in that
country. Thanks to the fall of Mazar-e-Sharif, in the
north, and now Kabul, the opportunities for
humanitarian relief are significantly greater than
existed even a week or so ago, but so are the
challenges. Above all, so are the expectations of the
Afghan people and the world that we meet the
challenge of humanitarian aid as vigorously as the
partners in the coalition have met the prior challenge of
military action. It is important that agencies see that the
provision of relief, recovery and reconstruction are part
ofa single plan, not separate.

Thirdly, we have to get a United Nations presence
on the ground in Kabul, as soon as physically possible,
to provide the eyes and ears of the international
community and to start the process of creating civil
administration. That of course involves considerations
of their security, and that of the territory generally, in
which the military coalition and other countries have
an important interim role to play.

Fourthly, I think the Council itself needs to take
early action to address the longer-term security and
stability of the region and to ensure the right
international military and security presence to achieve
that f again, taking account not only of what
Ambassador Brahimi said were the preferred options,
which obviously include an all-Afghan security force,
but also the reality that, with the best will in the world,
that force may take some time to assemble, train and
organize.

The last point I wanted to make in terms of
immediate action was to pick up on what Ambassador
Brahimi said about the need to get skilled Afghans who
are in the immediate region - in Iran and Pakistan as
well as in the much wider diaspora - and facilitate
their transfer into Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is a poor country economically -
one of the poorest in the world - but it is not poor in
terms of the intellectual abilities and skills of its
people. That is shown by the way in which many parts
of Afghanistan have been the cradle of our world
civilization. There are many highly skilled Afghans
around the world. There are many in the United
Kingdom. I wish to say that in the United Kingdom we
are now taking steps to work out programmes to enable
those Afghans resident in the United Kingdom who
have the necessary skills and wish to go back to
Afghanistan to play a part in the reconstruction of that
country immediately to do so. We are certainly also
very ready to provide ideas that we have to other
countries that host members of the Afghan diaspora so
that we can get a coordinated support programme for
such transfers of those skilled people back to
Afghanistan.

My last point is that we also must keep the focus
on the fight against international terrorism. The Al
Qaeda organization is down, but it may well not be out.
We do have to ensure that they are wholly defeated.
There is nothing that can directly assuage the suffering
of those who lost loved ones on 11 September, nor of
those innocents who have suffered so grievously over
the years at the hands of the Taliban. But the news
today, and I hope our decisions this week and the
action by the United Nations and the international
community, should provide them with some much-
needed relief.

