Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (Spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Ms. Karen Pierce as the new Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom to the United Nations. We
wish her great success in her post and would like to
affirm that she can count on the same full support and
cooperation that we extended to her predecessor. We
welcome her to New York.

Iwould like to express our gratitude and recognition
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, who
provided us with a very complete, clear and detailed
briefing on the current situation in the Middle East,
which focused on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), on the Palestinian question.

Aware of the intensity and the extent of the
destruction of the current conflicts in the Middle East,
for which we desire a prompt resolution, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea would like to point out that, since it
was first put on the agenda of the General Assembly in
April 1947 to the present time, the Palestinian question
has not ceased to be at the heart of the instability of
the region due to its historical complications and
implications, its longevity and, in particular, a lack of
proper implementation of resolutions adopted by the
Security Council in that regard.

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates the appeal of the
Quartet for Middle East peace to both parties involved
in the conflict to adopt measures to reverse the negative
trend on the ground, which jeopardizes the solution of
two independent States - one Israeli and the other
Palestinian - called on to live together in mutual
cooperation and compelled to guarantee sustainable
peace and security for the two States and for other
parties in the region. However, some developments
on the ground seek to put that objective far beyond
our reach.

Equatorial Guinea believes the historic claims
of the Palestinians to be just, in line with the various
declarations of the African Union. We also believe that
Israel has the right to live in peace and security. The
Israelis should recognize that just as Israel's right to
exist cannot be denied, nor can that of Palestine. Violent
behaviour should cease once and for all and each party
should fuflfil its international obligations as set out in
the various United Nations resolutions in general. The
parties should refrain from unilateral actions that could
hinder the return to negotiations.

The reunification of Palestine under a single,
legitimate and democratic Government is also key to
envisaging the aspirations of the Palestinian people as
one, which would in part facilitate the mediation role
of the Security Council. We therefore welcome the
reconciliation agreement between Fatah and Hamas,
signed in Cairo in October of last year, as well as the
return of the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip to
resume its control.

Now more than ever, the Security Council and the
entire international community must remain united in
their desire to see a peaceful solution to all aspects of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Only in that way can we
bring due pressure to bear on the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities to stop the trends that threaten the process
and ask them to be adequately flexible and reasonable
in understanding once and for all that peace is a much
more valuable goal than the violence, hate and injustice
that have characterized the region for more than half
a century.

I would like to conclude my statement by expressing
the strong desire of the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea to see the current initiatives for
a peace plan of the Government of the United States
result in a tangible peace plan that is acceptable to all
parties involved in the conflict and thereby to bring
about peace among the Israelis and Palentinians, which
is so desired.

