Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and the
Ambassador of Kosovo for their statements.

In the light ofthe situation described by the Special
Representative, I should like to underscore three points.

First, as this year marks the tenth anniversary of
Kosovo's independence, I should like to recall that
France steadfastly stands beside Kosovo in supporting
it in the building of its institutions and in its efforts to
achieve economic and social development and establish
itself on the international stage. Numerous efforts
have been undertaken in terms of building institutions
and achieving economic development. Kosovo is a
peacekeeping success - a success story. However,
a great deal remains to be achieved, and Kosovo can
count on our support in moving along that path. All are
aware of our commitment to strengthening the rule of
law and combating organized crime and corruption.

We welcome the smooth conduct of the municipal
elections of 22 October and 19 November last, which,
following the legislative elections of June 2017, marked
a milestone in Kosovo political affairs, even though,
as was underscored by the European Union election
observation mission, the climate of intimidation against
some candidates and their voters in Serb municipalities
of Kosovo is to be deplored.

France also condemned the murder on 16 January
of the Serb leader of Kosovo Oliver Ivanovic' and called
for the circumstances to be brought to light. France,
like its American and European partners, voiced
its concerns at the attempt to call into question the
Specialist Chambers for Kosovo, and a Franco-German
mission visited Pristina to express that concern. We
have duly taken note of the political commitment of the
Kosovar authorities not to abrogate the law, as was just
mentioned by Ms. Citaku, and we trust that this plan
will be definitively abandoned very shortly.

Secondly, in the light of the information provided
by the Special Representative every three months, the
Security Council must focus on the issue of refocusing
UNMIK efforts and coordinating them with other
international actors with a presence in Kosovo. At a
time when the discussion is focusing on the future of
peacekeeping operations, the responsibility that we
shoulder as members of the Security Council is indeed
to ensure that the means deployed by the United Nations
are tailored fully to the situation on the ground.

To that end, UNMIK and the United Nations
must continue to support the efforts of the EU and its
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo for
peace, progress and stability in Kosovo.

I shall end on a third point: the future of Kosovo.
France believes that this is a priority in the political
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina conducted
under the auspices of the European Union. The
European Union is very clear in that regard: for both
Serbia and Kosovo, rapprochement with the European
Union is conditioned upon the complete normalization
of their relations. France fully supports the mediation
efforts led by the European Union and its High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Ms. Federica Mogherini.

The launch in Serbia of an internal dialogue
on Kosovo is a positive sign, and the Serbian and
Kosovar authorities have voiced their hope for giving
new impetus to dialogue with a view to achieving full
normalization of their relations. France fully supports
this approach, which is critical for lasting peace and
stability in the Western Balkans. Each side must do its
part by adopting a constructive attitude and refraining
from any unnecessary, or even dangerous, provocation.
We also underline the importance of efforts to
promote reconciliation and bringing communities
closer together.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the lasting
solution to the conflict lies in making common cause
with the European Union. The future of the Western
Balkans is in joining the European Union, as High
Representative Mogherini stressed yesterday while
pointing out that 2025 was the horizon to which we
must aspire and that the prospects for reaching it
are realistic.

