Ms. Sori-Coulibaly: Since my previous briefing to the Security Council, in a closed meeting on 31 October 2019, Guinea-Bissau has witnessed renewed tensions among political stakeholders, hampering stabilization and the Government's ability to focus on the country's economic performance and improve the living conditions of the population. Following the peaceful holding of the presidential election and the announcement by the National Electoral Commission (CNE) that Umaro Sissoco Embale, the candidate from the Movement for Democratic Change, had won the election, the candidate of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC), Domingos Simoes Pereira, filed a legal challenge with the Supreme Court of Justice claiming electoral irregularities and fraud. Subsequently, on 24 January the Court requested the CNE to repeat the national tabulation of the data from the regional electoral commissions, in accordance with the electoral law. A period of uncertainty ensued following the Court's orders and the CNE's compliance. However, following high-level mediation led by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on 4 February, the CNE completed the verification exercise under the aegis of ECOWAS and in the presence of the representatives of the two presidential candidates, the outcome of which reconfirmed the provisional results. However, the PAIGC filed another complaint concerning the verification process, seeking the annulment of the second-round election results. On 9 February, ECOWAS held an extraordinary session of its Authority of Heads of State and Government, in Addis Ababa, on the margins of the African Union Summit. They welcomed the conclusion of the verification process by the CNE, invited the Supreme Court to play its role fully in accordance with the constitutional provisions and electoral law and finalize its work by 15 February. The Supreme Court has since initiated the examination of the complaint in order to issue a decision. As aresult, the legal process involving the electoral outcome has yet to be resolved in order to allow for the first-ever peaceful transfer of power to a democratically elected Head of State in the country. However, given the deep mistrust between the two political camps, divisions in the executive branch and shifting political alliances in the Parliament, the swearing in of the future President will unlikely bring about stability. Therefore, the continued engagement of the Security Council and the broader international community will be essential. Likewise, the continued engagement and active participation of civil society to advocate and monitor the implementation of the Stability Pact and the Conakry Agreement will be paramount for the sake of stability. Despite the challenges facing the outcome of the presidential election, Guinea-Bissau should be commended for completing its electoral cycle. Other areas that registered progress include the fight against drug trafficking and organized crime, with regard to which the Bissau Regional Court is currently hearing a landmark case involving the seizure of 1.8 tons of cocaine in September 2019. The judiciary police has also concluded key investigations, leading to the 10-to-15-year prison sentence of three suspects. In addition, a national action plan on drug trafficking and transnational organized crime is now in place and will serve as a road map for justice, security and judicial institutions in their efforts to combat drug trafficking. State institutions in Guinea-Bissau have also shown resilience and should be commended for resorting to legal means to resolve political disputes in connection with the presidential election results. Moreover, the country has witnessed no interference by the military in the political arena; the media have been enjoying freedom of speech; and there have been no major human rights violations. The upcoming post-electoral period could present a window of opportunity for sustainable peace, stability, national cohesion and reconciliation, should there be political will and commitment by national stakeholders. Within the framework of Guinea-Bissau's Stability Pact, there is an urgent need for a far-reaching reform agenda that includes the constitutional review, the electoral law and the political parties' law reforms, as well as the reform of the defence and security sector and the judiciary. National authorities should renew efforts to build a culture ofaccountability atall levels ofthe State. Progress in human rights and gender mainstreaming represents key peacebuilding components. Accordingly, political stakeholders and a free and respected media should set the tone to curb all forms of discrimination and hate speech. Most important, as history has taught us, ethnic and religious discourse must not find its way into the political arena. The establishment of an independent national human rights institution compliant with the Paris Principles remains a fundamental pillar for the promotion and protection of human rights following the withdrawal of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). Furthermore, the implementation of the national action plan on drug trafficking and transnational organized crime will be key for the country's long-term stability. Consolidating recent gains made in drug seizures and the prosecution of cases requires political will at the highest level, but also reinforced collaboration among national, regional and international players. In line with resolution 2458 (2019), which endorsed a three-phase transition and drawdown of UNIOGBIS, I would like to assure the Council that the mission is working towards its exit by 31 December. In that regard, the closure of the four regional offices was completed in 2019. Meanwhile, I have been working to ensure solid transition planning with the United Nations country team, as well as through close engagement with the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), which will assume the role of good offices in Guinea-Bissau following the mission's departure. I have also been engaging with national authorities and regional partners to ensure that the transition is fully supported by all stakeholders. A set of benchmarks has been developed and reflected in an integrated United Nations transition calendar that will enable the gradual drawdown and transfer of residual tasks to the United Nations country team, ECOWAS, UNOWAS and other partners in preparation of the mission's closure. However, diligent engagement with national counterparts is critical at this stage, and I call upon Bissau-Guinean national stakeholders to enhance their involvement with the transition process. As part of the transition efforts, a comprehensive assessment of the United Nations country team's capacities against the national peacebuilding priorities will also be undertaken to identify gaps in its capacity. Those peacebuilding priorities will be anchored in the United Nations country team's long-term programmatic interventions, encapsulated in the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework for the period 2021 to 2025. In that regard, I intend to hold a joint UNIOGBIS-United Nations country team retreat in March to help streamline ongoing transition efforts and the development of the Cooperation Framework. However, to allow the United Nations country team to take on critical peacebuilding activities - including political dialogue, national reconciliation and the implementation of urgent reforms, as well as combating drug trafficking and _ transnational organized crime - after the departure of UNIOGBIS, funding will be essential. I appeal to the international community to lend generous support to the Cooperation Framework in Guinea-Bissau. With the conclusion of the electoral cycle, the mission has shifted its efforts towards supporting the reform agenda, as envisioned in the Conakry Agreement and the Stability Pact. However, the lack of constructive dialogue among national political stakeholders, including in Parliament, poses a serious threat to the implementation of reforms, particularly the constitutional review, which is recognized as being at the heart of the country's recurrent instability. During the critical post-electoral period, all political forces and civil society organizations should be encouraged to commit to political dialogue and consensus-building on important national priorities to consolidate peace and stability. Regional and international stakeholders must also remain engaged. In that regard, UNIOGBIS continues to support preparations for the holding of a national conference on peace, reconciliation and development, with financial assistance from the Peacebuilding Fund. That commendable initiative should be supported by the international community. I encourage the Security Council to call upon the relevant actors to firmly move forward with that agenda, which would also contribute to ensuring political and institutional stability. It is also important for the international community - and ECOWAS in particular - to remain committed to Guinea-Bissau in support of political dialogue and confidence-building, while encouraging a culture of democracy, inclusivity and national unity. In that connection, I intend to establish a high-level platform that brings together international partners and national authorities to regularly discuss, promote and accompany the country in its reform agenda, as well as inform on the United Nations transition. That platform would continue under the chairmanship of the Resident Coordinator following the closure of UNIOGBIS. I take this opportunity to commend the other members of the group of five - the African Union, ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the European Union - whose joint and tireless efforts ensured that Guinea-Bissau complied with the electoral calendar. Before I conclude, allow me to recall that, during the past 20 years, the United Nations has invested considerably in Guinea-Bissau. Now, ahead of the reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the country, we have a collective responsibility to safeguard the democratic and peacebuilding dividends. It is imperative that Guinea-Bissau be kept high on the agenda of the regional and international community, including the Peacebuilding Commission. We must collectively step up our efforts aimed at inclusive and sustainable development for all, within the context of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework and beyond. Focusing on the most vulnerable, particularly women and youth, is paramount, considering that about 60 per cent of Guinea-Bissau's population is under 25-years old and most young people are unemployed. Without opportunities, they could become spoilers, rather than peace agents. Finally, following the legacy of Amilcar Cabral, I encourage Bissau-Guinean political leaders to engage in constructive dialogue to overcome their differences and respect their national institutions - the very basis of the State - in order to rebuild their country for the next generation.
