Mr. Tekeda (Ethiopia): At the outset, I wish to
express our appreciation to Argentina for organizing
this open debate, for its concept note (S/2013/446, annex) and for making it possible for the African Union
(AU) to participate in this important meeting. We also
appreciate the briefing by the Secretary-General.

In our view, this debate comes at the right time, when
Africa is making tremendous efforts at the continental
and subregional levels to address the peace and security

deficit that Africa continues to face. That has been
facilitated by a well-defined strategy encapsulated by
the African Union's Peace and Security Architecture,
an initiative of the AU that, along with other positive
and innovative steps taken by the African Union in the
areas of human rights, governance and the protection
of constitutional order, signifies how meaningful the
transformation of the Organization of African Unity
into the AU has been. That needs to be underlined, all
the more so during the year when we are celebrating
the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of the
Organization of the African Union/AU.

We in the African Union are absolutely convinced
that a principled, consistent and predictable cooperation
between the United Nations, on the one hand, and
regional and subregional organizations, on the other,
is indispensable to the maintenance of international
peace and security. We note with appreciation that, over
the past few years, significant strides have been made
in conflict resolution, peacekeeping, post-conflict
peacebuilding and reconstruction. That is indeed in
consonance with the overriding objective of the African
Union's peace and security agenda, which is to create
an enabling momentum for a more integrated, peaceful
and prosperous Africa.

In this regard, the signing and implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) are examples of cooperation based on
flexibility and making the best use of the comparative
advantages of the African Union, subregional
organizations and the United Nations in conflict
prevention, effective mediation, peacekeeping, peace
support missions and peacebuilding strategies.

It is becoming self-evident that success, even
limited progress, in international and regional peace
and security requires effective cooperation between
regional and subregional organizations of the United
Nations within the context of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, consistent with the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for
ensuring international peace and security.

It should be stated quite frankly that while much
progress has been made in cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union and its
subregional organizations, much remains to be done to
ensure that the comparative advantages of each is put
to optimal use. The Secretary-General could not have
put it better when he said in 2010 in his progress report
on the United Nations support to the African Union, in
which he said:

"The complex challenges in the world today
require a revitalized and evolving interpretations of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations"
(S/2010/5I4, para. 54).

He also reiterated in the same report "the need for the
Security Council to enunciate its vision ofthat strategic
partnership" (ibid., para. 55). "This would entail" he
added,

"a clearly defined expectation of the role of regional
organizations in maintaining international peace
and security, and would empower the Secretariat to
be able to help implement that vision" (ibid)

As the representative of one permanent member of
the Security Council said early last year, "The United
Nations needs a strong African Union, and the African
Union needs a strong United Nations" (S/PV6702, p. 15).

It would suffice to focus on two areas where
there is a need for greater cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union and its regional
organizations, regarding which, perhaps, the vision of
the Security Council might facilitate progress. The first
issue involves the perennial question of predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding for African Union
peace-support missions authorized by the Security
Council. There has indeed been some progress in this
area, as we can see in the much improved arrangement
for AMISOM. with respect to the logistics package,
which is now funded from assessed contributions. But
this is still a far cry from what the African Union-United
Nations panel on modalities for support to African
Union peacekeeping operations had proposed some
years ago. The Secretary-General was even more
forthcoming on this point when he said again in the
aforementioned report to the Council that

"the support package for AMISOM. should be
identical to the support provided to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and that action should be
taken to ensure parity between the reimbursement
rate for AMISOM. contingent personnel and United
Nations contingent personnel" (op. cit., para. 61).

But the need for further enhancement of
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
and its subregional organizations ought not to be seen
only from the funding point of view, no matter how
critical that aspect might be. No less vital is the need
for consultation and effective coordination between the
two organizations. There is room for improvement in
this area, though in terms of formal interactions on the
question of peace and security, perhaps the AU and its
Peace and Security Council could be deemed to occupy
a privileged position, largely owing to the fact that the
majority of the issues before the Council are African.

Obviously, the AU and its subregional organizations
are better placed in terms of geographical proximity,
political and cultural familiarity with local conditions,
and shared experiences, which are critical to making a
real difference for peace. Hence, without prejudice to
the global mandate of the Council in the maintenance of
global peace and security, the smart thing to do would
be to raise the level of consultation between the two
organizations in more substantive terms. In this regard,
greater efforts are required to ensure that cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union is
more effective, including through joint planning and
joint assessment for peace operations in the continent.
These efforts must be guided by genuine respect for the
strength each can bring to bear on a given situation,
based on a mutually agreed division of labour that
focuses on results.
The mandate of the Security Council is clear.
It is the body that has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
But it should not be too difficult to apply Chapter
VIII of the Charter with flexibility and wisdom, the
goal being to address a common challenge. Indeed,
the results achieved in the Sudan, Somalia and other
regional security concerns are illustrative of what can
be achieved in this regard.

We would therefore like to emphasize the need
in the same spirit as the United Nations to intensify
such regional initiatives and to accelerate its efforts to
implement the United Nations-African Union 10-year
capacity-building programme for the African Union.
More efforts are also required to fully operationalize
the African Union continental peace and security
architecture, including the Standby Force and the
Continental Early Warning System.

Furthermore, the enhancement of cooperation

between the Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council, including the annual consultations, is vital for
reaching those objectives. It is our considered view that

these meetings should result in concrete action-oriented
initiatives for the development of strategic partnerships
when addressing specific issues of mutual interest
and concern. In this regard, concrete steps should also
be taken to strengthen the policy-level coordination
between the two organizations, not only to avoid
conflicting initiatives but also a duplication of efforts.

At the operational level, the Secretariat and
the African Union Commission need to ensure the
complementarity of their efforts. Strengthening the
efforts of the African Union and its institutional capacity
to effectively plan, deploy and manage peacekeeping
operations is in the interests of both entities. All this
is bound to make the partnership, between the United
Nations and the AU more meaningful and productive.
We believe that there is scope in the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union to
move in this direction.

Our best intentions would, however, amount to
nothing if we failed to provide adequate, flexible and
predictable funding for AU peace support missions.
The AU is also determined to do its level best in this
area. At its recently held Summit in Addis Ababa in
May, the African Union noted "the need for increased
funding from within the continent to assert Africa's
ownership and leadership, as well as the challenge
faced in building innovative and flexible partnership
with the United Nations and other stakeholders". It has
also decided to do even more with respect to enhancing
Africa's capacity for immediate crisis-response.

In conclusion, it is our considered view that much
has been done to ensure greater cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU to promote peace and
security in Africa, but much remains to be done. Africa
is ready for such cooperation because it is in its interest
to do so. No doubt, such cooperation is also in the
interest of the international community.

