Mr. Whiteley: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as
Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I wish to warmly thank today's briefers, and in
particular Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui, to whom we lend our full support.
We also want to thank the Malaysian presidency of the
Security Council for organizing today's debate.

Serious challenges for the protection of children
affected by armed conflict remain. Protracted conflicts
and humanitarian crises have severe impacts on
many children and leave them exposed, inter alia to
the threats of violent extremism and displacement,
which the Secretary-General rightly highlights in his
report (S/2016/360). Violent extremism is significantly
affecting children, who often are direct targets,
including the abhorrent practice of using children as
suicide bombers. Approaches to fighting and preventing
violent extremism need to be comprehensive and to
address the root causes, such as protracted conflict, but
also the lack of good governance, the rule of law or
education.

We note with growing concern the prevalence of
attacks on and the use of schools and hospitals for
military purposes. Governments and all other actors
must protect schools and hospitals by upholding the
provisions of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

We also see forced displacement as a particular
challenge, with an ever-growing number of children
fleeing in search of protection, making them
particularly vulnerable to crime, such as abduction and
sexual violence. Governments must also take urgent
action to protect the rights of these children.

This year's report is an acute reminder of the vital
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Children and Armed Conflict and of United
Nations agencies, in particular by providing objective
and impartial information as the basis for the report. The
lists in the annexes to the report are an essential tool in
holding the relevant conflict parties accountable for the
grave crimes committed against children. It is therefore
of the utmost importance to protect the integrity and
impartiality of the report, including the listings in its
annexes and the children and armed conflict agenda
of the Security Council. Ending violations against
children and implementing action plans, rather than
political or financial pressure, should be the only route
to delisting. All parties to a conflict need to be held to
the same standards when applying the listing criteria.
We fully support the call of the Secretary-General on
all parties identified in his report to work with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
protect children in conflicts.

Last year was marked by very disturbing cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse, including by United
Nations peacekeepers, other international forces and
civilians. In addition to the need for ensuring full
accountability, one crucial measure would be mandatory
and comprehensive predeployment training on child
protection to ensure the effective protection of children
on the ground. But there is also progress that can be
achieved on this agenda. Colombia is a good example
in that regard, with substantial progress achieved in the
peace talks and the agreement on the release of children
by Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia.

TheEUActionPlanonHumanRightsandDemocracy
for the period 2015-2019 ensures a comprehensive
human rights approach to conflicts and crises. The
issue of children and armed conflict is mainstreamed
in our common security and defence policy, missions
and operations. Child protection considerations are
addressed during the planning process in new missions
and operations, in our predeployment training and in
our reporting and review documents.

EU development aid supports several projects for
child victims of armed conflicts by promoting their
safe access to basic services, protecting them from all
forms of violence and ensuring their reintegration into
societies. Specific projects in this field are supported
under the European Instrument for Democracy and
Human Rights, the Instrument contributing to stability
and peace and the European Neighbourhood and
Partnership Instrument - for example, in Colombia,
Yemen, Ukraine and Syria.

In 2015, EU humanitarian aid dedicated over
€ll.5 million to specific child-protection activities,
including psycho-social support, mine-risk education
and actions against the recruitment of child soldiers,
as well as their reintegration - for example, in the
Syria crisis, in South Sudan, in Ethiopia and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In 2016, the EU is
quadrupling its humanitarian assistance to education in
emergencies. The humanitarian projects selected under
the €52 million package for education in emergencies
will enable safe access to quality education. Recently,
the EU also decided to update the list of priority
countries on children and armed conflict to align it
with the Secretary-General's report.

Furthermore, the EU and its member States
continue to be strong supporters of the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, and we welcome the significant
progress that has been made. The focus in the remaining
months of the campaign will be on the implementation
of the action plans. The EU stands ready to support
Governments in this phase, together with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF.

In concluding, let me underline that the United
Nations and its member States should ensure that
everything is done to effectively protect children
affected by armed conflict and provide them with better
prospects for the future.

