Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for
presenting the report of 13 February on Timor-Leste
(S/2004/117). We are particularly grateful for the
presence of Minister Jose Ramos-Horta, with whose
country Chile has deep ties of friendship. We
appreciate the analysis of the Secretary-General's
technical assessment mission of early January, which
evaluated on the ground the assistance necessary for
strengthening Timor-Leste's democratic foundations
and provided projections for such assistance beyond
May of this year.

I would like to begin by expressing support for
the Secretary-General's proposal to extend the current
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) for a further 12-month consolidation
stage.

In connection with the first programme outlined
in the report (S/2004/117), my delegation completely
agrees that providing assistance to the justice system
and administrative structures is essential for the
viability and political stability of Timor-Leste. We are
concerned about delays in the administration ofjustice
and shortcomings in human rights procedures, and we
agree that capacities in this field must be strengthened.

In connection with the second programme, the
training of the police force, we agree that we must
continue to contribute to and support the process of
training the National Police of Timor-Leste. We
particularly appreciate the fact that 3,024 members of
the police force are already patrolling, in every district
in the country. However, we understand that the
National Police needs to continue its training, with a
particular view to achieving a higher level of
professionalism, effectiveness and responsibility. We
believe it is also essential that intensive training of the
Rapid Intervention Unit continue and that UNMISET
maintain assessment and monitoring personnel in that
field.

In connection with the third programme, namely
the maintenance of external security, we agree that this
is a central element in achieving stability in Timor-
Leste. We resolutely support the Secretary-General's
proposal in this regard, as we deem it both appropriate
and realistic. We believe that the deployment of 42
military liaison officers to monitor the security
situation and support demarcation activities is a good
measure, as is the deployment of a military force to
support the work of those officers. A total military
peacekeeping component of about 350 troops seems to
us to be reasonable.

We are pleased to note the excellent
communication and cooperation between Timor-Leste
and Indonesia and their mutual commitments in the
political field. We hope that an agreement on
provisional border demarcation will soon be reached
and that the perpetrators of serious crimes will be
brought to justice. We also hope for continued bilateral
strengthening, since this will without a doubt further
the consolidation of stability in Timor-Leste.

In the field of human rights, we appreciate the
assistance that UNMISET has provided in the
investigation of crimes committed in 1999,
investigations that have led to 81 indictments.
Assistance will be needed to complete all
investigations of serious crimes. This will undoubtedly
promote greater confidence in the justice system and
strengthen the message that those who commit such
crimes will not enjoy impunity. Here, we particularly
value the work accomplished by the Commission on
Reception, Truth, and Reconciliation, and we hope that
it will continue its investigations with a view to issuing
a report by the end of October this year.

Lastly, we reiterate our view that, in order for
UNMISET's task to be completed and for continued
support to be brought to the task of consolidating and
broadening the achievements made, the mandate should
be renewed for an additional year, reducing the
mission's size and modifying its mandate. We hope that
the Council will display unity in supporting this
proposal for the benefit of Timor-Leste and its people.

