Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
congratulates Argentina on the priority it has given to
this very important issue. We recognize and applaud
the strength and relevance of the Latin American
regional organizations that are represented here today.
In the Pacific, we are also very well served by our own
regional organizations, which have restored security
when Violence has threatened lives and stability. Just
last month, in Honiara on Solomon Islands, regional
leaders celebrated the success of the 10-year-long
Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.

We therefore share the sentiments expressed today
about the importance of strong and effective regional
institutions and their competitive advantage through
proximity, in-depth knowledge, commitment and local
accountability. We would say that proper use of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations can be a
critical contributor to international peace and security,
as expounded this morning by the Secretary-General
and others. But we also share the realism expressed
today about the need, in difficult cases, for regional
efforts to be backed up or supplemented by the United
Nations and the Security Council in particular. We also
share the African Union's optimism, as expressed on its
behalf by the representative of Ethiopia, that its African
Peace and Security Architecture can address regional
challenges. But we also share African concerns, as just
voiced by the representative of Egypt, that the Security
Council is simply not doing enough to respond to the
hopes and expectations of the African Union (AU) and
African regional and subregional organizations.

There seem to us to be two distinct elements
to the problem. First is the concern that, sometimes,
the Security Council can overshadow and effectively
marginalize the AU and other regional institutions
and, conversely, in other cases, the Council is often too
passive or is not responsive in a timely manner.

It is not enough for the Security Council to adopt
statements of good intention. What is needed is a new,
practical willingness to extend the Council's capacity to
interact in a collective way that builds real partnerships
with the regions. To achieve this, the Council must
be perceptive and flexible in responding to particular
situations.

Sometimes, effective cooperation and partnership
will require urgent Council political action of
a preventive kind. Sometimes it will mean the
consideration of strong deterrent measures. Other times
it will require the use of the Council's unique capacity
to provide financial, logistical and even military
support to assist regional efforts. Sometimes it will
require decisions to deploy a full-scale United Nations
operation.

Right now, the model developed for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is
causing dissatisfaction on all sides, and that is hardly
surprising, given its history. Instead, New Zealand
would like to see a focus, by the Council and by regional
organizations, on building practical partnerships at
a much earlier stage of an emerging problem. The
Security Council and regional organizations should
be working together in conflict prevention, conflict
management and conflict resolution. We therefore echo
Ethiopia's call on behalf of the AU for more effective,
results-focused consultations with the Council and
regional organizations. Regional actors can, as the
representative of Egypt has just emphasized, contribute
in-depth knowledge and longstanding relationships
with key local stakeholders, with whom they often
share linguistic, cultural and historical ties. Such ties
can be crucial for generating the trust and engagement
required for successful mediation, and they can prove
useful in supporting civil society constituencies for
building and sustaining peace.

At the global level, only the United Nations has the
power to levy assessed contributions from all Member
States, but this Council can also bring into play other
assets, such as institutional weight and impact and the
capacities of Member States with wide experience of
similar issues in other parts of the world, and it can
provide neutral perspectives. A real partnership along
those lines, including the hybrid missions advocated
by Egypt, could also be very useful in reducing
the incoherence that sometimes bedevils conflict
prevention, with overlap between the United Nations,
bilateral and regional organizations and actors.

To make progress on this important agenda item,
we believe that the Council must take a step that would
involve cultural change. Formats like the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa could be a very useful entry point for forging
the kind of partnership we are suggesting. But, for that
to be meaningful, working methods must be adapted to
allow regional and subregional organisations and their
members to be meaningfully engaged. We are convinced
that only through active conflict prevention under
Chapter VI and effective engagement with regional
and subregional organizations under Chapter VIII can
we hope to reduce the demand for hugely expensive
peacekeeping operations; and, above all, we must
address the enormous human, social, environmental
and financial costs of armed conflict. In Chapters VI
and VIII we have the tools, and New Zealand urges
that, by working together, the Council and regional and
subregional organizations should put them to very good
use.

