I am going to speak in my national capacity. As Ms. DiCarlo has just pointed out, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is an important achievement of effective multilateralism. It is the result of 12 years of intense activity, based on dialogue and diplomatic pressure. Belgium is joining forces with its European partners to defend it with conviction. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is our best guarantee to ensure the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. However, in order to succeed, all parties need to implement its provisions in full and maintain the spirit of cooperation. Belgium, like the Secretary-General and the majority of the members of the Security Council, regrets the withdrawal of the United States from the Plan. My country also regrets the reimposition by the United States of unilateral sanctions and their side effects, as well as the recent decision not to extend nuclear waivers. These sanctions prevent not only Iran but also the other Member States of the United Nations from implementing their commitments under resolution 2231 (2015), approved by all the members of the Council and supported by a large majority of the international community. Together with other European countries, Belgium adhered to the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges in 2019 in order to uphold the economic benefits that form part of the Plan. Belgium regrets the increasing non-compliance by Iran with its commitments under the Plan. Like our European partners, we reject any "less for less" approach. We call on Iran to return to full compliance with the JCPOA as soon as possible in order to prevent irreparable damage. We support the efforts of France, Germany and the United Kingdom to resolve the outstanding issues in the framework of the dispute resolution mechanism under the Plan. Belgium continues to support the professional, objective, independent and impartial work of the International Atomic Energy Agency. It commends the Agency's efforts to maintain monitoring and verification activities in Iran despite the challenges, including those posed by the coronavirus disease crisis. Belgium is concerned at Iran's continued ballistic activities and calls on Iran to comply with all provisions of resolution 2231 (2015), including those listed in annex B. Belgium is also worried by the assessments presented in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/531), as we have just heard, that point to the Iranian origin of, first, transfers of conventional arms seized in the territorial sea of Yemen, and secondly, of parts of the cruise missiles and the drones used in the attacks on Saudi Arabia last year. These activities reinforce mistrust and only contribute to the exacerbation of tensions in the region. It is clear that the issues discussed today cannot be addressed in isolation from the regional dynamics at play. If we want long-lasting peace and security in the region, we must focus our attention on the broader regional context. The region urgently needs confidence-building measures between stakeholders, and must work in good faith to solve its protracted conflicts. These regional concerns must be resolved by proactive dialogue and by negotiation with all actors in the region. All the relevant resolutions of the Security Council must also be observed.* Belgium calls on all stakeholders to exercise restraint. Undermining the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action will not put us in a better position to discuss regional issues, nor will it provide us with a solution to the proliferation risks. Our priority as members of the Security Council should therefore be to preserve the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and to make it work. *
