Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I congratulate
Equatorial Guinea on its very productive presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and I thank
you, Sir, for organizing today's open debate, which
is of the utmost importance to Africa, as it should be
to the Security Council. I also thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, African Union High Representative for
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020, and Mr. Vasu
Gounden, Founder and Executive Director of the
African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of
Disputes, for their valuable and informative briefings.

At the outset, Rwanda associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Benin on
behalf of the Group of African States.

The theme of this debate involves one of the
African Union's aspirations under Agenda 2063 - a
peaceful and secure Africa. Africa's quest is to build a
secure and peaceful environment that is conducive to
social and economic development for the benefit of all
Africans. Silencing the guns in Africa is an ambitious
yet achievable goal that can be reached by taking
integrated approaches that extend across the nexus
of peace and security, governance and development.
Success in meeting that goal will require greater policy
coherence and political commitment from all of us to
implement the available mechanisms and tools.

The African Union Master Road Map of Practical
Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 is an
important framework that, once implemented, will
contribute to an Africa free of violent conflicts. The
recent positive developments arising from conflict
resolution in the Horn of Africa and the recent
peace agreements in South Sudan and the Central
African Republic are important contributions to
silencing the guns in Africa, even though the latter
agreements have yet to be translated into the voluntary
disarmament of armed groups under inclusive national
security institutions.

Rwanda's contribution to today's debate will focus
mainly on conflict prevention and resolution, security
sector reform, peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
albeit very briefly.

Preventive diplomacy and mediation are integral
parts of conflict resolution and prevention. It is true that
progress has been made in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts on the continent. In many
instances conflicts escalate or re-erupt as a result of
weak or less resilient institutions and non-inclusive
governance systems, which are not capable of taking
over the management ofpeace once it has been achieved.

We need to focus our efforts and actions on
the structural causes of conflict with the aim of
strengthening the institutions and social mechanisms
of States and communities, assisting affected States to
develop more robust and inclusive institutions that can
address the causes of conflict and prevent future ones.

Strengthening our efforts and strategies related
to demobilization disarmament and reintegration is
one such strategy that can significantly contribute to
silencing the guns in Africa. That is our own experience
as a country that has successfully reintegrated
more than 70,000 former combatants who operated
mainly - and some still operate - in the eastern part
ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, causing chaos
and insecurity for local populations.

Our recommendation therefore is that demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration (DDR) need to be
carried out at all stages of conflict resolution and post-
conflict peacebuilding. Central to successful DDR is
effective support for former combatants to reintegrate
into civilian life. DDR is and should be perceived to be
part and parcel of the political process to consolidate
peace and stability.

Lastly, the illicit proliferation and possession of
small arms and light weapons in Africa, including
in countries on Security Council arms embargoes
and sanctions lists, help perpetuate armed conflict
on the continent. More effective monitoring of the
implementation of arms embargoes will certainly
contribute to creating an environment that is more
conducive to conflict resolution.

The guns cannot be silenced nor can peace be
sustained without development, inclusive governance
and inclusive and effective institutions, as has
been underlined by many speakers before me. The
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union
remains the most effective way to prevent conflict and
build lasting peace.

