Mr. Seruhere (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank you, Madam, for convening this meeting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and Under-
Secretary-General John Holmes and High
Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem Pillay
for their briefings. We wish Mr. Holmes every success
in his new endeavours.

We associate ourselves with the statement of
Uganda in the spirit of the East African Community
and the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in
the Great Lakes Region, both of which are keenly
focused on protecting civilians in armed conflicts.

The United Republic of Tanzania is profoundly
committed to the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. We consider the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts to be a fundamental human right and
critical to the legitimacy and credibility of any United
Nations peacekeeping mission. This subject has been
on the United Nations agenda for over 10 years ever
since the Security Council got engaged in the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. We commend
the Council for the achievements made so far in that
regard, especially with the adoption of resolutions
1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000) and, most recently,
resolution 1894 (2009).

Across the globe, we have seen violence and
mass atrocities against helpless civilians who had
hitherto placed all hope and trust for their protection in
the United Nations, but in several cases never got it, as
was witnessed in the Rwandan genocide of 1994, in the
case of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1995, and in the
present Somalia, to mention but a few. In that regard
and especially in conflict situations, it is and should be
an absolute requirement for all actors and
stakeholders- from the State to civil society, from
belligerents to humanitarian organizations and from
armed personnel to unarmed partisans - to work with
the United Nations in the protection of civilians. No
one should be allowed to shirk the responsibility to
protect civilians in armed conflict, but since the United
Nations was created and entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, it bears perhaps the greatest
responsibility.

Armed conflicts and terrorism not only violate
universal freedoms, but also cause insecurity to human
society and instability to States. Above all, they retard
the advancement of human civilizations and undermine
the various initiatives for bringing prosperity through
the United Nations and country partnerships. The
United Nations and the international community cannot
assist countries in attaining the Millennium
Development Goals when armed conflicts and
terrorism strike at will.

Only yesterday, the sovereign of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, reminded the United

Nations community that since the United Nations was
created, prosperity and changes in human and social
behaviour, as well as advances in technology, have
arisen because the people wanted them. Well, they still
want them. The Queen asked the United Nations to
take leadership, not only to fight terrorism and climate
change but also with more enthusiasm, inspiration and
greater determination to bring peace, security, stability
and prosperity to all of us. The protection of civilians
in armed conflicts is indispensable if that is to happen.

The United Nations remains the lead agent for
civilian protection and change, so the Security Council
must provide the catalyst on a continuous basis with
commitment and impartiality. In the same vein, donor
nations and the international community must not shy
away from their responsibility to support the
attainment of global peace, security and prosperity
through the protection of civilians, who are the
producers of real wealth. In so doing, regional and
subregional organizations and non-State actors should
be brought on board to participate as stakeholders.

Recent United Nations-sponsored studies have
shown that not all peacekeeping missions include the
component of civilian protection in their mandates.
However, that is very crucial if confidence-building
measures are to succeed and if civilians are to be
effectively involved in post-conflict reconstruction
activities.

In that regard, two imperatives emerge. First,
mandates for peacekeeping missions have to be
reassessed with a view to including a mandatory
provision to protect civilians and to spelling out
benchmarks for its fulfilment. Secondly, as a rule of
thumb and a matter of principle, the planning of
missions by the Secretariat should, from its inception,
involve troop-contributing countries and, where
necessary, other actors and stakeholders to specifically
cater for the protection of civilians, taking into
consideration their interests and strategies, but without
violating the sovereign rights of host nations.

