Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Belgium for scheduling this briefing on the important issue of nuclear non-proliferation - one of the crucial pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). My thanks also go to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas; the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu; and the President-designate of the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT, His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen, for their excellent and informative briefings on the state of preparations for the Review Conference in April. Indeed, in April the 2020 NPT Review Conference will be held, following the previous Conference in 2015, which ended in disagreement. This year's Conference will allow us to take stock of the progress made over the past five years in the implementation of all objectives of the Treaty relating to its three pillars: disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technology. My delegation is therefore pleased to participate in a constructive spirit in this briefing on a subject that is of great concern to the international community. The non-proliferation of nuclear weapons has been a contentious issue for decades in the light of its impact on global security. The Security Council has an enormous responsibility in that regard. That is another reason why the Niger, a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board of Governors, welcomes this meeting. It is important to note that, since its entry into force on 5 March 1970, the non-proliferation Treaty has made it possible to considerably reduce the proliferation of nuclear weapons and progress towards disarmament goals while promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. Statistics on the gains made clearly demonstrate the strategic importance of the NPT as an essential instrument for international stability. However, despite the positive results, there remain grey areas when it comes to the Treaty's implementation. The violations we have witnessed pose a serious threat to world peace and therefore demand the increased vigilance of the international community. My delegation strongly denounces and condemns those violations and is outraged by the growing efforts in recent years to update nuclear arsenals, which still pose a nuclear threat to the world, which aspires to greater peace and justice. Cooperation among States parties is an important element of the implementation of the NPT and must be strengthened if we are to reach the critical consensus it requires. The Niger was deeply concerned about the lack of consensus emerging from the second session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference, which posed a real obstacle to the achievement of the NPT objectives. In that regard, my delegation calls for the strict compliance of States parties with their international obligations. These States stand to gain from this instrument of peace. My delegation calls on all States to work harder to consolidate and sustain the implementation of the NPT, which is the cornerstone of the international security architecture. By ratifying the NPT on 9 October 1992, the Niger demonstrated its commitment to the Treaty's objectives. We welcome the fact that the African continent is today a nuclear-weapon-free zone thanks to the signing of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, which amply shows Africa's consensus to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons. Further, the Treaty insists on the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. On the eve of the tenth NPT Review Conference, to be held this year, the Niger reaffirms its commitment to the implementation ofthe NPT and to multilateral treaties aimed at eliminating or preventing the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons at a time when the emergence of actors promoting terrorism is already threatening the peace and security of several States. That is why the Niger once again calls on the nuclear Powers to show greater responsibility in assuming their international commitments in the area of arms control and disarmament in order to spare humankind the anguish of a new nuclear disaster. The Niger welcomes the eminently positive verification and control role of the IAEA within the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. All States must therefore support its efforts. We must do all we can to preserve the credibility, impartiality and neutrality of the Agency. In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the work of the next NPT review conference will be crowned with the greatest success.
