The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now proceed to the election of one member
of the International Court of Justice, in accordance with
Article 13 of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice, to fill the seat that has become vacant following
the resignation of Judge Hisashi Owada as a member of
the Court, effective on 7 June 2018.

I draw the attention of the Council to document
S/2018/488, which contains the name of the candidate
nominated by national groups: Mr. Yuji Iwasawa
(Japan).

I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter addressed to me by the Legal
Counsel, dated 20 June 2018, informing me, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, that after the established
deadline for nominating candidates, namely, 16 May
2018, the national groups of Slovenia and Paraguay
submitted additional nominations to the Secretariat. I
should like to draw the Council's attention to the fact
that those nominations relate to the candidate already
nominated by other national groups and whose name
therefore already appears in document S/2018/488.
The Legal Counsel recommended that, in accordance
with established practice, I inform Council members
orally on the day of the election about the decision of
the aforementioned national groups. I am also informed
that the Legal Counsel made a similar recommendation
to the President of the General Assembly.

The nomination of the aforementioned national
groups is as follows: for Mr. Yuji Iwasawa, Slovenia
and Paraguay.

The Security Council has before it a memorandum
by the Secretary-General, contained in document
S/2018/487, describing the present composition of the
Court and setting out the procedure to be followed in
the conduct of the election. I should like to remind
the Council that under Article 10, paragraph 1, of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes both in the General Assembly
and in the Security Council shall be considered
as elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is
eight votes.

If, in the first ballot in either the General Assembly
or the Security Council, the candidate does not receive
an absolute majority, then pursuant to rule 61 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
a second ballot will be held. Balloting will continue in
the same meeting until the candidate has obtained the
absolute majority of votes.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When
we proceed to the vote, members of the Council will
receive a ballot containing the name of the candidate.
No withdrawal will be accepted once the ballot papers
have been distributed. However, it will be possible to
withdraw between ballots.

Members of the Council will be requested to place
an "X" in the box next to the name of the candidate if
they wish to vote for the candidate. If the members do
not wish to vote for this candidate, they should leave
the box blank. Only the candidate whose name appears
on the ballot is eligible for election. Therefore, votes
may be cast only for the candidate whose name appears
on the ballot papers.

I should like to inform Council members that,
in accordance with established practice, the ballot
papers in the Security Council will not be counted
until it has been verified that the ballot papers in the
General Assembly have also been collected. The
Council will remain in session pending the receipt of
that information.

Only when a candidate has obtained the required
majority of votes in the Security Council shall I
communicate the result to the President of the General
Assembly, and I shall request the Council to remain
in session, pending the receipt from the President of
the General Assembly of the result of the voting in
the Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to select
two delegations to serve as tellers.

The names of the delegations of France and Sweden
have been drawn. I request each of them to appoint one
of their members to serve as teller.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Baikari
(France) and Mrs. Anderberg (Sweden) acted
as tellers.

The President (spoke in Russian): May I take it that
the Council is now ready to proceed with the election of
a member of the International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

I am informed that the General Assembly is now
ready to proceed with the voting process.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in the
box next to the name of the candidate, if they wish to
vote for the candidate.

***


The President (spoke in Russian): I take it that all
the members of the Council have now voted and I ask
the Conference Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<>l<>l=


The President (spoke in Russian): All the ballot
papers have been collected. I should like to remind
Council members that in accordance with the established
practice, the ballots will not be counted until it has been
verified that the ballot papers in the General Assembly
have also been collected. The Council will remain in
session pending the receipt of that information.

>l<>l<>l=


The President (spoke in Russian): I have now been
informed that the ballot papers have been collected in
the General Assembly.

The counting of the ballots in the Security Council
will now begin. The tellers will now count the ballots.
As per practice, there will be two independent countings
of the ballots, one by each teller. I should like to remind
Council members that in accordance with established
practice, I shall wait for the General Assembly to
complete its count before I announce the results of
the voting in the Security Council. The Council will
remain in session.

*>l<>l<


The President (spoke in Russian): The result of the
voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Yuji Iwasawa 15

Accordingly, the candidate, Mr. Yuji Iwasawa,
received the required majority of votes in the Security
Council. I have communicated the result of the vote to
the President of the General Assembly in writing.

I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have just received from the President of the
General Assembly the following letter:

(spoke in English)

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
97th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing a member
of the International Court of Justice, Mr. Yuji
Iwasawa obtained an absolute majority of votes in
the General Assembly."

(spoke in Russian)

As the candidate, Mr. Yuji Iwasawa, received the
required majority both in the Security Council and the
General Assembly, he is therefore duly elected as a
member of the International Court of Justice for a term
beginning today, 22 June 2018, until 5 February 2021.
I should like to congratulate him and wish him every
success in the high office to which he has been elected.

On behalf of the Council, I would like to thank the
tellers for their assistance in the conduct of the elections.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at I] am.

