Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
you here today, Sir, and to commend the presidency's
leadership. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock for his comprehensive but once
again alarming update.

Like many around this table, we share a sense
of urgency on this issue, especially following the
adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), which we adopted
unanimously a month ago. Unfortunately, we have to
recognize that it has not been implemented in the first
30 days since its adoption. We are meeting again when
there has been no substantial change on the ground and
the fighting is far from over. The military offensive in
Syria continues and the human suffering is growing
as a result. Any action, even against terrorists, cannot
justify attacks on innocent civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including health facilities. That must
stop, and the parties to the conflict must strictly
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. Accountability for serious violations
is a requirement under international law and central to
achieving sustainable peace in Syria.

As indicated in the last report ofthe United Nations-
mandated Commission of Inquiry, there is a need for
the international community to take a broader view of
accountability and to take urgent steps to ensure that
the needs of Syrian conflict victims for justice and
accountability are met both immediately and in the long
term. We call upon all parties to alleviate the suffering of
the civilians, including children, by granting them free
and safe access to humanitarian assistance, including
voluntary medical evacuation, which should be strictly
overseen by the United Nations and the implementing
partners in order to ensure the voluntary character of
the process.

While discussing evacuations, let me underline that
people must have the right to return and to a safe location
for settlement. Any evacuation negotiations should also
include civilians. Humanitarian aid convoys to eastern
Ghouta must continue for those who choose to stay.

We would like to stress that all actors should use
their full influence to immediately improve conditions
on the ground. We urgently call for the cessation
of hostilities in the whole of Syria. Attacks against
civilians, civilian property and medical facilities must
stop in order to alleviate the humanitarian suffering of
the Syrian people.

Some small positive steps have taken place, such
as a larger number of humanitarian convoys reaching
the besieged areas in March, especially when compared
to previous months, when humanitarian access was
almost completely blocked. That improvement shows
that it is possible to make progress, although much more
is needed. In that context, we call on Russia, Iran and
Turkey - as the European Union did, and as the High
Representatives did through their respective ministers
after the Foreign Affairs Council of the European
Union in February - to fulfil their obligations and
responsibilities as Astana guarantors.

It is also important to note that the cessation of
hostilities may also provide a chance for the peace talks
under the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva
to gain momentum so that a political solution may
finally be reached. Once again, let me underline that
we should seek to reach an intra-Syrian framework
political agreement, in line with Council resolution
2254 (2015). In that connection, we strongly believe
that the conclusions of the Congress of Syrian
National Dialogue in Sochi could and should be used
to advance the Geneva process, especially with regard
to the creation of a constitutional committee by United
Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura,

In conclusion, let me stress the necessity of
maintaining the unity of the Council on the question of
the full implementation of the humanitarian resolution
across Syria. The civilian population ofSyria has already
suffered too much. The adoption of the resolution was
just the beginning of the process. We call on all with
influence on the ground to take the necessary steps to
ensure that the fighting stops, the Syrian people are
protected and, finally, our joint humanitarian access
and necessary medical evacuations continue.

