The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Cuba, Egypt, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Malaysia,
Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 20 July 2010
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which has been issued as document
S/2010/391 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Wednesday, 21 July 2010, on the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

It is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 16 July 2010 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, in which he requests to be
invited, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, to participate in the consideration of
the item on the Council's agenda. If I hear no objection,
I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe. I now give the floor to
Mr. Pascoe.


