The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Bahrain, Cuba, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Sudan and Yemen in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite these
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Downer
(Australia), Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain), Mr. Rodriguez
Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Shah (India), Mr. Velayati
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Madadha (Jordan),
Mr. Muntasser (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Abdulla
(Oman), Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Taha
(Sudan), Mr. Al-Shara (Syrian Arab Republic) and
Mr. Al-Eryany (Yemen) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Members of the Council that I have
received a letter dated 27 September 1996 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request to be invited to participate in
the debate on the situation in the occupied Arab
territories, under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure of the Security Council."

On previous occasions the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Ibra Deguene Ka.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The President (interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter dated 27 September 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Guinea to the United Nations, which
reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Engin A. Ansay,
Permanent Observer of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference to the United Nations,
during the Council's discussion of the item
entitled 'The situation in the occupied Arab

I"

territories .

This letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under symbol S/1996/799. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Engin A. Ansay,

There being no objection, it is so decided.


