Mr. Nacerodien (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate Ukraine on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March 2001. On behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
I would like to express our sincere appreciation to the
President for convening this important discussion in
the Council. It is essential that we as the United
Nations take action to address the pressing situation in
Palestine.

Just last month, the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Terje
Roed Larsen, issued a report on the impact of the
repressive measures on the Palestinian people.
According to Mr. Roed Larsen, the Palestinian
economy has suffered gross domestic product losses of
over $900 million since the onset of the crisis and
labour income losses of over $240 million. Based on
World Bank data, the report estimates that 32 per cent
of the population is now living in poverty - a 50 per
cent increase since the onset of the crisis.

Closures, blockades and restrictions on the
movement of goods, persons and resources imposed by
Israel have resulted in the economic suffocation of the
Palestinian people. By any standards these figures
clearly show the devastating impact that the closures
have on the Palestinian economy, fuelling and
fomenting dangerously high levels of frustration and
violence.

The international community, much less the
Security Council, cannot remain silent whilst a
militarily superior occupying force violates
international humanitarian law. How many more
innocent lives must be lost before we take action?

The Non-Aligned Movement repeats the call on
the Security Council to pass a resolution mandating the
immediate deployment of a force to protect Palestinian
civilians against the impact of the military campaign of
the Israeli armed forces. The United Nations, and in
particular the Security Council as the custodian of
international peace and security, must adopt measures
to bring an immediate end to the suffering of the
Palestinian people.

The recent closure of Palestinian towns by the
Israeli Defence Force, in particular the ongoing
blockade of Ramallah, has further undermined the
already precarious humanitarian situation in the
occupied territories. Palestinian civilians are not only
being prevented from reaching their places of work in
Israel, but they are also being denied access to essential
food and medicine supplies.

Such a heavy-handed and disproportionate
response by Israel constitutes an affront to the most
basic rights of the Palestinian people. These actions
contravene Security Council resolution 1322 (2000),
which calls upon Israel to meticulously abide by its
legal obligations and responsibilities under the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. As members of this
Council well know, the Fourth Geneva Convention
expressly prohibits the collective punishment of a
civilian population. The Non-Aligned Movement
therefore reiterates its call on Israel to act with restraint
and to meticulously abide by its legal obligations with
respect to the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
The Conference of High Contracting Parties of
the Fourth Geneva Convention held in Geneva in July
1999 stated its readiness to reconvene should the need
arise. The High Contracting Parties had, in common
article 1, agreed to "undertake to respect and ensure
respect for the present Convention in all
circumstances". Clearly the time has come for the High
Contracting Parties to meet urgently on the situation in
Palestine.

The Non-Aligned Movement has long affirmed
that the question of Palestine constitutes the nucleus of
the Middle East conflict. The achievement of the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and to an independent State with East
Jerusalem as its capital is pivotal to the achievement of
a sustained and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

The Movement believes that peaceful negotiation
is the only means of ensuring lasting peace, security
and stability in the region. We urge the parties to take
the required steps to ensure the cessation of hostilities,
to restore calm and to adopt measures to re-establish
mutual trust. It is only then that an atmosphere
conducive to the resumption of negotiations can be
created.

We firmly believe that the condition of land for
peace is essential if meaningful progress in the peace
process is to be attained. For a durable, just and
comprehensive peace, negotiation towards final status
issues has to be in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international legitimacy.

Once more the Non-Aligned Movement wishes to
repeat our firm belief that it remains the permanent
responsibility of the United Nations to stay fully
engaged in the Palestinian question until a definitive
solution is achieved.

