Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings and for the continued efforts of their teams. I also thank Ms. King for her comments. The United States is troubled that the implementation of the Riyadh Agreement has been slow. We call on the Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional Council to promptly implement the agreement, and we welcome continuing Saudi facilitation of that process. We are dismayed about the ongoing escalation between the Houthis and the Saudi-led coalition and the potential loss of progress towards a political solution it portends. We urge the parties to exercise restraint and abandon the path of escalation, as it looked like they might just a few weeks ago. The United States is also concerned about the Houthis' purported ban on the new Yemeni rial notes in Houthi-controlled areas, which will have a devastating impact on the exchange rate and the overall Yemeni economy. That measure serves only to harm ordinary Yemenis, and the Houthis should resort reverse it. Turning to sanctions, the report released last week by the Yemen Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) (S/2020/70) contains a number of findings with serious regional implications. The Panel concluded that the Houthis did not carry out the 14 September attacks against Saudi oil facilities. Furthermore, the Secretary-General noted in his report on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) that the unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) used in the attack contained components consistent with known Iranian UAVs. There is only one reasonable conclusion that can be drawn from those findings: Iran launched the attacks on Aramco facilities from Iranian territory. Iran also continues to undermine the prospects for a political solution in Yemen. Just last week, the United States Navy interdicted 358 Iranian-made missiles and other weapons on their way to the Houthis. We have made that evidence available to the United Nations and other international partners. While all of us around the table call for a return to talks, Iran shows its true colours by continuing to send advanced weapons to the Houthis, in violation of the Council's arms embargo. The United States is also extremely concerned about mounting Houthi interference with the work of aid partners in northern Yemen, which limits the ability of the United Nations and other humanitarian organizations to deliver assistance to the most vulnerable Yemenis. Houthi actions, including the imposition of 2 or 3 per cent per project levy amount to a flagrant rejection of a principled humanitarian response. For any who would point to reports that the Houthis have agreed to rescind the project levy, they should know that the Houthis have made clear to those on the ground that they expect funding, in some manner, from the non-governmental organizations (NGOs).The United States applauds the efforts of the United Nations and other humanitarian organizations to keep vulnerable Yemenis alive in that restrictive environment. However, we understand that Houthi interference now prevents the guarantee of assistance delivery in the areas they control. In the light of those entirely avoidable circumstances, donors are faced with the difficult dilemma of how to continue delivering aid while remaining responsive to taxpayers. We may be forced to consider suspending or reducing our assistance in northern Yemen as early as March, unless undue Houthi interference ceases immediately and access to vulnerable populations improves. We continue to ask the Houthis to take steps towards ensuring minimum conditions for principled humanitarian operations. They include lifting access restrictions, eliminating illegitimate levies on aid projects, allowing unimpeded the assessment and oversight of projects, approving backlogged agreements with NGOs and implementing biometric registration. The United States stands by the efforts of the United Nations and other aid agencies to provide humanitarian assistance based on the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. To the Houthis, we repeat our appeal from last month. All Yemenis in need deserve life-saving assistance. They must not make it impossible for us to continue providing aid in the areas they control. The conditions for doing so are clear. In addition, we reiterate our call for the Houthis to allow the United Nations to board, inspect and maintain the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which experts assess poses a serious threat of creating a major spill. In their quest to extract benefit from the situation, the Houthis block United Nations efforts to assess and remedy the danger, while risking an environmental disaster that would quickly become an economic and humanitarian catastrophe. If that occurs, the Houthis alone will be to blame. On a positive note, the United States is appreciative that the United Nations has been able to conduct two medical air-bridge flights, transporting 31 critically ill Yemenis to Jordan. We thank Jordan for its role in helping those vulnerable people receive care. Such life-saving measures are essential and should continue with the helpful support of Jordan and other regional partners. We also welcomed the 16 February announcement that the parties have agreed on a plan to complete the first official large-scale exchange of prisoners since the beginning of the conflict. We encourage them to expeditiously complete the remaining steps that will lead to the exchange. We hope that those developments will bring the parties one step closer to resolving the conflict. In conclusion, today we renew our call for leaders in Yemen to de-escalate hostilities. That is the only way to end the suffering and destruction that have plagued Yemen for far too long.
