Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
country is pleased with this new opportunity to hold
a dialogue and interact with United Nations Force
Commanders from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia. This opportunity is
a continuation of a good practice, one that allows us to
move forward in our thinking on more effective and
better management of peacekeeping operations and
how to better use the resources available. We would like
to thank Mr. Ladsous and the three Force Commanders
for their respective briefings and for having shared with
us their thinking and their perspectives based on their
experience on the ground.

Peacekeeping operations today represent, as my
colleagues have said, one of the most important and
valuable tools available for collective United Nations
action for peacekeeping and international security,
and they allow us to save millions of lives. In recent
years, multidimensional peacekeeping operations have
encountered increasing challenges. Faced with that fact,
it is clear that adaptation is necessary in order to ensure
that the capacity of peacekeeping operations is able to
respond to the increasingly complex tasks mandated
to them by the Council, and so that they can function
more effectively in the political, security and climatic
environments where they are called on to deploy.

The format of meetings like today's enables us to
better understand realities on the ground and to see the
point of view of those who are permanently in touch
with those realities and whose job it is to carry out
the mandates that we discuss and that are adopted by
the Council. It is important to have their perceptions
on how to make peacekeeping operations as effective
and efficient as possible. The three Force Commanders
and Mr. Ladsous raised three very pertinent points
today concerning training, new technologies and
inter-mission cooperation. My delegation would like to
comment specifically on those three points.

First, the issue of training is extremely important
and a crucial factor in the successful conduct of every
mission. We believe it is helpful to draw on the expertise
of the major troop contributors, who have accumulated
considerable experience during their service in
multiple peacekeeping operations. In that context,
the effectiveness of cooperation between emerging
contributing countries and those that possess know-
how and expertise has been widely demonstrated. It is
time to make that practice routine.

Turning now to inter-mission cooperation, my
country has always supported this approach, with its
proven usefulness on the ground whether in a crisis or
when a new peacekeeping operation is being set up.
Inter-mission cooperation also has many advantages in
dealing with optimizing resources and filling logistical
gaps in crisis situations. Indeed, it has demonstrated
its effectiveness in the past few years, particularly
in the Mano River area, between the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, as we were able to see during the
Security Council's visit to West Africa.

Our beliefin the growing usefulness of that approach
encouraged us during Morocco's presidency of the
Council in December to organize a debate specifically
on the subject (see S/PV.6886). That debate enabled us
to highlight the potential of this type of cooperation
and identify the difficulties to be overcome. It also
emerged that this tool should not be seen as a lasting
solution to a number of the structural problems that
undermine the effectiveness of peacekeeping. It also
underlined the importance of supplying all the various
United Nations missions with the human, logistical and
technical means they need to carry out their respective
tasks adequately.

The subject of the use of new technology in
peacekeeping operations deserves greater reflection.
Yesterday, we heard Mr. Ladsous and Ms. Ameerah
Haq's discussion (see S/PV.6985) of the new security
and logistical challenges facing the forthcoming United
Nations mission in Mali, owing to climatic conditions
that require innovative approaches and the use of
new technologies to ensure peacekeeping operations
do not deplete the water table. However, it was
explained that some technologies do not work, owing
to extreme temperatures requiring the use of more
basic communication methods. All of which shows
how important it is to continue reflecting on how to use
those new technologies, and to arrive at a consensus
on the subject at the level of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations in order to clarify every
aspect of their use.

The success of peacekeeping operations rests
on crucial interdependent factors such as realistic
mandates, triangular cooperation between the
Secretariat, the troop-contributing countries and
the executive department in planning both the
implementation of those mandates and genuine exit
strategies along with measures ensuring sustainable
development. Morocco stresses again the importance
of full respect for peacekeeping operations mandates
and the basic principles that govern them - that is, the
consent of the parties, the non-use of force except in
legitimate self-defence and impartiality.

Finally, Morocco is a traditional contributor to

United Nations peacekeeping operations in terms of
troops but also of training and humanitarian assistance.
We therefore remain committed to our peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions. In conclusion, I would
like to pay tribute once again to all the men and women
who have paid with their lives for their dedication to
the cause of peace, while calling on the United Nations
to continue to strengthen the measures that will ensure
greater security for its peacekeeping troops.
