Mr. Powell (United States): Mr. President, let me
begin by expressing my thanks to you, to the Secretary-
General and to all of my colleagues for your
expressions of solidarity and your condolences on this
tragic incident of this morning. The reports that I have
so far suggest preliminarily that it is an accident, and
let us hope that turns out to be the case, even though it
is nonetheless a tragic event for those who lost loved
ones. The majority of those aboard were Dominicans
on their way back to the Dominican Republic. So, a
special note to our Dominican friends here at the
United Nations on this loss of life.

I also want to express my thanks to Jamaica and
Ukraine for their leadership in convening this session.
Since this is my first appearance before the Security
Council in this Chamber as Secretary of State of the
United States of America, I am sure you will
understand that it is a particular treat and an honour,
Sir, to have Jamaica in the chair as President.

Mr. President, fellow Ministers, friends and allies
in the coalition against terrorism, action is needed, and
action is needed now. Two months ago yesterday,
citizens from many of the nations represented in this
room were victims of savage attacks by terrorists here
in New York. All of your delegations saw and felt the
results of that violence, the wreckage that still smolders
less than two miles from this Chamber. Yesterday at the
site President Bush, joined by Secretary-General
Annan and the President of the General Assembly,
Foreign Minister Han, commemorated the loss of over
500 of your citizens and the thousands of other
innocents who lost their lives on that day.

Those who seek to define terrorism need look no
further. No one can defend such heartless acts against
innocent people. This is not about a clash of
civilizations or religions. It was an attack on
civilization and religion themselves. This is what
terrorism means.

Now let me share with the Council what the
United States is doing about it and what we hope others
will do. The United States is taking the fight against
terrorism directly to the terrorists and to their
supporters. We have declared war on all terrorist
organizations with a global reach. As President Bush
made clear to the General Assembly, because these
organizations are global, we need the support of all of
our partners in the international community.
Specifically, we need the help of police forces,
intelligence services and banking systems around the
world to isolate and eradicate our common enemies
wherever they may hide.

The United States is grateful that so many nations
and so many international organizations have
responded so quickly and so forcefully. The American
people were heartened by worldwide solidarity after
the attacks. The swift action taken by this body and by
the General Assembly on 12 September made it clear
that the perpetrators and supporters of terrorism will be
held accountable. The Security Council took a critical
step forward by its adoption of resolution 1373 (2001)
a little over two weeks after the attacks. Resolution
1373 (2001) is a mandate to change fundamentally how
the international community responds to terrorism. It
requires us to cooperate to target terrorists' ability to
solicit and move funds, to find safe haven, to acquire
weapons and to move across international borders.

For many, implementation will involve
complicated and difficult challenges to their financial
and legal systems, changes to the established ways of
doing things, changes aimed at choking off the funding
and weaponry that sustain these terrorist groups,
changes in the way we cooperate to find and bring
terrorists to justice and to safeguard borders. The
Security Council has already got off to an excellent
start by setting up a Committee under able
chairmanship to make the call for concerted action a
reality. States are starting to work together to cut off
the financial resources that are the oxygen of terrorist
groups. We have already seen Council members
support the immediate freezing of the assets of over
120 persons and entities that the United States
identified to the United Nations Afghan sanctions
Committee. The Council is well situated to coordinate
specialized training and assistance to help countries
deal with rapid financial flows and regulatory
loopholes. To be effective, resolution 1373 (2001)
demands a new resolve. As President Bush said, its
obligations are urgent and binding. States must now
work together, both bilaterally and multilaterally.

But the war on terrorism starts within each of our
respective, sovereign borders. It will be fought with
increased support for democracy programmes, judicial
reform, conflict resolution, poverty alleviation,
economic reform and health and education
programmes. All of these together deny the reasons for
terrorists to exist or to find safe havens within those
borders.

The United States stands ready to provide
technical assistance, ranging from aviation security to
financial tracking measures and law enforcement. We
welcome initiatives by others in these fields, and we
are ready at any time to exchange information about
terrorism and to cooperate in other ways to combat the
common enemy and the common threats that we all
face.

There is more. We must consider the integrity of
international transmission systems, such as the mail
system. We must consider the essential nature of the
Internet when telephones and mail fail. A few weeks
ago, such subjects might have elicited little attention.
Today, we can understand that inaction can have grave
consequences. In each of these areas, there are
important roles for the United Nations and for each of
our countries to play. We are grateful for the help of the
many that have joined in the fight. We believe that out
of this great tragedy, a new, common purpose has
arisen.

No greater threat to international peace and
security exists in the world today. And through this
body, we have established and are establishing the tools
to build a more robust defence. It is time now to put
those tools to work.

