Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to welcome once again Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Special Representative of the
European Union, and to thank him for his briefing,
which we followed with great interest. I should also
like to warmly welcome the presence today of
Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I support the statement to be made shortly by the
Permanent Representative of Austria on behalf of the
European Union. For my part, I should like to make a
few comments.

First, I reaffirm France's full support for
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling's efforts, his priorities and the
objectives he has set through his work programme.
This is an important year for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
marked by the general elections to be held in October,
the negotiation of a stabilization and association
agreement with the European Union and institutional
reform. The priorities of the High Representative are
ours as well. In that regard, we are pleased that he is
making the improvement of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
economic prospects one of his priorities. Indeed, the
country's economic recovery is a prerequisite for
development and for improvements in the lives of
Bosnian citizens.

Secondly, I wish to emphasize our support for
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling's role as coordinator of the
international community's activities. That is essential
to maintain a consistent and harmonious approach.
With regard to the gradual phasing out of the mandate
of the High Representative and its replacement by that
of the Special Representative of the European Union,
we look forward with great interest to the proposals he
will be making in June.

Concerning the strengthening of the ties between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union, we
are pleased that the negotiations to conclude a
stabilization and association agreement are taking
place in good conditions, the Bosnian authorities
prepared well for them. We encourage them to continue
that progress so that the pace of the negotiations does
not slow. In that regard, I wish to recall the importance
of full cooperation on the part of the States in the
region with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

From that perspective, the completion of the
ongoing reforms is also essential; the general elections
to be held in October must not lead to a slowing of
their implementation. We welcome the agreement
reached among Bosnia and Herzegovina's seven main
political parties on initial constitutional reforms; this is
a step in the right direction because it will help to
strengthen the central Government and promote better
governance. We welcome the role played by the United
States in that outcome.

Thus, it is now essential that the constitutional
amendments - which have been agreed upon in
principle - be adopted on schedule so that they can be
implemented before the October elections. We also
encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue with
police reform and reform of the media and public
administration.

In the area of the police, we deem it important to
resolve the dispute concerning the decertification of
Bosnian police officers. Here we are prepared to
support any solution on which Mr. Schwarz-Schilling
could agree with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.

I should like in conclusion to extend my best
wishes to Mr. Schwarz-Schilling and to Mr. Terzic' in
their efforts to advance the reform process. We have
provided Bosnia and Herzegovina military, financial
and humanitarian support over the past 10 years, and
we will continue to stand side by side with that country
in the years to come.

