Ms. Amos: The Secretary-General's latest report
(S/20l3/689) on the protection ofcivilians takes stock of
the current, very bleak state of affairs in this area of work
and also provides an update on progress in responding
to the five core challenges. It makes recommendations
for strengthening protection, addressing new weapon
technologies, explosive weapons use in populated
areas, casualty recording, non-State armed groups,
peacekeeping operations, humanitarian access and
accountability.

In today's briefing, I will focus my remarks on
the general deterioration in the protection of civilians
in the past year, the impact of key developments in
peacekeeping operations on the issue and the pressing
need to strengthen the protection of civilians from the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas.

I regret to inform the Council that, despite the
extensive human rights and humanitarian law that
has been put in place and the widespread availability
of social media, which is now used to track atrocities
against civilians, civilians continue to be killed, injured
and maimed in conflict by targeted or indiscriminate
attacks on a regular basis. They are arbitrarily detained,
tortured, raped or forcibly recruited. They are displaced
to an uncertain fate, often with no or only limited access
to basic necessities.

The recent examples of Syria, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan bear that out, with parties
to conflict failing, sometimes deliberately, to respect
and protect civilians pursuant to their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law.
In many respects, we seem to be going backwards as
international exhortations, including from the Council,
go unheeded.

In Syria, civilians have been subjected to brutal
violence for almost three years, and there appears to
be no end in sight. We all hope that the current talks in
Geneva will deliver a positive result. As the violence
intensifies and the situation on the ground becomes
more complicated, people are becoming even more
desperate. There are reports and allegations of the
systematic targeting of communities with specific
religious affiliations. And the use of siege as a weapon
of war is particularly heinous - the deliberate denial
of humanitarian assistance to people in desperate need.
As a world community, we had all hoped that we had
moved beyond that, and yet we are witnessing it in
Syria every day. There are 250,000 people in areas of
the country that are besieged. They cannot leave, and
we cannot get aid in.

The recent and desperately needed humanitarian
pause in Homs has enabled United Nations and Syrian
Arab Red Crescent workers to evacuate more than 1,000
civilians and to deliver some food and medicines to
people in the Old City. It was a heroic effort, as people
waiting to leave and humanitarian workers trying to get
aid in were being deliberately targeted. We will learn
the lessons from that operation and seek to replicate it

in other parts of the country.

Atrocities continue in the Central African
Republic, including against those fleeing violence.
There are 100,000 people seeking refuge at the
airport, and thousands have fled into the bush. The
conflict is complex, and all communities are affected
by the violence. I am gravely concerned by reports of
reprisals against the minority Muslim community. In
many towns, Muslim groups are currently isolated and
threatened by anti-Balaka forces, and tens of thousands
have already left the country for Chad or Cameroon.
Many local religious leaders are doing all they can to
bring communities together, but the trust has gone.

In South Sudan, thousands of lives were saved
when the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
allowed people into its bases after violence erupted on
15 December. Nearly 75,000 people are still receiving
protection and assistance in eight United Nations bases,
crowded together in unsustainable conditions and too
fearful to return to homes and communities, which have
been razed to the ground. However, the majority of the
displaced, 85 per cent of them, are in open areas where
access is difficult and insecure. We continue to receive
reports of ongoing clashes, despite the cessation of
hostilities agreement, leading to further displacements.
People are exposed to physical and sexual violence,
the destruction of their property, separation from their
families and psychosocial trauma.

In all those situations and in many others,
humanitarian workers face significant challenges as
they seek to protect and assist those in need. That is often
done at great personal risk, as we saw four days ago in
Horns. They, too, must be protected and respected by
parties to conflict. In 2013, 120 humanitarian workers
were reported killed, 105 injured and 113 kidnapped.

Let me now turn to peacekeeping operations.

Mandating peacekeeping missions to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence
remains among the most significant actions taken by the
Council to enhance protection, and it has undoubtedly
saved lives. In many countries, we are constantly asking
our peacekeepers to do more, as their numbers are not
necessarily commensurate with the task at hand. We
have seen that in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo,
South Sudan and elsewhere. But we also recognize that
the implementation of a robust protection mandate by
peacekeepers can lead to tensions for missions and
humanitarian actors. We have sought to address some
of those challenges. But there are three specific areas
where our continued engagement is essential.

First, ensuring effective coordination between
missions and humanitarian actors is essential. We all
know that there needs to be a clear distinction between
humanitarian action and a mission's political and
military objectives, so as to maintain the centrality
of the principles underpinning humanitarian work.
It is important that the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors are, and are seen to be, neutral,
impartial and independent. However, that is not always
easy to achieve in volatile, fast-moving conflict
situations, where communities look to the United
Nations for protection but their leaders cite the partiality
of the United Nations in support of one side or another,
thereby increasing risks to humanitarian workers and
limiting their access to people in need.

Secondly, many of the tasks undertaken by
peacekeepers to protect civilians rely on their
impartiality. But peacekeepers are also sometimes
expected to use force. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has peacekeeping and peace-enforcement
troops under the same command. It may be the only
way in which they can protect civilians, but we must
remain mindful that, if that impartiality is called into
question - in particular if the mission is perceived
to have become a party to the conflict - its close
proximity to civilians, including in pursuit of its
protection activities, could place civilians at increased
risk of attack at the same time.

Thirdly, it is important that the civilian
contribution to implementing the protection mandate
is not overshadowed by a focus on the military role
and the physical protection of civilians. The work of
human rights, the protection of women and children
and security-sector reform staff is just as essential for
ensuring protection in the long term. Along with the
protection cluster, their work also helps to guide the
military component in its approach to the protection of
civilians.

Let me now turn to the protection of civilians
from the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. As is apparent in Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq and
Somalia, we must do more in that area. According to
the British non-governmental organization Action on
Armed Violence, almost 38,000 people were killed
or injured by explosive weapons worldwide in 2012.
Of those, 78 per cent were civilians. When explosive
weapons were used in populated areas, 91 per cent
of casualties were civilians. Last week, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan reported a
14 per cent increase in civilian casualties in 2013, as
compared to the previous year. The indiscriminate use
of improvised explosive devices by anti-Government
elements increased in 2013 and remained the leading
cause of civilian casualties.

In addition to being killed or injured, civilians are
also displaced, often for long periods and in precarious
conditions. In Syria, 6.5 million people are internally
displaced, and 2.5 million have fled the country. Many
of those displaced have fled fighting characterized
by the devastating and continuing use of explosive
weapons in populated areas - all despite the Council's
calls for the removal of heavy weapons from population
centres.

In the Sudanese states of Blue Nile and South
Kordofan, aerial bombardment of civilian areas by
Sudanese forces and shelling both by Sudanese forces
and by the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North
continue to result in death, injury and displacement.

Explosive weapons can result in horrific injuries
requiring emergency and specialist medical treatment,
rehabilitation and psychosocial support services. But
often that treatment and support is unavailable, in
part because health facilities have been damaged or
destroyed. The International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), from which the Council will hear later,
reports that explosive weapons are the leading cause of
damage to health-care facilities in armed conflicts.

Explosive-weapon use in populated areas results
in damage to, or the destruction of, housing and other
infrastructure, such as schools. Approximately one
third of the housing stock in Syria has been destroyed
by the fighting, while nearly one fifth of the schools are
either damaged or being used as shelters.

Livelihoods are also devastated as land and
other means of production are rendered unusable as
the result of explosive remnants of war, which will
continue to pose a threat to civilians until they are
removed. Damage to the agricultural sector during
hostilities between Israel and Palestinian armed groups
in Gaza from 14 to 21 November 2012 is estimated
at $20 million. Moreover, explosive remnants of war
remain buried in farmland and in the rubble of damaged
buildings, posing a threat to people and those working
on rubble-removal and reconstruction.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly called on
parties to conflict to avoid the use of explosive weapons
with wide-area effects in populated areas. He has asked
the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs
to continue working with Member States, United Nations
colleagues, the ICRC and civil society to strengthen
the protection of civilians against such weapons. We
will work to promote Member States' recognition of
the humanitarian impact of explosive-weapon use in
populated areas and their commitment to avoid or limit
such use in the future, including by building on good
practice in that area. I hope that all Member States will
engage in those efforts.

While our humanitarian and peacekeeping work
saves lives and can enhance the safety and security
of people affected by conflict, it remains the primary
responsibility of the parties to conflict to respect and
protect civilians and spare them from the effects of
hostilities.

Until such time as parties act accordingly, and
until such time as they are persuaded or coerced
into complying with the law - including by the
Council - or held accountable for their failures, the
lack of sustained protection for civilians will continue
to give little cause for optimism, but considerable cause
for despair, outrage and shame.

