Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I am
setting aside my speech and will just make one or two
extempore remarks. First of all, I applaud your initiative,
because you have hit on the first thing we can do and are
doing, which is to give this subject profile. Our thanks go
to Vice-President Gore for doing that in spades. It needs
profile, because not all African Governments are even
acknowledging that they have got a problem. Let us
applaud those who are - such as Uganda and Senegal for
actually starting efficient programmes on AIDS, and several
other countries whose leaders are now beginning to
acknowledge that something needs to be done.
Mozambique, Kenya, Swaziland, Botswana, Zimbabwe and
Namibia are all clearly beginning to do that; but there are
many others that are not. I think they need to report this
meeting and our interest in this subject, as a security
subject, to begin to get behaviour to change, as the
Ugandan Minister told us so clearly.

We ourselves, I think, are adding to the de-
stigmatization of AIDS by having this meeting. But it has
got to be taken up by Africans. The fact is that the
prevalence of AIDS in Africa is a symbol of the
comparative failure of development, security and education
in Africa. That is an African failure, and it is an
international failure. It is not just one or the other. It is the
failure of both Africans and non-Africans. We have got to
inspire a different approach.

The second thing that is needed, apart from profile, is
resources. I think there is nothing that has been said today
in detail that is more important than the American
announcement on resources, but let us all put in our own
bit where we have done something. Last January, the
United Kingdom started a £100 million programme over a
three-year period on global AIDS. My Prime Minister
announced that £23 million of that would go to Africa last
month. Let us see what this money is going to be spent on.
It is going to be spent in the following way: £40 million
worth to research a vaccine; £7.5 million for a regional
AIDS initiative focused on prevention activities with the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), in
southern Africa, and more than £1 million going to train
volunteers to go out into African countries and spread the
message.

We have a £35 million health programme with
Malawi that is focusing on sexual and reproductive health
assistance programmes, and many other detailed
programmes with individual countries, including the
distribution of condoms. These programmes are beginning
to attack the actual problem we are facing.

Mr. President, now I want to ask you a question:
how are we going to follow this up? It is all very well to
produce rhetoric, but, as I said earlier, we have done the
main work of today in the fact of having this meeting,
and rhetoric is not going to help. The Security Council is
only one element of this. I hope that before your month
is over, you will have organized a systematic cooperation
between the Security Council and other organs of the
United Nations that takes this subject forward. Otherwise,
we will stop with the words that we produced today.

Secondly, the United Nations - and the Secretary-
General must lead here - must have a system and a
structure for cooperation with other international
institutions and with Governments - and, as people have
said, with civil society. How is that going to happen? For
a start, I have mentioned one or two things that the
United Kingdom is doing. Is there going to be a register
or a clearing house of what programmes are being done,
in which countries, to what end? Otherwise, we will start
duplicating, or we will leave great gaps in countries that
desperately need help. So can we have a register or a
clearing house that exemplifies the coordination that we
are now all calling for?

Thirdly, we need leadership on this. That leadership
has got to come partly from the United Nations, from the
Secretary-General and from the Security Council, from
the Economic and Social Council, from the World Health
Organization, from the World Bank and others. The Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) can
perhaps bring this together. The United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) can play its part.

The UNAIDS analysis of where we have got to with
the AIDS catastrophe in Africa was an excellent piece of
work. No further analysis is needed today. Where is this
leading? And what kind of role is the Security Council
going to play?

 

What I think we need has already been said; but let us
say it again. It is five things: political will - that means
also profile; resources; capacity on the ground so that
programmes are well led and get to the points that are
necessary with expertise; partnership and coordination; and
research - we have got to have a vaccine.

Every developed country should be able to say
publicly what money it is putting into an AIDS
programme - and an AIDS programme in Africa. And
then we might be getting somewhere.

