Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
duties of President of the Council, and wish you, and the
entire French delegation, every success in that post. We
express our gratitude to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, Ambassador Elaraby, for the work
carried out by him and the Egyptian delegation last month.

It also gives me sincere pleasure to thank the head of
the Angolan Government delegation, General Carneiro,
Vice-Minister without Portfolio, for his comprehensive
statement. As one of the troika of observer nations of the
Angolan settlement process, the Russian Federation is
keenly interested in the successful advancement of the
peace process and the speedy establishment in that country
of lasting peace and stability, and is sparing no effort to
attain those goals. Resolving the years-long conflict in
Angola would not merely be a great boon for that friendly
country and other countries in southern Africa, but would
be a major success story for the peace-keeping activities of
the United Nations and the international community as a
whole.

We are pleased to note that the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol has recently been proceeding at a faster
pace. The completion of the talks on military questions has
opened the way to the establishment of a unified armed
force. Agreement has been reached on the creation by the
middle of August of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation. Several important steps have been taken to
consolidate the peace process, including the quartering of
the rapid reaction police, the continuation of the withdrawal
of troops to defensive positions, and the start of the
operation to disarm the civilian population. Progress has
been made in the area of demining and ensuring freedom
of circulation of people and goods, and the level of
hostile propaganda has dropped. At the same time, we are
concerned that the implementation of key elements of the
peace process is still very much behind schedule. Again,
we must say that the primary responsibility for this lies
with UNITA.

Recently, under pressure from the international
community, UNITA has taken certain positive steps,
notably by bringing the overall number of its servicemen
registered in the quartering areas to 53,000. Nevertheless,
the commitments it undertook in this area have not been
fully met. We agree with the conclusion of the Secretary-
General's report, that until UNITA quarters all of its
troops and hands over to UNAVEM. III all of its
weapons, including heavy weapons, the quartering cannot
be deemed complete. A component of this process must
be the quartering of the so-called police forces set up by
UNITA in several regions in violation of the Lusaka
Protocol.

It is also important for the leadership of UNITA
immediately to comply with the agreements to return the
generals assigned to them to the Angolan Armed Forces,
ensure that UNITA Members of Parliament take their
seats in the National Assembly, and take steps speedily to
incorporate its designated representatives into the work of
the country's State administration at various levels. Of
great importance is a constructive solution to the question
of the post of the Vice-President of the country.

The coming weeks will be decisive for the fate of
the peace process as a whole, as important decisions of a
military and political nature are taken. In this regard, we
feel it is appropriate that the international community not
relax its justified, targeted and carefully measured
pressure on the participants in the settlement, encouraging
them scrupulously to abide by the Lusaka Protocol.

It is important that this policy be combined with
purposeful support of the peace process, including
material assistance for the implementation of the
painstakingly planned and phased demobilization of
former combatants and their integration into civilian life.
Very active support is also necessary in establishing
greater trust between the parties. We have high hopes for
the meeting scheduled for early August between President
dos Santos and the leader of UNITA, Mr. Savimbi.

The Russian delegation feels that the draft resolution
on Angola before the Council today is adequate to the
tasks of this stage of the Angolan settlement. We believe

 

that the Security Council's new resolution will send a
serious signal to the participants in the settlement, primarily
UNITA, to show good faith in fulfilling the obligations they
have assumed. The Russian delegation, together with other
members of the Security Council, will vote in favour of this
draft resolution.

