Mr. Holmes: Mr. President, may I take this
opportunity to thank all the representatives around the
table for their supportive and constructive comments. I
hope their tributes to the comprehensive and detailed
nature of my report were not simply indirect criticisms
of its length.

I also think that it would not be too optimistic to
say that there does seem to be virtual unanimity around
the table about the analysis of the situation and what
we need to do about it in the cases of both Somalia and
Uganda. I find that very encouraging, in particular in
the case of Somalia. That support was, I think,
genuinely unanimous about the need for genuine
political dialogue and reconciliation as the best way of
tackling the humanitarian problems as well as the
problems of the country as a whole. There was support
for full deployment of the African Union Mission in
Somalia. Also, there was agreement on the severity and
size of the humanitarian crisis we now face,
particularly with the size of the recent displacement
from Mogadishu - which was, I think, the largest
single displacement we have seen in the world so far
this year.

I was also grateful for the support expressed for
the humanitarian relief efforts that are under way,
which so far have not made as much impact as we
would have liked, but we are continuing to step up our
efforts. Also, I note the welcome around the table for
the proposed visit by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the View
that this should take place as soon as possible.

The representative of France raised a question
about what more we could do to improve access for
humanitarian workers in Somalia. Of course, there is
no simple, magic solution to this; it is something that
needs to be tackled in a number of ways. I think that
the most important starting point is the acceptance by
every authority in Somalia - the Government and any
others, local or otherwise, in control of territory or
otherwise active - of respect for the principles of
independence and impartiality of humanitarian action.

The Transitional Federal Government has
established an inter-ministerial committee, headed by
the Minister of Health, to liaise with the humanitarian
community and to deal with humanitarian issues. We
welcome the establishment of that body, and we will
work as closely with it as possible on these issues.

As I suggested in my initial remarks, I think that
it is important that the central Government give
instructions, disseminating them and making them
public, that all concerned should be helping and
facilitating humanitarian work and access as much as
possible. It is clearly important that humanitarian
workers not be harassed at checkpoints or requested to
pay so-called taxes. That is not the case at the moment;
I am afraid that they are being harassed and requested
to pay "taxes". It is not always clear who is in charge
of any particular checkpoint - they are simply armed
groups. But insofar as the central Government has
control over those who are manning checkpoints, it is
important that it pass the message down to those
concerned that that is not an acceptable practice and is
not to be used as a method of checking free movement
by humanitarian workers, who are simply trying to
help those in most desperate need.

Again, I repeat that probably the single biggest
thing that could be done to improve access for
humanitarian workers is a move towards the kind of
inclusive political dialogue and inclusive political
settlement that we have all talked about around the
table this afternoon. There may also be more specific
things that could be done. For example, there are still
some strategic airstrips which are not open for
humanitarian access. For example, the airstrip at
Merca, near Mogadishu, is not yet open. Reopening it
for humanitarian flights in the near future would
facilitate access to particular areas.

In general, I hope that the Council will keep a
close eye on this issue and ensure that whatever
declarations or resolutions it may adopt in future
contain strong appeals for respect for humanitarian
principles by all those concerned and for maximum
facilitation of humanitarian access.

The representative of Italy asked about
cooperation with the Government of Uganda on the
question of transition from immediate relief efforts to
longer-term recovery and development efforts. The
Government has established a joint monitoring
committee aimed precisely at that process, chaired by
the Prime Minister, and it is working with the
international community on the spot to lead moves
from the current emergency humanitarian action plan
to the peace recovery and development plan, which I
mentioned earlier and which is currently being worked
up with the World Bank and others. So, there is good
cooperation with the Government in that area. I think
that, as I said, it is vital that the international
community focus on this and on the question of the
difficult move from immediate relief efforts with an
emergency mindset - if I can put it like that - to
longer-term development efforts, which normally
involve different agencies with different, longer-term
approaches. That is where the problem - the gap in
relief efforts or in development aid - normally arises.
As I said, I very much hope that in the case of Uganda
we can make sure that that gap does not appear and
that there is the seamless transition from relief to
development that we all want to see.

I should also reiterate that, while the international
community has a great responsibility in this regard and
must do all that it can to make sure that that the
transition works properly, there is an enormous
responsibility on the Government of Uganda as well to
provide basic facilities in local areas in terms of health,
education, police and court presence and provision of
water to make sure that people can, once they have
returned home, settle in rapidly and resume their
normal lives in an acceptable fashion.

I would like to respond very briefly to one or two
other points raised around the table. Some members,
including the representative of Slovakia, mentioned,
rightly, the question of children and armed conflict,
both in the case of Somalia and in the case of Uganda.
This is, indeed, a huge problem in Somalia, and all
parties have, I think, been guilty in different ways and
at different times of recruiting and using children - as
internationally defined - as soldiers. It is vital that
that process come to an end. In the case of Uganda, as

various representatives pointed out, children, women
and others are still being held hostage by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). I appeal to it again to release
them now. But at the very least, it is vital that in any
peace settlement that there may be between the LRA
and the Government of Uganda, full provision be made
for the free and voluntary return of those who are still
held by the LRA against their will.

The representative of Indonesia raised the
question of the need for humanitarian relief efforts to
take full account of local national sovereignty and the
encouragement of local national capacity to respond to
crises and disasters, and the need to make sure that
international relief efforts do not, through their
emergency aspects, damage longer-term development
efforts. Let me simply assure him that we are
extremely conscious of all of those points and very
anxious to make sure that we work even harder than we
have in the past to increase national capacity and
reliance on local response as the first answer, because
that is, indeed, a direction that we should be taking in
the future.

Others mentioned - as I did in my statement -
the question of piracy off the coast of Somalia and the
need for the international community to take a stand on
this and make an effort to stop it. Clearly, it is a major
impediment to, for example, the efforts of the World
Food Programme to provide the necessary food aid to
the people of Somalia, because the quickest and most
reliable method of moving large amounts of food is by
sea. I hope that the Council and the international
community will address themselves to deciding what
can be done to address the problem rapidly.

On the question of the Juba peace talks, various
representatives talked about the need to make sure that,
whatever the outcome of the talks may be, they do not
encourage impunity or amnesty and that full account be
taken of the need for justice in the conclusion of the
talks. I think that those points are well taken; there are
being addressed in the context of the talks. That is why
it is so important to find the necessary balance between
the requirements of the lasting peace which the people
of the area are desperately hoping for and the need for
proper justice and accountability at the same time.
Finally I would like to thank those around the
table who have paid tribute to humanitarian workers on
the ground for their work in difficult and dangerous
circumstances. That is much appreciated, and I will
ensure that those comments are passed on to those
concerned. Those tributes are fully deserved,
particularly in places like Somalia and northern
Uganda.

