Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, my delegation would like
to welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera, President of the Central African
Republic. It is a genuine privilege to have him with
us. We believe that his being here is not just testimony
to his commitment to the United Nations, but it also
affords us a unique opportunity to support the efforts
of his Government and his people to find lasting peace
based on social justice.

Bolivia would also like to express its gratitude
for the briefing by Mr. Ladsous, as well as that by
His Excellency Ambassador Omar Hilale, Permanent
Representative of Morocco.

We acknowledge the progress and efforts made
and the challenges faced by the Central African
Republic to achieve peace. We express our support
for the democratically elected Government on the
path charted to find peace in line with its sovereignty
and independence.

Bolivia would like to highlight and commend the
work done by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and its efforts to stabilize the country by
precisely following its mandate, providing humanitarian
assistance, protecting civilians and carrying out
activities to ensure disarmament, peace and security.
We also express our concern about the worsening
violence in recent months, which is mainly affecting
civilians and leading to instability on the political,
social and humanitarian fronts. The country's civilians
are the ones being affected by that violence, and it is
they who must bear the brunt, including humanitarian
consequences such as displacement and being forced to
become refugees.

Bolivia also absolutely rejects the use of force. As a
pacifist country, we urge the armed groups to lay down
their weapons and to set aside sectarian interests of all
types that may impede the dialogue from producing
results so that agreements can be finalized to put an
end to the conflict.

We take note of the African initiative that
encompasses the main outcomes of the Bangui
Forum, which set out compromise terms with regard
to peace, security, justice, reconciliation, governance
and economic reconstruction, in addition to the issues
of combating impunity and ensuring that no social or
political segment is excluded from the dialogue.

Bolivia also urges the international community to
continue to contribute actively to mobilize adequate
resources to help the Central African Republic establish
peace and socialjustice. We believe that the involvement
of regional organizations and the participation of the
African Union and neighbouring countries have been
and will continue to be critical in political initiatives
to achieve peace and muster support for a sustainable
reconciliation process, using African solutions for
African problems. We note the efforts of the President
of the Central African Republic to identify ways to
achieve rapprochement, peace and understanding
through inclusive dialogue and to lay the foundations
for the stability required by its people to enjoy peace
and stability and to agree, through a sovereignty and
independent Central African intitiative, on what is
most beneficial to the country in a context of ofthe law,
justice, reconciliation and peace.
The factors in achieving those objectives being
well defined 4 a democratically elected Government
and the cooperation and involvement of regional
organizations - the only way to resolve problems is
through a negotiated political solution and to clearly
establish Central African ownership of that solution,
with respect for its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.

