Ms. Bird (Australia): Let me, too, acknowledge the
many high-level participants that have come here today,
in particular those from small island developing States
(SIDS), including from our Pacific family, to take
part in this meeting of the Security Council. We, too,
commend New Zealand for convening today's debate.
The participation of a large number of small island
developing States at the ministerial level demonstrates
the importance of this issue and underscores the value
of this Security Council meeting.

To Australia, as an Indo-Pacific country surrounded
by SIDS, the vulnerabilities and challenges facing our
SIDS partners are all too clear. The adoption ofthe SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway at the Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States in September 2014 was a landmark outcome that
recognized that crime and violence, conflict, piracy
and trafficking adversely impact the peace of SIDS. It
underlined the importance of supporting SIDS through
genuine and durable partnerships.

Experience shows us that the international
community can make practical contributions towards
ensuring the peace and prosperity of SIDS. But it
requires an integrated approach to building resilience in
support of peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights. We see several important elements,
including, first, securing global commitments and
cooperation to address challenges faced by SIDS, for
example by acceding to and implementing the global
agreements that are fundamental to improving security
for SIDS, such as the Arms Trade Treaty - as called
for today by many of the Ministers from the Caribbean.

Bold commitments are needed and action to reduce
emissions, including a strong new climate agreement
under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, greater and more effective investment
in adaptation and resilience, and an update to the
Secretary-General's 2009 report on climate change
and its possible security implications (A/64/350),
and the implementation of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 (General Assembly resolution 69/283) and the sustainable development
goals, especially goal 16, on peaceful societies, and
goal 14, on oceans.

Secondly, regional partnerships must be supported
to help SIDS pool resources and build capacity. For
example, the Pacific Transnational Crime Network
has disrupted drugs, firearms and wildlife trafficking
throughout the region. The Pacific Patrol Boat
Programme, involving a network of patrol boats
and Australian naval advisers, has strengthened
surveillance to protect fisheries and tackle crime. This
month, Pacific Foreign Ministers agreed to strengthen
regional disaster response capacities by committing
to a number of concrete actions, including improving
pre-positioning of emergency supplies and investing in
multihazard early warning systems.

Thirdly, capacity-building efforts in support of
peace and security are important. Member States should
continue to build institutional capacity in governance,
law and justice and natural resources management
and resilience, including through scholarships and
technical and vocational training. In addition and
throughout all of that, gender equality is essential to
peace and security. Support for SIDS should actively
engage women.

The Security Council and Member States can also
take practical steps to help SIDS implement Security
Council obligations, including by engaging regional
organizations. For example, Australian support for
the Caribbean Community Regional Coordinator
over the past year has strengthened non-proliferation
and counter-terrorism capacities in the Caribbean.
Australia will continue to work with our neighbours,
the international community and the United Nations
system as a whole, to support the peace and security
of SIDS.

Let me conclude by again thanking New Zealand
for convening this important debate and for the
contributions made today by so many ministers from so
many SIDS capitals. Their experience and contributions
have enriched today's debate.

