Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me join
others in thanking the Nigerian presidency for having
organized today's debate. I warmly welcome your
presence and your leadership of this meeting, Sir, as
well as the presence of Her Excellency Mrs. Preneet
Kaur, Minister of State for External Affairs of India. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for his stimulating briefing.

In recent years, the importance of security sector
reform (SSR) has been increasingly recognized. Such
reforms are not only a key requirement for peace, the
protection of human rights and sustainable
development; they also play a pivotal role in crisis
prevention.

I would like to emphasize three points today.
First, local leadership is crucial to successful security
sector reform, as is national ownership. Only national
actors can ensure that the process is completed and that
key issues are addressed. If the political will needed to
tackle those issues is lacking, all efforts by outside
actors are futile. Security sector reform remains a long-
term, country-specific endeavour that very much
depends on the political commitment of national
authorities. United Nations involvement in national
security sector reform efforts should be based on a
clearly defined strategy with priorities, timelines and
partnerships. Such a division of labour is also vital in
the context of defining exit strategies for peacekeeping
missions.

In many conflict and post-conflict situations on
our agenda, reform of the security sector is an essential
prerequisite for achieving sustainable peace. It is a
long-term transformation process that should aim at
creating security institutions that are efficient,
transparent and democratic. Any such transformation
of security sector structures must be based on respect
for human rights and the rule of law. This is of special
importance in the field of corrections. SSR also has a
crucial role to play when it comes to the prevention of
violence, including sexual violence. In this regard, it is
also indispensable to address impunity, inter alia,
through training national security forces and
strengthening the capacity of the rule of law and justice
institutions. SSR needs to be approached strategically
and holistically.

Secondly, the various elements of reform - the
establishment of civilian control over security forces
and the improvement of operational capabilities and
institutional structures - are interdependent. Only
coordinated security sector reform can be sustainable
and efficient. Delivering as one is key. We therefore
welcome the close coordination on security sector
reform between the Secretariat and its various units,
the United Nations Development Programme and other
United Nations actors. The Peacebuilding Commission
also has a critical role to play. SSR has become an
integral part of peacebuilding strategies for countries
on its agenda.

My third and last point refers to the efforts of the
various international actors who work in support of
security sector reform, especially the European Union
(EU). The United Nations is rarely the sole partner
supporting SSR. The European Security Strategy of
2003 identified security sector reform as an area for
joint EU efforts. European Union support for security
sector reform has been provided within the Common
Security and Defence Policy framework as well as by
the European Commission. In Africa in particular, there
are numerous examples of close cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, such as
the African Union and the European Union. We
encourage such organizations to further broaden their
interaction and exchange of views.

SSR is a complex process in which best practices
should be widely shared in order to enhance efficiency.
The specific needs of women, children, the
disadvantaged and victims of discrimination should
always be included in the design and delivery of
security.

