Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this debate and for your presence
here today. I also thank the Nigerian presidency of the
Security Council for all of its important efforts on the
potentially transformational task of security sector
reform.

In May 2006, four years after Timor-Leste's
independence, as the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste was preparing to withdraw, a crisis in the security
sector sparked a political, security and humanitarian
emergency. This was precipitated by the dismissal of
nearly one-third of the Timorese armed forces, and saw
the police and army fighting each other again in the
streets. The unravelling of law and order left dozens
dead and some 150,000 displaced. In response, at
Timor-Leste's request, Australia, New Zealand and
Portugal deployed an international stabilization force
and, in August 2006, the Council mandated another
peacekeeping mission, the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

We must heed the important lessons of this and
other experiences of relapse regarding the centrality
that security sector reform (SSR) can have to long-term
stability and how SSR should be supported. There is
a very positive ending with Timor-Leste, which has
made great strides in reforming its security sector,
strengthening not just capacities but governance and
civilian oversight. In March 2011, the national police
resumed primary policing responsibilities after a phased
handover from UNMIT. Our understanding of SSR has
evolved - an evolution helped by the experience in
Timor-Leste. From a narrow conception of training and
equipping institutions, we now view SSR as a process
that needs to encompass the security architecture as a
whole and is as much political as technical.

I will focus on three issues. The first if national
ownership. National authorities need to generate and
drive a strategic vision for reform, but SSR is in many
ways about the contract between the security sector and
population, so to be effective it must have community
buy-in. The involvement of civil society, including
women's groups, is vital.

How do we better foster such ownership and
leadership? Second-generation SSR in Timor-Leste is a
good example. The Government took strong leadership,
with UNMIT and international partners - with their
relatively small footprint - in support. There was
significant community outreach. UNMIT's final stages
were guided by a best-practice, jointly agreed transition
plan, including a framework for the final assumption
of functions by Timorese security institutions and the
continuation of support by other partners. Separately,
Australia has signed an innovative New Deal
agreement with the Timorese Government, including
a commitment to supporting Timor-Leste's goals for
security sector reconstruction and reform across crime
prevention and investigation, public safety and border
control.

My second point concerns measuring impact. We
need to find new ways to evaluate the real impact of
SSR, including public confidence in security services.
In Solomon Islands, an innovative tool - the annual
people's survey - covers perceptions of the police
force. This informs planning by the Government and
the Australian-led Regional Assistance Mission to
Solomon Islands on police reform and law and order.

My third point concerns the role of the United
Nations. Many SSR initiatives fail because of a narrow
technical focus, but the United Nations can be uniquely
placed to support a holistic perspective across the
sector. UNMIT, for example, supported Timor-Leste's
comprehensive security sector review, which led to new
legislation for the security and defence sectors.

Security sector reform is most effective when
complemented by the development of strong democratic
institutions. Those are inherently political processes,
and today's draft resolution rightly encourages Special
Representatives and Envoys of the Secretary-General
to focus on security sector reform in their good offices
roles.

Finally, I would like to mention two particular
areas of United Nations engagement on security sector
reform.

First, on sanctions, the Cote d'Ivoire regime, where
lethal equipment importation is linked directly to the
Government's security sector reform process, is one of
the most striking examples of the nexus between arms
embargoes and security sector reform. Embargoes
can assist in stopping flows of weapons that could
reignite Violence and in creating the conditions for the
development of stronger security institutions. Groups
of experts can provide invaluable support - for
example, providing information on threats and illicit
flows, which can help security sector reform design.
We call for deeper cooperation among United Nations
missions, Sanctions Committees and groups of experts
on these issues.

Secondly, on policing reform, the Council has
just authorized one of the largest police components
in any peacekeeping operation, in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. In that country, rebuilding
the shattered security sector is absolutely vital.

When thinking of United Nations police, our
minds often jump to images of formed police units
patrolling. But let me emphasize the important part
police and civilians in United Nations missions can
play in supporting rebuilding and reform of host-State
policing.

Policing reform is often overshadowed by the
higher-profile reform of militaries. Yet police are the
public face of the security sector, the ones the population
should turn to for protection, and the guardians, as
the representative of Luxemburg reminded us this
morning. Building professional, accountable policing
and law enforcement agencies focused on serving the
community - and UNMIT supported such efforts well
in its later years - can be central to restoring the rule
of law and building trust in the authorities. We urge
more Council focus on that, including in mandates.

The United Nations can be uniquely placed to
coordinate international support, but it needs to get
better at coordinating its own policing assistance,
including by harmonizing the various approaches
adopted by different contributors to missions. The
Police Division's new strategic guidance framework
will contribute significantly to standardizing United
Nations policing activities, including capacity-building.

In conclusion, at its core, security sector reform
is about ensuring that a State's institutions serve
and protect its population. Support to security sector
reform is increasingly and rightly an integral part of the
mandates the Council authorizes. It is, effectively, our
exit strategy. When done well, security sector reform's
legacy is the stable and potentially transformational
foundation it provides for long-term peace, security and
development.

