Mr. Valle (Brazil): My delegation is grateful to
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
thank Ambassador Jones Parry for introducing the
report (S/2004/525).

First of all, I take this opportunity to mention
that, in 10 days' time, President Lula da Silva will take
part in a meeting of the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries (CPLP) in Sao Tome and Principe,
and, pursuing our policy of cooperation and solidarity
with Africa, he will also visit Cape Verde and Gabon.
West Africa faces us from the other side of the Atlantic
and is very close to our hearts and minds. We consider
that discussions pertaining to countries of the region
should have the full involvement of all Council
members.

The progress being made in Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Guinea-Bissau is quite impressive. In Cote d'Ivoire
the political deadlock seemed insurmountable. But,
having heard Under-Secretary-General Guehenno's
briefing last Tuesday, we have renewed hope that the
difficult situation in that country will benefit from the
personal involvement of the Secretary-General at Addis
Ababa and the upcoming meeting in Accra. We are also
very pleased by the active engagement of heads of
State of the region and of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in the process of
helping Ivorian parties return to the negotiating table.

In the countries I mentioned, poverty and
unemployment represent a permanent source of
instability and insecurity. We consider that the Council
should be regularly informed about what specific
projects are being carried out by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and by United
Nations country teams in order to foster economic
occupation in the short term - particularly by young
people, who are most likely to fall prey to militias and
armed groups. Although direct responsibility for
development initiatives falls elsewhere within this
Organization, their link to peace and security becomes
ever more evident. That is why the attention devoted
by the Council to development in post-conflict areas
should be increased.

We were also very encouraged by the intention of
ECOWAS to develop a conflict-prevention strategy. It
is our expectation that, in the future, the Council will
be working within a framework not only of
peacekeeping operations, but also of conflict-avoidance
initiatives. Cooperation between ECOWAS and the
United Nations Office for West Africa is very
welcome, and we agree that the Office's needs for
additional resources should be looked into as a matter
of priority. However, it seems that, having been created
as a result of the call of ECOWAS for a regional
approach to threats to peace and security, the Office
could benefit from being located in Abuja.

With regard to Guinea-Bissau, our delegation has
always stressed the importance of joint work done by
the Security Council and by the Economic and Social
Council, and it is a very positive sign that the mission
was undertaken jointly with the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group.

The international community must remain fully
engaged in Guinea-Bissau so that the investment there
will not have been made in vain. The significant
progress made in the political transition should not be
lost through insufficient economic activity. We call
upon the Bretton Woods institutions and development
partners to step up their financial and technical
assistance to that country, with a view to a smooth
process towards sustainable peace, culminating in
presidential elections in March 2005.

A matter of grave concern is the large quantity of
arms held by the population, as the report has
indicated. There are concerns that arms from other
countries in the subregion might be heading to Guinea-
Bissau. We wonder if the high ratio of combatants to
weapons noted in Liberia could mean that arms are
being smuggled out of one country into another, in
particular into countries without a United Nations
military presence, as is the case of Guinea and Guinea-
Bissau. The joint mechanisms for cooperation among
peacekeeping operations in the region should prevent
that from happening. We fully agree with the mission's
recommendation that the Security Council should give
consideration to the issue, and that ECOWAS should
include Guinea-Bissau in its regional policies of
containing proliferation. The fact, stated in the report,
that ECOWAS is planning to strengthen its moratorium
on small arms and to replace it with a mandatory
convention is a welcome development, and the Council
should support that initiative.

On the question of a regional approach to cross-
border problems, it seems from the recommendations
contained in the report that the harmonization of the
various programmes of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement in the
region has not progressed as much as expected. This is
probably the single most important item for
coordination among United Nations peacekeeping
missions in West Africa, and it should be constantly
pursued and should include, as recommended by the
Security Council, countries neighbouring those
emerging from conflict.

Finally, since Brazil chairs the sanctions
Committee for Sierra Leone, I would like to add that
the point raised in paragraph 42 of the report has also
been brought to the attention of Committee members
by the Special Court and that the Committee will be
looking into the matter as soon as next week. The
Committee will give due consideration to the request
for a priori exemption from the travel ban for those
under the custody of the Court should they need urgent
removal for medical treatment.

