The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

My delegation joins others in thanking the Secretary-
General for his report on the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL). There are some positive
aspects to the Secretary-General's report, particularly the
Transitional Government's declaration on the right of
refugees to return in safety; refugee return is an important
step towards normalization. But on the whole, the report
makes sombre reading, and its contents are made more
Vivid for us by what we have heard this morning of
Ambassador Albright's first-hand impressions.

We share the Secretary-General' s concern about cease-
fire violations, particularly the serious incident of fighting
in Tubmanburg at the end of last month. My delegation
deeply regrets the loss of life among the forces of the
Economic Community of West African States Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG). We are outraged that peace-keeping
forces should be subjected to attack and we join the
Secretary-General in extending condolences to the countries
and families of those concerned. We believe that ECOMOG
is right not to deploy further until the factions can provide
concrete guarantees for the safety of their personnel.

The Secretary-General's report of human rights
Violations in Liberia is also deeply worrying. The use of
civilians as human shields is totally unacceptable. My
delegation would be grateful for any information from the
Secretariat on the situation of civilians trapped between
ECOMOG and ULIMO-J forces outside Kle.

It is the responsibility of the Council of State to
ensure that the terms of the Abuja Agreement are adhered
to. There is a danger that the Tubmanburg and similar
incidents, as well as ULIMO-J inter-factional fighting,
will cause the Abuja Agreement to unravel country-wide.
In this respect, we agree with previous speakers that
disarmament and demobilization procedures are crucial.
We hope that UNOMIL and ECOMOG can start this
process as soon as possible. The onus is on the Council
of State and the leaders of all the factions to ensure that
all parties cooperate.

My delegation recognizes that the Abuja timetable
might well slip. In this context, we believe that an
extension of UNOMIL's mandate to 31 May is necessary
and agree with the Secretary-General's recommendations.
But all in Liberia must understand that the continued
commitment of the international community depends on
the willingness of the factions to observe the cease-fire,
disengage, disarm and demobilize; in other words, to
make concrete progress towards peace.

My delegation would also draw the Council's
attention to the scale of arrears built up in UNOMIL, as
well as in peace-keeping more generally. If peace-keeping
operations are to fulfil their mandates they must receive
the necessary funding in full and on time.

With that, I resume my function as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Senegal. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

