Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join Security Council colleagues in
welcoming the President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadie,
and the Foreign Minister of Kosovo, Mr. Skender
Hyseni, to the Council Chamber today, together with
the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier. I would like to express our
thanks to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on recent developments in Kosovo (S/2010/5)
and to commend the important work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in promoting stability and reconciliation in
Kosovo. I would also like to thank Mr. Zannier
personally for his continued leadership and hard work.

The Secretary-General's latest report illustrates
that despite continuing challenges, important progress
is being made in Kosovo. We particularly welcome the
fact that in the Secretary-General's assessment,
violence against minorities and inter-ethnic conflict
have decreased throughout the reporting period.
Kosovo's recently agreed border demarcation with
Macedonia bodes well for regional relations and
stability.

We welcome the continued cooperation that
exists between the United Nations and the European
Union (EU) on Kosovo. This period has seen the EU
successfully consolidate its role as the principal
international organization supporting the development
of the rule of law and governance standards in Kosovo.
Kosovo's future, like that of the wider region, lies in
closer European integration.

We welcome the improved relations between
UNMIK and the Kosovo Government. That
cooperation benefits all Kosovo's citizens and is not
connected to the issue of Kosovo's status.
Nevertheless, it is important to keep UNMIK's
resources under close review and ensure that they are
commensurate with the size of its responsibilities.

The success of November's local elections across
Kosovo's communities has demonstrated the
importance of decentralization to the people of
Kosovo, a desire to take more direct control of their
future. We commend the Kosovo Government for its
commitment to decentralization, which is essential to
delivering effective local governance and a more
stable, multi-ethnic society.

We call on the Kosovo Government and local
authorities to take the necessary steps to further deliver
minority rights throughout Kosovo, particularly in
those municipalities that have still to hold elections.
Kosovo Serbs, and their friends in the international
community, should recognize the practical benefits of
decentralization, in particular the local representation,
which brings funding and facilities for the benefit of all
communities.

To consolidate recent progress, Kosovo must now
work to improve standards in governance and the rule
of law. Serious challenges in the areas of human rights
and judicial independence - which were highlighted
in both the latest Secretary-General's report and the
European Commission progress report - must be
addressed. Kosovo's European perspective, in line with
that of its neighbours, offers clear incentives for further
reform. Kosovo, with the support of the international
community, must strive to match the progress towards
European integration being made by its neighbours.
That is the key to regional stability.

Equally, we welcome Serbia's application for
European Union membership. We encourage Serbia to
devote its full resources to making progress along that
path. Continued disagreement over status issues will
only serve as a distraction from achieving that
important strategic objective.

We strongly support the Secretary-General's call
for both Kosovo and Serbia to put status issues aside
and pursue greater practical cooperation, to the benefit
of all communities, on a wide range of issues such as
cultural heritage, energy, customs and justice.
Constructive cooperation with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) forms an
essential part of that. For example, there has been
unwelcome politicization of the electricity supply in
Kosovo, particularly in the north. Citizens should pay a
fair price for their electricity, and the money should go
to whoever supplies it. There is no need for any politics
in that.

A growing number of United Nations Member
States- now 65 - have recognized Kosovo. That
demonstrates growing international confidence in
Kosovo's statehood. Kosovo has made irreversible
progress since its declaration of independence,
becoming a viable independent State with broad EU
support for European integration. It will be important
that, following the International Court of Justice's
advisory opinion, Kosovo and Serbia focus on making
progress towards reconciliation and regional stability.
We urge all sides to take practical steps towards further
cooperation and to engage flexibly and constructively
to the benefit of the citizens of the whole territory of
Kosovo.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
working with Kosovo, Serbia and the wider
international community in promoting stability,
reconciliation, regional cooperation and economic
progress, so that Kosovo can advance towards an EU
perspective in parallel with its neighbours.

