Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for the way in which their offices have
carried out their duties with the aim of ensuring a good
start for the functioning of the Residual Mechanism.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Rosenthal and
the delegation of Guatemala, whose work in leading the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
considerably facilitated the progress made in this area,
as well as the interaction between the Mechanism
principals and Council members.

My delegation is convinced that the two Tribunals
and the Residual Mechanism will continue to provide
an invaluable service to the cause of international
justice and the maintenance of international peace
and security. We believe that in the past six months in
particular both the presidencies and the Prosecutors'
Offices have worked extremely hard in order to comply
with the Council's decisions on the finalizing of the
responsibilities of the Tribunals's bodies and their rapid
transfer to the Mechanism.

We commend the special diligence that the judges
and the secretariat of the Mechanism have shown in
adopting the regulatory frameworks for their activities,
including the Rules of Procedure and Evidence and
the various practice guidelines, which will provide an
invaluable service to litigants. We also welcome the
fact that the Arusha branch of the Mechanism began
fully functioning on 1 July and that The Hague branch
will do the same on 1 July next year. The reports we
have received show that the former has already taken
the opportunity to act in several areas of its mandate,
including adopting judicial decisions, among which,
in the first decision of its Appeals Chamber, were
measures on protecting witnesses and Victims and
monitoring the carrying out of ICTR sentences.

My delegation believes that, given the developments
experienced in Rwanda, the Mechanism has a
particularly important role to play with regard to the
monitoring of cases remanded to national jurisdictions,
as was the case with the two cases referred to French
courts in November 2007 and to one case referred to
Rwanda, in which we expect the respective criminal
proceedings to start in the next few months.

In resolution 2054 (2012), the Council highlighted
the importance of ensuring proper follow-up on
transferred cases and, above all, that of unfailingly
respecting the rights of the accused being transferred.
We believe that to be very important, particularly if we
take into account the fact that one transfer is still in
process and that in six of the cases where the accused
are still at large it has already been decided to refer
them to Rwandan tribunals. We trust that the States
concerned will continue to provide the Arusha branch
with all the necessary cooperation, since, as President
Meron indicated, the effectiveness of the Mechanism,
as was also the case with the two Tribunals, depends
entirely on States' cooperation. It is also true that
effective cooperation with Member States continues to
be a key factor in enabling the Tribunals to complete
their mandates.

In that regard, it is regrettable that we still have
a situation where several of those accused by the
Rwanda Tribunal have not yet been captured, although
there is relatively precise information regarding their
whereabouts. A particularly worrying situation is that
of the three accused persons still under the jurisdiction
of the Mechanism, who are apparently in the Great
Lakes region and southern Africa. In our View, when it
adopts its next resolution, the Council should reiterate
and reinforce its appeal to all States to cooperate
effectively with the Tribunal, and that in particular
those whose duty it is to take steps to ensure the arrest
and delivery of fugitives to the Tribunal should comply
with their obligations based on the relevant decisions of
the Council. In that context, we echo the appeals made
by the Prosecutor of the Mechanism to various States
in the region to show greater diligence and to cooperate
with his Office in order to resolve this sensitive issue.

The Mechanism for International Criminal
Tribunals is the principal tool through which the
Security Council can continue to channel the will of
the international community to put an end to impunity
for heinous international crimes. We welcome the fact
that the various bodies of the United Nations and the
Mechanism are taking the steps necessary to ensuring
its smooth functioning. We should spare no effort to
continue that work, and to that end we believe it is vital
to respond to the request made by the Presidents of both
Tribunals to extend the judges' terms in order to allow
them to carry out each Tribunal's completion strategy.

