Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
beginning of this week, on Monday, 14 February, the
occupying Power's municipal authorities in Jerusalem
adopted a plan to construct 124 new housing units in
what is known as the Ramat settlement. On 16 January,
the Israeli occupying authorities approved a plan to
construct 1,400 new housing units in what is known as
the Gilo settlement, south of East Jerusalem. And on
9 January, the Israeli occupying authorities demolished
the Shepherd Hotel in occupied Jerusalem - a well-
11-23845
known historic landmark and important part of
Palestinian heritage - in a measure to pave the way to
establishing a settlement of approximately 400 housing
units.

The truth of the matter is that since the Israeli
authorities lifted their settlement moratorium last
September - a moratorium which, as is well known,
was only partial - settlement activity has not returned
to its previous rate. Rather, it has doubled. Some have
estimated that, in the first six weeks since that date,
settlement activity caught up with and surpassed the
work that had been partially halted during the previous
10 months.

It is also worth noting here that, according to a
statement issued on 12 February by the United Nations
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for the
occupied Palestinian territory, the demolition of
Palestinian houses as part of settlement activity in East
Jerusalem and surrounding areas increased by 40 per
cent in 2010.

If this is part of the reality of Israeli settlement
activity, then where are the principles of international
law - the principles and provisions that our
Organization was built to protect and defend, as stated
in the Charter of the United Nations?

Article 49, paragraph 6, of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the protection of civilian
persons in time of war stipulates that "The Occupying
Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its own
civilian population into the territory it occupies". In
resolution 446 (1979), the Security Council reaffirmed
that the Fourth Geneva Convention applied to Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967. It also
determined, in paragraph 1 of that resolution, that

"the policy and practices of Israel in establishing
settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967 have no legal
validity and constitute a serious obstruction to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East".

The Council came to that conclusion dozens of years
ago, and has since reiterated it in many resolutions on
settlement activity.

If anyone still has any doubts as to the illegality
of settlement activity, the July 2004 advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on the wall
concluded that
11-23845
"the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian Territory (including East Jerusalem)
have been established in breach of international
law" (see A/ES-10/273, para. 120).

Part 2, article 8, paragraph 2 (b) of the 1998
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
classifies as a war crime the

"transfer, directly or indirectly, by the Occupying
Power of parts of its own civilian population into
the territory it occupies, or the deportation or
transfer of all or parts of the population of the
occupied territory within or outside this
territory".

In addition, in dozens of resolutions - most
recently in resolution 65/104 - the General Assembly
has reiterated that settlement activity in the Arab
territories occupied in 1967 were illegitimate and an
obstacle to peace. It has also called for an immediate
and complete halt to that activity.

It is worth noting here that the Road Map,
established by the international Quartet and adopted by
the Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003),
compels Israel to freeze "all settlement activity
(including natural growth settlements)" (S/2003/529, annex). It also compels Israel to "immediately
dismantle[...] settlement outposts erected since March
2001".

The Joint Understanding of the 2007 Annapolis
Conference also confirmed the commitment of all
parties to continue to fulfil their respective obligations
under the Road Map until a peace treaty is reached.
That of course includes compelling Israel to freeze all
settlement activities. The Council adopted the contents
of that concluding document in resolution 1850 (2008).

In its statements - the most recent of which was
issued on 7 February - the international Quartet has
continued to call for the implementation of the
provisions of the Road Map, including a halt to
settlement activity.

These are the provisions of international law on
settlements. These are the resolutions of the General
Assembly. These are the resolutions of the Security
Council. This is the legal opinion of the International
Court of Justice. These are the positions of the
international Quartet on Israeli settlement activity.
3

However, these are the same positions and rulings
that Israel has continued to ignore and challenge - to
the point where the number of settlers in Jerusalem and
the West Bank now exceeds 517,000. We have
therefore submitted today's draft resolution on Israeli
settlement activity, which we invite members to vote
on today.

We are proud of the unprecedented number of
States - more than 100 - that have agreed to sponsor
the draft resolution. We would like once again to
express our special thanks to those States. The purpose
of the draft resolution is to have the Security Council
play its required role and choose the side of justice and
righteousness. We therefore hope that the draft
resolution will enjoy unanimous support from the
members of the Council.

We have come to the Council not just because we
believe that our cause is a just one, which it is. We are
also here because we believe in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the Organization's central role in
upholding justice in the world, without which there can
be no international peace and security. We have come
to the Council because, in accordance with Article 24
of the Charter, it is the body to which the Members of
the United Nations have given the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Today we have come to this Council, and we will
continue to return to this Council as long as a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace is not achieved in
our region of the world, and as long as the Arab
Palestinian people are not granted the possibility to enjoy
self-determination and to establish their independent
State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital - for
Jerusalem, 0 Jerusalem, you are the path of those who
have ascended to Heaven, as sings our country, and you
will continue to be the jewel of all cities.

