Mr. Medrek (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express to you, Mr. President, and to
the other members of the Security Council our
appreciation for your immediate response to the request
made by the Group of Arab States to hold an
emergency Council meeting to discuss the dangerous
situation prevailing in the occupied Palestinian
territories as a result of the atrocious acts carried out
by the Israeli occupation forces - acts that have
escalated dangerously during the past few days.

I also wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We express our confidence in your
wisdom and in your ability to skilfully manage the
Council's work. I avail myself of this opportunity also
to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of China, for his efforts during the past
month.

The Security Council is meeting today against the
backdrop of an extremely difficult situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, created by the Israeli
occupation authorities' continued pursuit of their
aggressive practices and their resort to systematic
extrajudicial executions, targeting the political and
national icons of the Palestinian resistance, thereby
creating a situation that threatens the security of the
whole region.

At a time when the international community was
anticipating that the peace process would be resumed
and put back on track, Israel assassinated Sheikh
Ahmed Yassin, along with other Palestinian civilians.
That atrocious act was strongly condemned by the
international community. Immediately after this tragic
event, His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Chairman of
the Jerusalem Committee, sent a message to Mr. Yasser
Arafat, President of the State of Palestine. His Majesty
expressed his strong denunciation of this grave act of
aggression that contravenes all divine principles,
humanitarian values and international agreements.

The Kingdom of Morocco expresses its total
rejection of the dangerous policies pursued by the
Israeli Government in further escalating its military
campaign against defenceless Palestinian civilians,
forging ahead with its policy of systematic executions
targeting the national and political icons of the
Palestinian people, resorting to collective punishment
and destroying the social and economic infrastructure
of Palestine. We also condemn its attempt to build the
separation wall in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Morocco condemns all those practices, which are
flagrant violations of resolutions of international
legitimacy, the norms of international humanitarian
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention, and all
human rights agreements and charters.

The international community has unequivocally
condemned this latest assassination, branding it a
violation of international law and international
agreements. This has already been stated by Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, who stressed that the
assassination of Sheikh Yassin is illegal and that it not
only is contrary to international law, but does not help
the search for a peaceful solution to the Middle East
problem.

The policy pursued by the current Israeli
Government will only lead to a further deterioration of
the situation and will definitely lead to the continuation
of this cycle of violence and counter-violence, thereby
causing more victims, threatening the stability and
security of the whole region and eradicating any
chance for peace.

The Kingdom of Morocco underscores its
denunciation of all acts of violence that target innocent
civilians, regardless of who the perpetrators are,
because it believes that such operations will impede
international efforts aimed at reviving the peace
process.

The Kingdom of Morocco, under the leadership
of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, is convinced of
the need for peace and makes constant efforts to attain
peace; it remains hopeful, despite the difficult
circumstances, that it will be possible to end the
violence in the region. It wishes to stress its conviction
that strengthening peace and resuming negotiations
constitute the only means of achieving a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East through
Israel's withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian
territories and through the building of an independent
Palestinian State, with holy Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions,
particularly Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), and with the
principle of land for peace.

