Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): First of all, I would like
to thank the delegations that have extended their
condolences over the tragic air crash. I wish to join all
of them in extending our deep condolences to our
Afghan brothers over the tragic loss of the Afghan
Minister for Mines and Industry in that crash.

We also wish to thank the three briefers for their
comprehensive presentations. We express our deep
appreciation for the efforts that the international
community is making to bring about reform of the
Afghan security sector.

Pakistan has also made a modest contribution to
that cooperative process of the international
community. We have offered equipment and facilities
for the training of the Afghan army and police, as well
as contributing to the strengthening of Afghanistan's
judicial system and narcotics-control mechanisms. We
have also offered special training in the field of
demining. I am sure it will be of interest to everyone
here to know that only last week Pakistan donated to
the Afghan Government a large quantity of arms,
including 500 MP5A3 sub-machineguns, 180 82-
millimetre mortars, 75 rocket-propelled grenades and
substantial quantities of ammunition for those
weapons. The delivery of those weapons is part of
Pakistan's commitment to support and strengthen the
Afghan central Government and to assist in the raising
of an Afghan national army, as envisioned at the Bonn
Conference. We will continue to support efforts aimed
at reforming the security sector in Afghanistan.

I have a few questions for Ambassador
Nishimura. My first question is whether the design of
Afghanistan's disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process will include measures to
curb the smuggling of arms outside of Afghanistan. We
would also like to hear his views about how the
international community can ensure the full
cooperation of all the factions, big and small, in
participating in the disarmament process. He also
talked about the financial aspects of the DDR
programme. How can it be ensured that this process,
and especially its reintegration aspect, remains
adequately funded?

