Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Speaking as the
representative of Bangladesh, I should like briefly to
highlight the following four points.

First, as to the security situation, its improvement in
Kosovo calls for the urgent deployment of civilian police
personnel in their approved strength. We also believe that
a major component in the improvement of the situation is
stimulating economic activities and reconstruction. When
a large majority of people is busy in economic pursuit,
the security situation will improve concomitantly. We also

 

believe that community-based programmes in various parts
of Kosovo need to be undertaken extensively to achieve the
same objective.

Secondly, as to missing and detained persons,
Bangladesh supported the proposal for appointing a special
envoy for all missing persons and detainees when the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) was discussed in
the Council on 6 March. Now, having personally seen
during our mission in Kosovo the agony of hundreds of
families, we reiterate our very strong support for the
appointment of a special envoy as soon as possible. A
speedy resolution of this important issue is needed for the
improvement of mutual trust and for confidence-building
among the ethnic communities. We strongly feel that this
appointment will greatly contribute to the effective
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

T hirdly, as to the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, the improvement of their situation and
their return hinge upon the perception of an improvement
in the general security situation, a well-functioning judiciary
and the settlement of property issues. This is a major
undertaking of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and a very important one. We
are particularly appreciative of the committed role of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in this regard. We believe that the matter should
receive the Council's close monitoring.
Finally and fourthly, as to the culture of peace,
Bangladesh strongly believes that the foundations of a
sustainable peace and reconciliation in Kosovo are to be
laid by promoting a culture of peace among all, particularly
among the younger generations. Peace education
programmes need to be undertaken widely through the
involvement of civil society.

Let me conclude by thanking all my colleagues for
their gracious and kind words addressed to me in their
interventions this morning.

