Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Under your
impetus, Sir, the Security Council's work in February
was marked by very rich activity on all the subjects on
its agenda, from Africa to the Middle East and Europe.
More sadly, this month was also tragically marked by
the sudden loss of the Permanent Representative of
Russia, Vitaly Churkin, to whom we again pay tribute.

I would like to refer first to the meetings we have
held on crises in Africa.

The consultations of 3 February with the Secretary-
General upon his return from the African Union
Summit in Addis Ababa were a highlight of this month.
They provided an opportunity for an informal and
in-depth exchange with the Secretary-General, who
expressed his willingness to make the strengthening
of the relationship with the African Union a priority.
We share his desire to continue to work better with the
African Union and are committed to continuing this
effort, both with the proposals to be submitted on the
basis of resolution 2320 (2016), as well as with a view to
future joint consultations between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council.

Several country situations in Africa also caught the
attention of the Council this month, In particular, at the
8 February meeting on Cote d'Ivoire (see S/PV.7880),
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of C6te d'lvoire
confirmed that the country continues to consolidate
peace and stability and to make progress in areas
related to national reconciliation and social cohesion.
In that context, the transfer of the responsibilities of
the United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire to the
Ivorian authorities continues, in accordance with the
mission's withdrawal plan. That meeting also recalled
the enduring challenges. As illustrated by the incidents
in January and February within the armed forces,
more efforts are needed to reform of the security
sector. President Ouattara's commitment is particularly
encouraging. In this and other areas, the United Nations
country team will continue to support the authorities'
efforts towards stability and development. We hope
that the international community will provide financial
support for the transition plan presented last fall.

As regards the Central African Republic, we
must remain vigilant. President Touadera and his
Government, with the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and other
partners, are pursuing their efforts on behalf of stability
and reconcilation, but they face armed groups that refuse
to participate in good faith in dialogue and reform, and
that pursue criminal activities. That is unacceptable at a
time when the Central African Republic has the historic
opportunity to move towards long-term stability. In
that context, we welcome MINUSCA's affirmation
of its posture and strengthening of its credibility.
Armed groups must understand that pursuing criminal
activities at the expense of State-building and suffering
imposed on civilians will lead them nowhere .

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Council met last week at our initiative to discuss
the situation in Kasai and the lack of progress in the
implementation of the 31 December political agreement.
Testifying to our shared concern, the members of the
Security Council adopted a press statement (SC/ 12734)
calling on the Congolese Government to immediately
conduct a credible and impartial investigation and
to bring to justice those responsible for the violence.
The statement also calls on the Congolese parties to
implement without delay the agreement of 31 December,
in particular by appointing a Prime Minister. Two
months after the signing of the agreement, it is more
necessary than ever to maintain the good political will
that made the agreement possible if more insecurity is
to be avoided in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The statement also reflects the Council's Willingness
to closely monitor developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and - most importantly f to
take action against Congolese actors Whose statements
or conduct would undermine the proper application of
the agreement and the organization of elections.

At the initiative of the presidency, the activities
of the Council have also been marked by several
European dossiers, starting with the ministerial debate
on European conflicts (see S/PV.7886), as well as the
annual briefing by the chairmanship-in-office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
presented by the Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs
(see S/PV.7887) and, yesterday, the briefing on the
situation in Kosovo (see/SPV.7891). As members know,
France is deeply committed to a resolution of the
crisis in Ukraine, which must include re-establishing
Ukraine's control over the entirety of its internationally
recognized borders, including in Crimea. Along with
our German partners, France remains determined to
pursue its efforts under the Normandy format. Every
result achieved on the ground matters. In our View,
there is today no alternative solution but to support
the implementation of the Minsk agreements, which
is the only way to make progress towards a peaceful
resolution of the conflict.

We are also convinced of the central role on the
ground of the Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
as well as of the need to allow it carry out its mandate
without hindrance. The resumption of fighting in recent
days and the incidents targeting observers should lead
us to step up our engagement on this issue, which the
Security Council must continue to follow Closely.

I should now like to turn to some issues relating
to the Middle East that continue to be of concern to
us. Turning first to Libya, the Council's consultations
on 8 February made it possible to express a solid
convergence of views among members of the Council
with regard to supporting the efforts of Prime
Minister Faiez Mustafa Serraj to make the institutions
established under the Skhirat Agreement more effective
and representative, with heightened positive support
from neighbouring countries and with the full support
of United Nations mediation, which remains central.
We hope that this positive momentum will be pursued
in support of a political solution that is fully inclusive.
We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General and the
Council are fully engaged to that end. France will not
let up in its efforts in that regard.

With regard to the peace process in the Middle East,
the two-State solution has never been so threatened.
The recent announcements by the Government of Israel
concerning the settlement policy - announcing the
construction ofmore than 6,000 newhousing units-and
the adoption by the Knesset of a law retroactively
legalizing previous settlements on Palestinian land
give rise to great concern. France hopes that the next
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) will make it possible to take
stock of the consequences of those announcements to the
contiguity of and accessibility to Palestinian territories.

Lastly, on Syria, after a few weeks' calm following
the signing of the Russian-Turkish agreement on the
ceasefire, the situation on the ground is once again
deteriorating. The regime and the militias that support
it are once again bombing civilian facilities, including
hospitals, in numerous Syrian locales. Terrorist attacks
are also continuing, in particular in Homs three
days ago. More than 1,000 people have died since
22 December. We therefore hope that the monitoring
mechanism developed in Astana will make it possible
to establish full respect for the ceasefire throughout
the whole of the territory, including full, unhindered
access for humanitarian assistance, especially to the 13
areas still under siege by the regime.

It is against that worrying backdrop that the
intra-Syrian negotiations have resumed in Geneva,
under the auspices of the United Nations and including
representatives of the regime and the opposition.
We hope that the Syrian regime will at last accept to
engage in good-faith discussions on the parameters
for the necessary political transition, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).

Another area of major concern with regard to
Syria has to do with the fact that it continues to be
a theatre for the repeated use of chemical weapons
against civilians. To put an end to that, France and the
United Kingdom, along with the United States, have
strenuously endeavoured in recent months to bring the
Council together around a response to those crimes, and
have prepared a draft resolution on which the Council
will soon act. We hope that the members ofthe Security
Council, as they did in the case ofresolution 2118 (2113),
will assume their responsibilities and sanction the
perpetrators of those criminal acts in violation of the
universal prohibition on the use of chemical weapons.

Allow me to conclude by once again commending
you, Mr. President, for the professionalism with which
you have led the work of the Council during the month
of February. I should also like to highlight the ongoing
efforts of the successive presidencies to improve the
working methods of the Council, both in terms of
effectiveness and transparency. In that regard, we
welcome the numerous elements to the press that have
been agreed, which have made it possible for everyone
to better understand the Council's deliberations in
private consultations. We know we can count on the
upcoming British presidency in pursuing that initiative
and making the Council as effective a tool as possible
in the service of peace and stability.

