Mr. Camara (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to convey to you, Sir, my delegation's
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. Given our knowledge and
appreciation of your outstanding personal and
professional qualities, my delegation is confident that
under your guidance, the Security Council, in this first
month of the new millennium, will be able to write a
fresh chapter in its history.
Sir, I wish to welcome your recent initiative to
facilitate greater cooperation between countries that
contribute troops to peacekeeping operations and the
Security Council, so as to enhance the work of the
Council. I wish also to express our appreciation to the
Council for having enabled our delegation to take part
in today's meeting, which is devoted to the
consideration of a situation that affects the equilibrium
ofthe whole of the West African region in general, and
my country in particular.

Indeed, for more than 10 years now, our
subregion has been gripped by a crisis that has
seriously jeopardized peace and security in our
countries. Everyone is aware of the great sufferings
that have afflicted the peoples of Liberia and Sierra
Leone for a decade now. My delegation would wish to
stress in particular the atrocities committed during that
period in the two afflicted countries, the hundreds of
thousands of people forced into exile and the
considerable material damage that has resulted.

Thanks to their determination, the States of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its interposition force, the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group, were able to end the genocide in
Liberia. The return of peace and the holding of free
elections in that country, which allowed those very
parties who were responsible for the genocide to come
into power, have not diminished their belligerence.
They have continued their activities of destabilization
and destruction against other neighbouring States, in
particular Sierra Leone and Guinea.

The involvement and outright support of the
Liberian Government for various rebel movements of
the subregion have been proved beyond a doubt. The
Monrovia authorities are pursuing a policy of
terrorism, thereby violating all of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Organization of
African Unity, ECOWAS and the Mano River Union.

The allegations made by the delegation of Liberia
are unfounded and cannot in any way disguise the
belligerent nature of the Liberian authorities. Everyone
is aware of the support given by Liberia and its
President to the Revolutionary United Front (RUF)
rebels. Liberia and other States of the region are the
main suppliers of weapons to the various rebel groups
operating in Western Africa, in a flagrant and
widespread violation of the arms sanctions imposed by
the Security Council.

The excellent report of the Panel of Experts on
the links between blood diamonds and weapons in
Sierra Leone is very instructive in this regard. We
would like to commend the outstanding work done by
the Panel under its Chairman, Mr. Chowdhury.

My country, the Republic of Guinea, is subject to
rebel attacks led from Monrovia and supported by RUF
rebels. These attacks have resulted in a great number of
deaths, including that of an official of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; significant
material damage; and a genuine humanitarian disaster
involving the displacement of border populations and
the scattering of hundreds of thousands of refugees.

Despite the recent statement of the President of
the Security Council condemning these attacks and
pointing the finger explicitly at Liberia, the incursions
continue. It is absolutely vital to put an end to the
terrorist activities of the Monrovia authorities and to
break the link between Sierra Leone diamonds and the
supply of weapons to rebel movements. This is the
challenge that the Security Council is tackling today.

It is understandable, therefore, why my
delegation welcomes this initiative and hails the
measures contained in the draft resolution before the
Council. We hope that the targeted sanctions that have
been envisaged will send a strong signal to the Liberian
President to end his support for rebel and terrorist
movements.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to encourage
the Council to monitor compliance with, and respect
for, the provisions contained in the draft resolution, as
soon as it is adopted.

