Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings. The war in Yemen must be stopped. We reiterate that the only solution is political. We therefore call on the parties to the conflict to resume talks in coordination with the Special Envoy, to whom France reiterates its full support. The parties must agree on the draft declaration proposed by the Special Envoy. They must also seek a comprehensive political solution without delay, allowing the effective participation of women in that process. The agreement on the exchange of prisoners reached in Montreux at the end of September is a positive step. It now needs to be fully implemented, and we welcome the first flights seen today. Further confidence-building measures should follow soon. In the north, we condemn in the strongest terms the offensive against Ma'rib and the Houthi attacks against Saudi territory. We are also very concerned by the resumption of hostilities in the Al-Hudaydah governorate, in violation of the Stockholm Agreement. Pursuing a military solution will lead nowhere, serving instead only to exacerbate the suffering of the Yemeni people. The Security Council therefore reiterates its clear call for a ceasefire, in line with resolution 2532 (2019). In the south, the Riyadh agreement must be fully and effectively implemented. That must lead to the swift formation of a new Government that includes representatives from the south of Yemen. The Yemeni parties must show a spirit of compromise at this crucial juncture. The humanitarian situation continues deteriorating. Amid worsening food insecurity, the coronavirus disease pandemic and measles and polio epidemics, we must collectively do all we can to tackle the growing humanitarian needs. To that end, it is crucial that all parties guarantee humanitarian access to all persons in need. The protection of civilians, including the protection of humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as the protection of civilian infrastructure, should also remain an absolute priority. Respect for international humanitarian law is an obligation applicable to all. Turning, in conclusion, to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, there is an urgent need to act. We call once again on the Houthis to, without delay, permit access to the tanker for the United Nations-mandated inspection mission, to which France has contributed financially. France will remain fully mobilized and committed to achieving peace in Yemen and de-escalation at the regional level.
