The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the following
countries to participate in this meeting: Albania,
Algeria, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco,
North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates and Uruguay. There being no objection, it is
so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Reena
Ghelani, Director for Operations and Advocacy of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.

Mr. Maurer is joining the meeting via video-
teleconference from Geneva.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I Wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/458, which contains a letter
dated 3 June 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/475, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
that has been sponsored by the countries that appear on
the list that is also before Council members.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Cote d'Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

