Mr. Barbarlic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized the debate on this important topic, with
particular attention to its repercussions in Africa.
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.

The interrelationship between drugs, organized
crime, human trafficking and corruption represents a
universal challenge that endangers the economies,
security and political stability of all countries of the
world. These threats, which do not respect borders,
require each country and the international community
to make additional efforts to enhance multilateral
partnerships and cooperation to properly address this
modern scourge.

Enhanced knowledge of trends is a prerequisite
for effective policymaking and operational responses.
In this context, I would like to underline the
importance of the ratification and implementation of
international legal treaties. Of particular importance is
the need to provide national drug control information
that will enable United Nations treaty-based and
governing bodies to monitor patterns in drug abuse, to
make realistic impact assessments and to develop
global and regional policies to fight illicit drugs and
crime.

On the other hand, technical assistance to
Member States - especially to developing countries
with fragile political and economic situations i is
crucial to strengthening national capacities to create
efficient drug control frameworks, to preventing and
counteracting illicit drug abuse, and to providing
access to drug dependence treatments and creating an
environment favourable to reintegration and alternative
development.
My delegation would like to join those who have
acknowledged the seriousness of this problem and to
point out that, given its nature, it is clear that no single
country acting alone can address this problem
successfully. While building the proper judicial and
police systems in individual countries is of paramount
importance, cooperation at the subregional and
regional level is equally important.

In that sense, we fully support the work of the
Economic Community of West African States in
promoting and fostering regional cooperation in West
Africa aimed at countering drug proliferation.
Although we are discussing the situation in Africa,
similar problems are occurring in other regions as well.

I should also like to use this opportunity to state
that my country has undertaken important legislative,
judicial and structural reforms aimed at strengthening
our national drug control system and fighting illicit
trafficking and related crimes. The Parliamentary
Assembly of my country has also adopted a national
strategy on the supervision of narcotic drugs and the
prevention and suppression of the abuse of narcotic
drugs, and a plan of action for its implementation. I
should also like to stress that we have established close
cooperation with the customs and border-control
services of neighbouring countries and initiated the
conclusion of bilateral agreements on police and
judicial cooperation based on the common
understanding that tackling drug trafficking crimes
requires a regional approach.

We believe that it is crucial to cooperate,
exchange information and experiences, and promote
good practices in confronting this issue. In that regard,
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the joint efforts
undertaken by the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and other relevant United
Nations organs and agencies in tackling the numerous
security risks caused by drug trafficking in many
countries and regions, particularly in Africa. Lessons
learned in one place can often be of great use and help
in another. In that context, the knowledge and expertise
of UNODC are of exceptional value, and Member
States should benefit from them.

In conclusion, I would once again like to reiterate
that this discussion in the Security Council is timely
and very important, and we hope that the results of
today's deliberations will energize the concrete
activities necessary to combat illegal drug trafficking
and related crimes in Africa. Positive results in this
struggle on the African continent will in turn contribute
to global action to build security and justice in the
region.

