Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are happy to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to this Security
Council meeting, and we are grateful to him for his
detailed briefing on the situation in that country. Like
other delegations, we would like to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Brahimi for the major
contribution he has made and for his tireless work to
help the Afghan peace process. The Russian Federation
has supported him and will continue to support him in
his important work. We are also grateful to the
Secretary-General for his report describing the
highlights of the implementation of the Bonn
Agreement on Afghanistan.

From 11 to 19 June the Emergency Loya Jirga
was held in Kabul, and this was certainly a milestone
in Afghanistan's post-war State reconstruction. It was a
real step towards achieving national harmony and
establishing solid institutions of authority and a stable
political regime. The assembly's results strengthened
the policy for re-emergence of an independent and
peaceful Afghanistan, completely removing from its
territory hotbeds of international terrorism, religious
extremism and the threat of drug trafficking.

We have noted that a viable political system is
being established in Afghanistan that is broadly
representative and reflects the multi-ethnic nature of
Afghan society. It also takes account of historical
realities.

It is good that the Loya Jirga elicited enormous
interest among the Afghan society. Nobody remained
indifferent, and for the first time in many years women
played an active part in Afghan political life.

Of course, not everything went smoothly, and this
is mentioned in the Secretary-General's report. There
were virtual ballots on the establishment of the
parliament, on the key personnel in the Government
and on other matters. There was some intimidation, and
some candidates were even killed. At the same time,
one could hardly have expected, after such a protracted
civil war and upheaval in Afghan society, that harmony
would have instantly prevailed.

We think it is absolutely essential that the
Afghans be able to reach a compromise and set up the
framework of a Government that will be able to
continue the policy begun last December on building a
new Afghan society.

The Russian Federation welcomes the election of
Hamid Karzai as the head of the Transitional
Administration. We think it is important to ensure the
unity of the Government he is heading, and for our part
we will do our utmost to help him in this endeavour.
We hope that the Transitional Administration will
continue to implement consistently the Bonn
Agreement and will also do its utmost to ensure that
peace is restored to the country as swiftly as possible
so that the economic and social structures can be
rebuilt.

We share Mr. Brahimi's concern for the need to
strengthen security in Afghanistan. We welcome the
stabilizing role of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) in maintaining law and order in Kabul
according to its mandate. We wish the Turkish
commander of ISAF every success, and we express our
appreciation to the United Kingdom for its leading role
in the initial phase of ISAF's work.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, in the
present circumstances it does not seem possible to
expand ISAF beyond the capital of Afghanistan. It is
evident that in these circumstances it is necessary to
speed up the establishment of an effective Afghan
national army. Foreign forces can play an important
role in the establishment of the Afghan army. We think
it is important to ensure that foreign assistance is not
competitive in nature. Rather, it should carried out
strictly in accordance with the purposes and tasks set
by the international community as enshrined in the
decisions of the Security Council. Also, it must be
ensured that the persons trained actually join national
army units, that they form the core of the army and not
simply leave military service immediately after
completing their training.

In his statement, Special Representative Brahimi
drew attention to the acute humanitarian problem in
Afghanistan and to the inadequacy of the resources
available to the Transitional Administration. In the first
stage of the humanitarian operation to provide
emergency assistance to Afghanistan, Russia provided
over $12 million of assistance. I would highlight the
reopening of the Salang tunnel and the opening of
hospitals and a cinema in Kabul. We intend to increase
our assistance to Afghanistan. We have already
delivered 48 vehicles. Under a contract with the United
Nations, we plan to deliver another 137 vehicles with
sets of spare parts.

Work is under way in cooperation with a number
of countries to deliver food and medicine and to
provide electricity from Tajikistan. We hope that other
countries' contributions will be translated from
numbers into actual assistance.

Russia supports the central role of the United
Nations in a settlement. The Special Representative
should be the coordinator for international programmes
in Afghanistan. At the beginning, a large number of
governmental and non-governmental organizations
were operating in Afghanistan. We think the time has
come for such activities not to proceed piecemeal but
rather to be coordinated with the overall efforts of
Special Representative Brahimi. UNAMA has
important work to do, including the preparation of a
new constitution and the organization and holding of
elections. We trust that the tasks assigned to it by the
Security Council will continue to be successfully
carried out and that lasting peace will be established in
Afghanistan.

