Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by joining those who preceded me in
congratulating and welcoming Ambassador Karen
Pierce, the new Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, and wishing her every success.

I thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing
today. We would like to express our full support for
his work with his team and for the work of the United
Nations regarding the monitoring of developments
related to the issue under consideration.

In his briefing, Mr. Mladenov spoke of the
deteriorating situation in the occupied territories
while Israel, the occupying Power, continues to violate
international law and undermine international efforts
to achieve peace based on a two-State solution. The
fact that Israel is not shouldering its responsibilities at
the international level as the occupying Power - based
on the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention - and that
it does not comply with, and even disregards, United
Nations resolutions demonstrates that Israel does not
heed the decisions of the international community. This
is the main reason behind the humanitarian tragedy
that has befallen the unarmed Palestinian people,
which obviously only fuels tensions in the region. The
Palestinian question is still at the heart of the regional
conflict, so it is essential to focus on this matter rather
than on other issues, regardless of their importance.

We condemn all unilateral Israeli policies, actions
and measures that seek to change the situation on
the ground in order to create a new status quo and
to undermine the two-State solution based on the
1967 borders. Israel, the occupying Power, pursues
its aggressive policies and provocative and unilateral
measures that contravene Security Council resolutions
and international conventions. We remind the Council
of the serious potential consequences of the decision
to transfer of the United States embassy to Jerusalem
on 14 May. That decision is null and void since it is
in explicit contravention of resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).

In violating Security Council resolutions,
particularly 2334 (2016), Israel, the occupying Power,
is maintaining its expansionist, illegal and illegitimate
activities, as Mr. Mladenov noted today. In that regard,
we demand to see a written report on the status of the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). Here in the
Council, we are dealing with an issue of 50 years of
occupation. It is essential, therefore, that we talk about
putting an end to the occupation as a precondition to
any negotiation between the two parties to achieve a
definitive, comprehensive and just solution. Indeed,
partial solutions have produced no results.

Despite the challenges to reaching a two-State
solution, due to the illegal and illegitimate aggressive
practices and settlement policies of the occupying
Power, we still believe that such a solution - based on
a clear timetable, the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative, which ensures the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State along the borders of
4 June 1967 and with East Jerusalem as its capital - is
the only way to achieve security and stability.

We would like to express our profound concern
with regard to the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Gaza,
which is a crisis that has lasted for more than a decade
due to the unjust and oppressive blockade imposed by
the occupying forces of Israel. Mr. Mladenov noted
its serious implications today. The blockade enshrines
Israel's practices and violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. On this point, I
recall the war that was waged by the occupying Power
against Gaza from 28 December 2008 until 18 January
2009, which destroyed a great deal of infrastructure.

We would also like to mention the financial crisis
facing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
which is the worst of its kind since the Agency's
creation in 1949. The crisis has a had negative impact
on the Agency, which plays a pivotal and important
role by providing assistance to approximately 6 million
Palestinian refugees on its rolls. The Agency has
contributed and continues to contribute to stability in
the Middle East. The State of Kuwait reiterates the
need for donors to provide UNRWA with the necessary
funding so that the Agency can continue to provide its
vital services to refugees and perform its humanitarian
activities without politicization. Reducing funding
for UNRWA will lead to a humanitarian disaster and
undermine all its education, health care, infrastructure
and humanitarian assistance programmes. In this
regard, we welcome the initiative of Sweden, Egypt
and Jordan to convene the Extraordinary Ministerial
Conference in Rome on 15 March, at which donor States
pledged some $100 million to mitigate the shortfall in
UNRWA's budget.

In conclusion, when we discuss the topic of the
Middle East in the Security Council, we always focus
on the Palestinian question. However, it is essential
this morning to mention the serious escalation that we
witnessed last night in the missile attack by the Houthis
from Yemeni territory against several cities in Saudi
Arabia, including Riyadh, Khamis Mushait, Najran and
Jazan. These missiles, which indiscriminately targeted
civilian and inhabited areas, were intercepted by the
Saudi air defence forces. However, shrapnel did reach
some inhabited areas, causing one death, numerous
wounded and property damage.

The State of Kuwait condemns and denounces in the
strongest terms this missile attack against the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, which is a violation by the Houthis
of international law and of relevant Security Council
resolutions. It also represents a rejection of peace and
contravenes the determination of the international
community to put an end to the conflict in Yemen, just
as it undermines all opportunities for the international
community to seek peace in the region.

The Security Council must be united in expressing
its clear opposition to these attacks, which threaten
regional peace and security. The State of Kuwait
underscores its full support for the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and for all the actions the Kingdom may take to
maintain its peace and security.

