Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway commends the
initiative of the Jamaican presidency to organize this
follow-up debate on the important topic of conflict
prevention. It is an honour to us that you,
Mr. President, are chairing this meeting. In our view,
the Jamaican delegation is making a great contribution
to the work of the Council.

Norway appreciates the fact that non-members
have been given the opportunity to participate in this
debate. Increased transparency in the working methods
of the Council continues to be a priority issue for
Norway and the other Nordic countries.

"Development is the best form of conflict
prevention." This observation, made by our Secretary-
General, has Norway's full support.

When involved in efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts, the United Nations and the Security Council
need a multifaceted, integrated approach. The ultimate
success of complex United Nations peacekeeping
operations - such as those in East Timor, Sierra Leone
and the Balkans - depends on our ability to ensure
follow-up in the areas of reconstruction, rehabilitation
and longer-term development.

To prevent the re-emergence of violent conflict, it
is necessary for us to stay the course and to remain
focused on the perspective beyond the immediate
violence and humanitarian crisis. We must also remain
focused after the cameras are gone.

The Security Council, of course, bears a
particular responsibility for preventing disputes from
breaking out into violent conflicts in the first place.
Success in solving a conflict is headline news. Success
in preventing conflict gets much less attention, but
prevention, as we all know is much less costly than
cure. Member States must therefore support the
analytical and early-warning capacity of the United
Nations and mobilize political will in the Security
Council so that it can react to situations and play a
positive role at an early stage, before disputes grow
into open and violent conflicts.

Preventive diplomacy is among the important
instruments that may be used even more actively in the
future than they are today. We must strengthen the
conflict-prevention capacity of the Secretary-General,
inter alia, by contributing to the Trust Fund for
Preventive Action.

We must encourage efforts to facilitate peaceful
mediation and dialogue, not only between leaders, but
also through people-to-people cooperation. We must
provide consistent political and material support to
United Nations peacekeeping. History has repeatedly
shown that the presence of United Nations
peacekeepers, including in preventive deployment, can
successfully prevent conflicts from arising or
developing further. Norway will continue to be actively
engaged in peacekeeping. We have, inter alia, offered
to assist in improving the planning capacity of the
Secretariat.

But lasting peace, stability and democracy will be
elusive unless we combat the root causes of conflict.
By promoting economic and social development and
environmental protection, we can hope to prevent
conflicts caused by poverty, inequality and inadequate
access to resources.
The special representatives of the Secretary-
General have a key role in coordinating the work of
relevant United Nations agencies active in the field,
bearing in mind their respective responsibilities for
addressing the wide variety of causes of conflict.

Integration processes are crucial, both to avoid
war and violence and to re-establish peace after armed
conflicts. We have clearly seen that the marginalization
and lack of integration of groups and individuals can
create breeding grounds for violent conflict. In this
regard, the continuous attention of the international
community is needed.

We need a more integrated approach to conflict
prevention. We need to focus the international
community on comprehensive peace-building. The
peace and security activities of the Security Council
cannot take place in isolation from the humanitarian
and development activities of the Economic and Social
Council, and vice versa. More cooperation within the
framework of the respective mandates is needed.

Ensuring sustainable social and economic
development is probably the most challenging part of
conflict prevention and peace-building. Developing
countries cannot be expected to do this alone. Donor
countries must fulfil their moral and political
commitments to development assistance, to debt relief
and to providing the United Nations system with a
solid financial base to implement its mandates for
peace and development.

The members of the Security Council have a
particular responsibility to contribute to the ability and
willingness of the international community to engage
in long-term and comprehensive peace-building efforts,
in addition to those that are related to the peace and
security mandate of the Council.

I can assure you, Sir, that my Government will
continue to be actively engaged in support of United
Nations and Security Council efforts over the broad
spectrum of activities aimed at conflict prevention and
comprehensive peace-building by assisting and
facilitating peace processes at the parties' request; by
contributing to peacekeeping operations with funds and
personnel; by promoting disarmament and combating
the spread of small arms; and by providing
humanitarian and long-term development assistance,
not least to Africa.

Norway remains convinced that there is no
alternative to supporting the United Nations as our
main tool for conflict prevention and the primary role
of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter. We remain committed to continued
cooperation with the Council in these efforts.

