Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me join other
colleagues in heartily congratulating the Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, for the very good work accomplished by
the CTC under his able leadership. His dedication to
the work of the Committee, his drive to push forward
and to realize to the fullest extent possible the agenda
set forth by resolution 1373 (2001), as well as his
personal commitment and effort in bringing home to
Member States as well as to various regional and
subregional organizations the cardinal responsibility of
eradicating terrorism - root and branch - have been
exemplary. It can be said that the outreach programme
that he has undertaken has been one of the most
successful United Nations in-house programmes.

The overwhelming response from Member States
and their cooperation with the CTC at all levels reflect
the serious commitment of each Member State to
address the problem of terrorism. Indeed, we have been
able to develop a broad, comprehensive and, above all,
sustained strategy to combat terrorism.

As a member of the Bureau, I wish to convey my
gratitude to all the other members of the CTC, the
experts, the staff of the Secretariat and the dedicated
staff of the Mission of the United Kingdom responsible
for CTC matters. I also wish to thank the
representatives of all those countries that responded to
the invitation of subcommittee B to discuss the draft
letters in the most transparent and even-handed
manner. The spirit in which our discussions have taken
place has been most cordial and cooperative, and it is
our hope that that spirit will continue to guide relations
between the CTC and Member States.

The dangers of terrorism and of possible attacks
by terrorists are realities that cannot be escaped.
Terrorism has no geographical boundaries. It attacks
indiscriminately and ruthlessly. A terrorist attack, be it
in Kashmir or in the Middle East, does not only have
negative effects in the locality in which it takes taken
place, it has ripple effects that may result in a
conflagration of unprecedented violence throughout the
globe. That is why we cannot stand idly by or be
passive onlookers.

The standards set under various international
conventions and instruments give us hope that
terrorism can be stopped. The far-reaching mandate of
resolution 1373 (2001), if fully implemented and
respected by each State Member of the international
community, will, to a large extent, guarantee
international peace and security and rid the world of
the scourge of terrorism. In order to ensure that we
attain that goal, it is important to address the following
issues in a comprehensive manner.

We will need to look into ways to prevent the
proliferation of future terrorists and terrorist
organizations. We will also need to address the root
causes of terrorism, as well as to explore ways to
enforce rigorous rules and laws, at the domestic,
regional and international level, on issues such as drug
trafficking, money laundering, terrorist financing and
traffic in small arms and light weapons. Lastly, perhaps
the most important issue - which is a matter that the
CTC is clearly focusing on fully - is to give the
necessary assistance in fully implementing resolution
1373 (2001) to those countries that need it.

My delegation supports the appeal made by the
Chairman to those States that have not yet submitted a
report to open a line of communication with the CTC
and to keep the Committee informed of any difficulty
they are facing in the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). Their response is all the more important if
we are to keep up the momentum in the international
alliance against terrorism.

Finally, I would like to reiterate my personal
commitment to the work of the CTC, as well as the
commitment of my Government to fully implement
resolution 1373 (2001).

