Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Iceland, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.

At the outset I would like to thank the Presidents
of both Tribunals, Judge Robinson of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and Judge Byron of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), and the Prosecutors,
Mr. Brammertz and Mr. Jallow, for their briefings on
the implementation of the completion strategies of the
Tribunals.

Preserving the legacy and integrity of the
Tribunals is of the utmost importance to the European
Union. The Tribunals have had a pioneering role in the
fight against impunity and made outstanding
contributions to international criminal law and
international humanitarian law. It is a fact that the
Tribunals will not be able to complete their work
within the dates envisaged in resolutions 1503 (2003)
and 1534 (2004). A number of challenges face both
Tribunals in their work towards completing their
mandates.

The European Union regrets that, despite the
continuing appeals of the international community,
13 accused remain at large. The arrest of the remaining
fugitives is necessary for the completion of the
Tribunals' work. Among those still at large are key
indictees allegedly responsible for the most serious
atrocities, such as Ratko Mladic', Goran Hadzie and
Felicien Kabuga. There have been many commendable
instances of cooperation. However, the European
Union continues to urge all States to cooperate
immediately and unconditionally with both Tribunals,
in full compliance with their obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

As outlined in the current completion strategy
reports, retaining qualified staff and judges remains a
difficult task. We acknowledge the importance of
enabling the Tribunals to complete the proceedings as
soon as possible without compromising due process.
However, we also reiterate the need for the Tribunals to
ensure that they continue to seek efficiencies wherever
possible and that they move to downsize as soon as
possible, in line with the level of trial and other
remaining activities.

We note with appreciation the ICTR's high output
in judgements and newly commenced trials in 2009.
The European takes note of the continuing commitment
to the completion of the mandates of the Tribunals. The
EU also urges the Tribunals to continue to identify
further measures to complete their work in an efficient
and expedient manner.

I will now turn to the work of the ICTY more
specifically. The EU would like to recall that full
cooperation with the ICTY is an essential element of
the enlargement strategy of the European Union. This
includes assisting in strengthening national

jurisdictions through capacity-building, as called for in
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2003). Our
commitment to strengthened cooperation and capacity-
building is demonstrated by the number of EU
members that have concluded agreements with the
Tribunal on the relocation of witnesses, the
enforcement of sentences, the secondment of prison
staff, and the financial and institutional support of the
EU to the Tribunal's capacity-building and outreach
activities.

We note with appreciation the efforts made by
Rwanda to meet the demands regarding the right to a
fair trial. The ongoing strengthening of the Rwandan
legal system and its ability to adjudicate cases from the
ICTR will, we hope, permit the ICTR to transfer such
defendants to the Rwandan courts. These efforts have
been fully supported by the European Union as an
important step towards the fulfilment of the Tribunal's
completion strategy.

The primary responsibility for the prevention,
investigation and prosecution of genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity lies with States. Thus, the
European Union continues to support the capacity-
building activities of both Tribunals, which also
contribute to the enhancement of the rule of law and
regional stability.

The European Union welcomes the work on
residual issues of the Security Council Informal
Working Group on international tribunals, including
identifying functions that need to continue after the
two Tribunals have completed their work. We value the
open and transparent discussions under the Austrian
chairmanship, including by convening an Arria formula
meeting open to all Member States in October.
The European Union stands ready to continue to
work with the Council on finding the most appropriate
solutions to the residual and legacy issues. This
includes addressing questions of a practical nature, as
well as finding solutions to ensure adequate access to
the archives. The archives should foster reconciliation
and memory and contribute to the preservation of the
profound achievements of both Tribunals to secure a
long-term legacy. Existing capabilities should also be
built on and synergies between Tribunals should be
created as part of an overall strengthening of
international criminal justice.

