Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland is very pleased to see
Foreign Minister Azad of Bangladesh presiding over
this important meeting. We welcome him warmly.

May I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Frechette for her thoughtful and comprehensive
introductory statement.

Later in today's debate, Sweden will make a
statement in its capacity as Presidency of the European
Union (EU). Ireland fully associates itself with that
statement.

The report which the Secretary-General has
provided to this Council and to the General Assembly
is a valuable and forward-thinking document which
presents a challenge to the entire United Nations
system and to the Member States. The report makes
clear in human and economic terms the inherent,
indeed self-evident, benefits of conflict prevention, as
well as the corollary: the devastating consequences of
failure to prevent conflict and of tardy reaction to
situations where lives are already in danger or being
lost.

The Secretary-General is correct. We need to
undertake the conceptual leap to thinking in terms of
prevention, to seeing conflict through the prevention
lens. Ireland is glad to have the opportunity to discuss
the Secretary-General's report here today and we look
forward to its consideration by the General Assembly
and the other relevant organs of the United Nations. We
believe that the report should be approached in a
practical manner and with an open mind. We should
not be deflected today into a dispute over the
prerogatives of the United Nations various organs.
Instead we should try to tease out what the Security
Council can do in practical terms to advance the goals
in the Secretary-General's report.

Ireland supports the report's basic premises, its
principles and, in general terms, its 29
recommendations. We would wish to look in particular
at three specific areas: first, the complementary
relationship between conflict prevention and
development; secondly, the important role of regional
organizations; and, thirdly, the need to strengthen
coherence and capacity concerning conflict prevention
in the United Nations system.

First of all, let me take up the complementary
relationship between conflict prevention and
development. An effective conflict prevention strategy
will require a comprehensive and multidimensional
approach that encompasses both short-term
preventative and long-term development aspects. As
the Secretary-General has noted, development
assistance by itself cannot prevent or end conflict, but
it can help to create the underlying conditions for the
development of peaceful, stable and prosperous
societies.

In our view, development cooperation focused on
poverty eradication is the most powerful instrument
that the international community has to address the
long-term root causes of conflict and to promote peace.
The Secretary-General has called for development
assistance to focus on decreasing structural risk factors.
The primary risk factor is poverty. A central issue that
we all need to address is the decline in aid flows to the
poorest countries. We echo the Secretary-General's call
for the donor community to increase aid flows to our
developing country partners. At the Millennium
Summit, the Prime Minister of Ireland, Mr. Bertie
Ahern, committed Ireland to reaching the target of 0.7
per cent of gross national product by 2007. This will
involve a four-fold increase in our development
assistance budget.

If the international community is to be genuine
and serious about conflict prevention, we must be
wholehearted in supporting poverty reduction and
sustainable development. We should not say one thing
in this room and act differently elsewhere. Ireland
would also like to see enhanced coherence between
major donors. We strongly support efforts to strengthen
the partnership between the United Nations system and
other major partners, including the European Union.
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
involvement in helping developing countries prepare
poverty-reduction strategy papers has a key role in
long-term conflict prevention efforts. The United
Nations operational development arm can play a very
significant role in poverty reduction and in helping
partner Governments reach the development targets
agreed at the Millennium Summit.

Successful conflict prevention means that we
must work closely alongside our developing country
partners before, during and after conflict. Prevention
also means preventing the re-emergence of serious
conflict. In that context, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes are increasingly seen as
an essential part of post-conflict resolution. Ireland
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation that
this Council include, as appropriate, a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration component in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and peace-
building operations. It is also important to be aware
that these operations ensure that the development
dimension is built in as a matter of course.

We agree very much with the Secretary-General
that efforts to prevent conflict should promote a broad
range of human rights, including civil and political
rights, as well as economic, social and cultural rights,
and the right to development. Meaningful conflict
prevention strategies must also take account of gender
equality and Ireland strongly endorses the Secretary-
General's call on this Council to give greater attention
to gender perspectives in conflict prevention and
peace-building.

In the second instance, let me address the
important role of regional organizations. Many
conflicts are inseparable from their regional contexts.
Support for regional and subregional actors should
therefore be a central element of conflict prevention.
For example, the development of appropriate
institutional capacities for early warning and conflict
prevention by the Organization of African Unity and,
more recently, the Economic Community of West
African States is warmly welcomed. At the same time,
there is a need for international partners to provide
further assistance and training to enable these and other
organizations to build on their achievements to date.

Ireland supports the development of regional
prevention strategies by the United Nations and its
regional partners, inter alia, through the establishment
of United Nations liaison offices. The regular meetings
between the United Nations and the regional
organizations have considerable potential. The
Secretary-General has recommended that the follow-up
processes to these meetings receive the fullest support.
Ireland agrees with him.

As a member of the European Union, and as a
long-standing contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Ireland sees a growing
synergy between the EU's work and the work of the
United Nations in conflict prevention. The fostering of
a culture of prevention, recommended to us by
Secretary-General Annan, is indeed at the heart of the
EU's approach. The recent European Council in
Gothenburg adopted an EU Programme for the
Prevention of Violent Conflicts. This Programme
accords the EU's highest political priority to improving
effectiveness and coherence in this area.

Ireland joins the Secretary-General in
highlighting the preventive potential of peacekeeping
operations. We have all seen the benefit of preventive
deployment, as well as the cost involved when the
international community either fails to deploy
preventively, or when it withdraws or winds up a
successful ongoing operation.

We believe, in particular, that there is untapped
potential in preventive peacekeeping activities
conducted by civilian police, whose community-
policing approach can play a significant role in
reducing tension and building confidence.

The goal of conflict prevention is an important
consideration in building crisis management-
capabilities in the context of European Security and
Defence Policy (ESDP). Ireland believes that the
Secretary-General's recommendations are fully
consistent with the European Union's programme for
the prevention of violent conflicts, which confirms that
"The development of ESDP has, since the outset, been
intended to strengthen the EU's capacity for action in
the crucial field of conflict prevention".

Thirdly, I would like to stress the need to
strengthen coherence and capacity in the United
Nations system concerning conflict prevention.

The Secretary-General has clearly identified the
need for enhanced coherence in our conflict prevention
efforts. The United Nations has developed important
new tools to improve coherence through the common
country assessment and the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework. These new
instruments help focus the "conflict prevention lens"
by identifying, prioritizing and implementing a
coherent approach to development and conflict
prevention with our development partners at the
country level.

This Council has recognized the important role
played by the resident coordinator system as the United
Nations presence on the ground before, during and
after conflict. This role should be enhanced.

We support the Secretary-General's call for
greater coordination on conflict prevention within the
United Nations system and his call for adequate
resources for the Department of Political Affairs to
carry out its responsibilities as the system focal point
in this area.

The establishment of a new unit to serve as the
secretariat for the Executive Committee on Peace and
Security, as recently proposed by the Secretary-General
elsewhere, would underpin efforts to enhance a
strategic approach by the Organization to conflict
prevention. We support the establishment of this unit,
and we call on all other delegations to demonstrate
their commitment to such a strategic approach by
supporting this proposal.

At the same time, we want to ensure a joined-up
approach in the United Nations, both at Headquarters
and in the field. We must at all levels ensure an entry
point for the development dimension.

The Charter of the United Nations is a document
of seminal political sophistication and prescience. It
was agreed by leaders whose life experience had been
forged in the crucible of the most destructive war in
history. The authors of the Charter and the Member
States that embrace it have given to the United Nations,
as one of its principal purposes, "to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war". Had the purpose
been to save the generations from the effects of war,
the Charter would have said so. It did not. The vision
of the United Nations Charter is in significant part a
preventive one when it comes to conflict. Surely this is
not in question.

With this in mind, Ireland will strive so that the
Secretary-General's report may trigger far-reaching,
practical action to realize that vision.

