Mr. Henze (Germany) (interpretation from Spanish):
Allow me first to say, Mr. President, what a great pleasure
and honour it is for me to be participating in a meeting of
the Security Council under your presidency. I congratulate
you on your assumption of this important post at such an
important time.

(spoke in English)

Let me also thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to
express my Government's views on the situation in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and regarding
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP). Germany
is a member of the Contact Group and of the
Coordinating and Consultative Process (CCP), which
prepared the draft resolution before the Council today.
But first and foremost it is a country with particularly
close ties and friendly relations with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. Therefore, it has taken and
continues to take a strong interest in developments in the
region and in the future of UNPREDEP.

UNPREDEP operates in a region that is still
particularly volatile and unstable. The mission started out
as a preventive effort to prevent a spillover from conflicts
in the other parts of the former Yugoslavia. Earlier this
year, the focus shifted towards the civil unrest in
neighbouring Albania and a possible spillover to groups
of Albanian origin in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. Thanks mainly to the good offices of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, in
the person of former Austrian Chancellor Franz
Vranitzky, and also to the multinational protection force
mandated by the Council, the situation in Albania has
stabilized considerably. Inter-ethnic relations in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia remain of
concern, but do not seem to have been directly affected
by the crisis in Albania.

Today, it is the situation in the Kosovo region of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, characterized by
repression and recent terrorist acts, which is deteriorating
and giving rise to fears of destabilization also in the area
of operation of UNPREDEP. Germany strongly
encourages the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to enter
into a peaceful dialogue with the Kosovo Albanians on a
solution to the crisis.

With preventive missions -- and UNPREDEP is a
model in this regard ~- it is always particularly difficult
to gauge the degree of success. It is similarly difficult to
decide when a preventive mission has satisfactorily
completed its task and is no longer necessary. This is due
to the fact that the lack of negative events, that is, the
forestalling of destabilization, is the goal to be achieved,
and there can never be absolute certainty that the
preservation of stability is really due to the presence of
the mission, or perhaps would have been possible even
Security Council 3839th meeting
Fifty~second year 4 December 1997

without it. Nevertheless, there seems to be general
agreement that UN PREDEP has been a success story that
the United Nations and the Council can claim full credit
for, and we entirely share this assessment. Germany also
believes that we should take no chances by ending the
international military presence in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia before a sufficient degree of
stability is achieved throughout the surrounding region.

In view of this situation, Germany supports the draft
resolution before the Council today, which foresees an
extension of UNPREDEP's mandate for nine months. We
are also looking forward to the recommendations requested
from the Secretary-General for the most appropriate type
of international presence after the end of this mandate
period.

Let me end by expressing my appreciation to the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Mr. Henryk
Sokalski. to the Force Commander, Brigadier General Bent
Sohnemann, and to all members of UNPREDEP for their
successful work in preserving peace and stability in the
region.

