Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
apologize for seeking the floor again.

I am happy to hear the representative of Israel
express the wish for a ceasefire and speak so positively
of the Lebanese people. Whether or not we agree with
respect to the recent aggression, what has happened is
the result of the violations committed by Israel against
Lebanon before Hizbollah existed. Those include the
repeated occupation and devastation of Lebanon.

Frankly, I am not defending any party, and what I
know about Hizbollah I have learned through the
media. We all know that this tragedy could have been
averted by the granting of legitimate rights through the
resolutions of the Security Council and agreements
reached in Madrid and Oslo. Many factors have
accumulated in favour of giving terrorists the
opportunity to pursue acts that threaten international
peace and security, precisely because we have been
unable to ensure the implementation of Security
Council resolutions, particularly on the issue of
Palestine.

Many efforts have been made and many
international peace conferences convened. Who is
impeding peace today? Who is delaying the granting of
rights today? All such factors are enflaming the region
and encouraging the establishment of a society rife
with unbridled terrorism, regardless of the legitimacy
or lack thereof of its cause. We do want a cessation of
hostilities and a ceasefire, but we want it to be just and
established by a resolution of this Council, and not
imposed exclusively from an Israeli perspective.

If we adopt resolutions without taking the reality
of Lebanon fully into account, we will face a civil war
there. Instead of helping Lebanon, as the representative
of Israel has claimed to wish to do, we will destroy it.

Many wars have raged there. My Lebanese colleague
knows full well what he wants and what can be
implemented on the ground. Let us do something to
maintain peace and security in the region. Let us focus
on who has implemented and who has failed to
implement the Council's resolutions. Who is strictly
subject to the resolutions of international legitimacy
and who is not? Who has helped to create the
phenomena of terrorism and jihad, cited by the
representative of Israel, in the Arab world? The
jihadists have seen weak Governments fail to obtain
peace with Israel.

I speak on the basis of my faith in peace and our
sincere wish to coexist in peace with Israel in the Arab
region, but not in the way Israel wants. It must be on
the basis of the restoration of the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people and adherence to the resolutions
of international legitimacy.

