Mr. Primakov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Russia reacted with great concern to the
bloodshed in Jerusalem, Ramallah, Nablus and Gaza. We
have not seen such a dangerous situation since 1982. We
must understand something: It would appear that this
situation is a direct result not only of reckless activity in
respect of the delicate issue of religious sentiment, but
also of the fact that over the past four months the peace
process in the Middle East has come to a virtual standstill
and that Israel has even begun to draw back from
agreements that it entered into. This took place after a
new leader came to power in that country.

The past four months were effectively a prelude to
the opening by the Israeli authorities of a tunnel directly
adjacent to one of the holiest places of the Islamic world,
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Given the seriousness of the
situation, Russia supported the request of the Arab Group
for an urgent discussion of this issue at a formal meeting

 

of the Security Council. We believe that this meeting will
be an important step in the search for a way out of the
current impasse.

Russia strongly urges all the interested parties to show
maximum restraint and to avoid action that may lead to a
further deterioration of the situation. We are convinced that
breaking the vicious circle of confrontation can be achieved
only through political means. We are also convinced that
the situation now requires not just close contact between the
parties if the vicious spiral of violence is to be broken
quickly, but also an urgent resumption of talks on an
overall Middle East settlement. Russia is one of the
sponsors of the peace process and cannot acquiesce to a
situation in which the first hard-won fruits of the peace
negotiations are sacrificed to tactical considerations and
internal political manoeuvring. There must be a resumption
of the peace process, not with a tabula rasa, but on the
basis of compliance with agreements already entered
into. Only those agreements - not just the written
agreements; I must emphasize, but also those reached in the
framework of the Madrid process - can, we are deeply
convinced, put an end to the dangerous escalation of
violence. Immediate progress in all negotiations on the
basis of the principle of "land for peace" and Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978)
on Lebanon, is the way forward.

Russia has cautioned that the longer instability persists
in the peace process, the greater becomes the risk of being
hurled back to confrontation. In the tragic events of recent
days, we can clearly see what that would lead to. Russia
has already taken steps and made contacts aimed at
normalizing the situation and encouraging dialogue and
cooperation between the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian national Authority. The most important thing
now is not to allow a further escalation of the dispute on
both sides. This applies to the interests of Palestinians and
Israelis alike and to the aspirations of the international
community as a whole.
It is no coincidence that, in the Security Council
today, many countries are represented by their Ministers for
Foreign Affairs. This not only reflects our concern about
events in the Middle East, but will make it possible for us
to take more effective action to normalize the situation.
However, to achieve this we need to adopt a resolution
today that is acceptable to all members of the Security
Council. It must be done today. Otherwise, we are very
much afraid that those who are guilty of the bloodshed will
receive the wrong signal.

