Mr. Bermi'idez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
their briefings.

I would like to highlight the work done by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen
and to convey my delegation's support for his tireless,
rigorous efforts to find a solution to put an end to the
conflict. Similarly, I also express our deep gratitude to
all those who provide humanitarian aid to Yemen for
their tireless and courageous efforts to bring some hope
to its beleaguered people.

Uruguay is appalled by the worsening conflict
in Yemen, where the worst violations and abuses of
international humanitarian law and human rights occur
on a daily basis. The fact that the serious conflict in
Yemen has received less media coverage than other
conflicts, such as those in Syria or South Sudan, does not
absolve the perpetrators, the international community
nor, much less, the Council, of their responsibility. By
way of illustration, how many meetings on Syria have
we convened since the last time there was a briefing on
Yemen, on 31 October (see S/PV.7797)? We have held
no fewer than 13 such meetings.

Uruguay is concerned about the ongoing violence
and the dismantling of institutions in Yemen, which
have made possible the spread of terrorism. Groups such
as Da'esh and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula have
expanded their operations and found the perfect haven
for their activities in the absence of any State presence.

We regret the long stagnation in the peace process,
which has not consolidated any positive results.
Nevertheless, we support the resumption of the peace
process, which for too many months has not yielded
any concrete results and is currently constrained due
to a very fragile road map. Uruguay once again calls
upon the parties to resume dialogue and to fully comply
with their commitment to the ceasefire, in order to
bring about an environment that is favourable to the
restoration of peace. Stability in Yemen also requires
a show of commitment from regional stakeholders and
their supporters, in particular from countries that have
sway over the parties, in order to vigorously seek a
peaceful resolution to the conflict.

Uruguay emphatically condemns the continuing
attacks on civilian targets in Yemen. Daily air strikes
and mortar and missile attacks indiscriminately destroy
hospitals, schools, markets, residential buildings and
other infrastructure. Cluster munitions, bunker-busting
bombs, anti-personnel mines and snipers also create
rifts among the civilian population. All stakeholders in
Yemen continue to show total contempt for the rules of
international humanitarian law, thereby giving rise to
great suffering and catastrophic consequences among
the civilian population trapped in combat zones.

Yemen, like Syria, is reaching levels of
dehumanization like we have seldom seen before.
Uruguay condemns all attacks on civilians, be they
in Yemen, Syria, Iraq or elsewhere, regardless of who
carries them out. We cannot have double standards
on this matter. Those responsible for these abhorrent
atrocities and their accomplices should be held
accountable for their crimes.

We are also worried about the devastating food
security crisis that affects more than 14 million
Yemenis, over half the population of Yemen. The
images we have seen this month of January of Yemeni
children literally dying from hunger should suffice
to elicit a reaction from us and to urgently call for
immediate and unfettered access to humanitarian aid,
which regrettably continues to be blocked by both
parties to the conflict.

It is time to revitalize the ceasefire and to find a way
to return to the negotiating table. We all know that these
conflicts have no military solution. The only resolution
can be broad and inclusive political agreements reached
in direct negotiations among the parties. That should
continue to be the main objective of the Security
Council and the entire international community. The
millions of Yemenis affected by the crisis have the
right - and we the obligation - to tirelessly continue
to seek out the best options for achieving peace.

