Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
should like to join other members of the Council in
welcoming the presence among us of the Minister for
External Relations of Angola, Mr. De Miranda, and the
Minister of State, Foreign Office, of the United Kingdom.

I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting of the Council on the situation in
Angola.

I should also like to thank Ambassador Robert
Fowler, Chairman of the sanctions Committee on Angola,
for his introduction of the report of the Panel of Experts
charged with examining violations of the sanctions
imposed by the Council against UNITA.

The delegation of Tunisia welcomes the publication
of the report that has been presented to us pursuant to
resolution 1237 (1999). This document - which is the
fruit of six months of investigations, inquiries and studies
undertaken by the Panel of Experts headed by
Ambassador Anders Mollander to keep the Council
informed about violations of the sanctions against
UNITA - illustrates, if indeed there is a need to do so,
the will of the Council to ensure respect for the sanctions
it imposes under the Charter.

In this connection, I would like to recall that Tunisia
has supported the imposition of sanctions against UNITA,
in the belief that this tool can help us promote a
settlement of the conflict by preventing UNITA from
finding the means of continuing its destabilizing and
violent objectives and by forcing it to comply fully and as
clearly as possible with the obligations it agreed to when
it signed the Lusaka accord. In this connection, we
welcome the conclusion of the Panel of Experts that there
has been a significant reduction in UNITA's ability to

 

manoeuvre as a result of the pooling of the international
community's efforts to ensure respect for the sanctions
regime and to stop violations thereof.

The report contains numerous recommendations as to
measures to be taken - notably, on the implementation of
stricter mechanisms aimed at ending illicit movements of
arms for UNITA's benefit and the sale and supply of the
oil that feeds its war machine. Other equally important
recommendations relate to the establishment of effective
controls over diamond smuggling, which is the main source
of financing for UNITA's war effort, as well as
recommendations with regard to UNITA's representation
abroad and the travel of its representatives overseas. The
recommendations proposed to the Council by the Panel of
Experts are designed to make the regime of sanctions on
UNITA more effective. There is no doubt that they
constitute a strong and unequivocal message as to the
resolve of the Security Council to ensure that the
international community's desire to impose peace in Angola
is respected.

However, while we greatly appreciate the work done
by the Panel of Experts in drafting its report, we would like
to draw the Council's attention to the sensitivity of some of
the information, conclusions and recommendations it
contains, which, in our view, must be handled very
carefully because they involve, among other things, the
naming of heads of State. We would have preferred the
report to avoid giving information citing certain parties, at
least at this stage, so as to first be certain of its absolute
veracity. In the absence of irrefutable evidence to
corroborate those allegations, and until the parties
concerned are allowed to provide information that may give
additional clarifications for the benefit of the investigation' s
objectivity, we believe that it would be preferable to
proceed gradually by first engaging the attention of the
States and parties concerned before making suggestions or
deciding on appropriate steps. I believe this approach would
give the necessary credibility to the investigations of the
sanctions Committee, and that credibility will certainly
serve to enhance its ability to act.

The Tunisian delegation expresses the hope that the
publication of certain elements in the report will lead to
greater awareness on the part of the international
community of the importance of strictly applying the
sanctions regime and the need to persevere in efforts to cut
off the sources of supplies to UNITA to force it to fulfil its
obligations under the Lusaka Agreement.

