Mr. Fabius (France) (spoke in French): I wish you,
Madam President, every success in your new position.

As has been clearly stated by others before me, small
arms and light weapons are responsible for 300,000
to 500,000 deaths each year. My British colleague
mentioned one death each minute. They threaten States
and social structures. It is therefore essential that the
United Nations continue to take action against the
major scourge. As far as France and many present here
are concerned, we committed early on to the fight
against the proliferation of those weapons. We favoured
the establishment of an international instrument.
Following the adoption in 2001 of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects we continued to work to strengthen it.
Our efforts contributed to the adoption in 2005 of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. We have also worked
in a number of international forums to combat the illicit
trafficking of such weapons by air.

This year, we adopted the first Arms Trade Treaty.
France signed the document on 3 June and we intend
to ratify it in the coming weeks; it is only through
ratification that it will enter into force. Naturally, it will
influence the proliferation of weapons and strengthen
security. Like many here, I encourage all States
Members of the United Nations that have not yet done
so to sign the document in order that it may enter into
force as quickly as possible.

With respect to resolution 2117 (2013), drafted by
the Australian presidency, France believes that it is
excellent and has supported it.

There is no single solution. In addition to the
ongoing mobilization efforts of States, which remain
essential, we must leverage all available tools to tackle
the issue of small arms and light weapons, including
international instruments, ad hoc measures, and
specific actions and cooperation in the field, including
the proposal of our Russian colleague. All of that must
be coordinated based on local conditions and mutually
defined goals.

I wish to conclude by stating the United Nations is
an Organization that sometimes faces difficulties - as
can be seen right now. But when we adopt a resolution
of this nature and take a stand on a matter of such great
magnitude, we see that the Organization, despite its
limits, is absolutely indispensible to world peace.

