Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
to start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on the
leadership with which you have led the Council's
work during your term, which is coming to an end,
and to congratulate the team that assisted you in that
endeavour in what was a difficult context.

The Security Council's activities during this month,
which is nearing an end, were dominated by crises in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, and in
Ukraine. Six meetings over two weeks, including two
emergency meetings, were devoted to the Middle East,
and four, including two emergency meetings, were
devoted to Ukraine. Three important resolutions were
adopted unanimously by Security Council members.
A number of press statements were issued without
hindrance, which my delegation welcomes.

With regard to the situation in Syria, Chad welcomes
the successful conduct of the operation aimed at the
destruction of chemical weapons, and the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) on the humanitarian
situation in that country. However, we remain deeply
concerned by the human tragedy affecting the Syrian
population, while no political solution is in sight. We
deplore the Security Council's inability to be able to
assist the parties to the conflict in finding solutions to
the crisis. We welcome the fact that the Security Council
has not lost sight of the impact of the Syrian crisis on
other conflicts in the region and we urge the Council to
continue its efforts to find a lasting political solution.
There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis.

The situation in the Middle East, following the
escalation of violence in Gaza, took up much of the
Council's time and the Council's repeated calls for
a ceasefire have unfortunately gone unheeded. The
violence in Gaza has reached unacceptable levels and
the number of civilian victims continues to grow each
day by the hundreds. We regret the Security Council's
impotence in the face of that tragedy. Like dozens of
other delegations, Chad calls for an immediate cessation
of Israeli military operations and the firing of rockets
at Israel to enable negotiations to resume. The grim
toll of victims resulting from the Israeli operation has
now surpassed 1,200 dead and 6,700 wounded in the
Gaza Strip, the majority of them being civilians. The
number of displaced persons is now in the hundreds of
thousands.

The Council has also considered the thirteenth
report (S/2014/442) presented by Mr. Said Djinnit on
the situation in West Africa, covering the period from
1 January to 30 June 2014. Chad welcomes the progress
achieved in settling the political and security-related
problems, including the implementation of the cross-
border security strategy for the Mano River Union, the
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau
and the successful execution of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone.

However, many challenges remain, especially
with regard to transnational organized crime, drug
trafficking, terrorism, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
and security-related problems. In that respect, the
fight against the Boko Haram terrorist group requires
a pooling of efforts and close cooperation between the
States ofthe subregion. Chad welcomes the attention the
Security Council has granted to multilateral cooperation
between the States of Economic Community of West
African States faced with the threat posed by Boko
Haram in north-eastern Nigeria and in neighbouring
countries.

The ebola epidemic that is currently raging in
West Africa is an equally serious threat as it continues
to spread dangerously towards other countries. The
international community must mobilize to prevent its
spread on a larger scale.

Chad welcomes the outstanding cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
especially in peacekeeping. The efforts and sacrifices
made by the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic have
enabled us to prepare the ground for the deployment
of United Nations operations in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.

To further strengthen that partnership, it is
important that the issue of financing the African Union
operations, the difficulties associated with the transition
of the African missions and those of the United Nations
or the role of the African Union in the pre-transition
phase and the appointment of the leadership of the new
mission be subject to greater study in future debates. In
that regard, the support of the Security Council, which
is determinant in the African Union's efforts aimed at
operationalizing the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crises, as African authorities themselves
undertook during the African Union summit held
in Malabo on 26 to 27 June 2014, has proved to be
insufficient.

In conclusion, I would again like to reiterate my
congratulations to the President and the entire Rwandan
team for the tremendous amount of work done, the
relevance of the subjects covered and the courage that
they have shown throughout this particularly difficult
term. I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the delegation of the United Kingdom as
it assumes the presidency of the Council in August and
reiterate the Chadian delegation's full support for the
entire team and wish it every success.

