Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Before I begin, I want publicly to recognize Tunisia's
extraordinary contribution to the cause of peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition to
personnel of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
Tunisia has dedicated three of its finest diplomats to
this effort. I refer, of course, to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Kamel
Morjane, Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi and
you, Mr. President. We are deeply grateful to the
Government of Tunisia for devoting so much of the
coming month to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we pledge our full support
and cooperation.
I join in welcoming President Kabila to the
Security Council and to New York. We express to
President Kabila, both in his official role and his
private capacity, our deepest condolences for the death
of his father and late President. We are deeply moved
that in his time of grief, President Kabila has reassured
the Congolese people and the international community
of his commitment to moving ahead with the peace
process. The eyes of the world were on President
Kabila when he assumed his office. They followed him
to Paris, Washington and now New York. Now is the
time for bold and statesman-like steps on the part of all
the parties, including the United Nations. We must all
work together.

There are four important messages that we want
to communicate to the Government of the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

First, whether in the field of peacekeeping,
humanitarian relief or development, the United Nations
is and will remain a friend of the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo.

Secondly, it gave us new hope when President
Kabila's first words to the Congolese people and the
international community were a renewed call for peace
and democratization. We warmly welcome President
Kabila's clear affirmation of his Government's
commitment to the successful implementation of the
peace process and his pledge to continue and intensify
cooperation with MONUC.

Thirdly, we support the Lusaka process and urge
all the signatories to ensure that peace finally comes to
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and the region.

Fourthly, and most importantly, now is the time
for action. We want MONUC to deploy and peace to
succeed. For this to happen we require an operational
plan for the disengagement of forces and their
redeployment, and the parties must create and sustain
the conditions needed for further MONUC operations.
This includes the provision of adequate assurances for
the security and freedom of movement of United
Nations and related personnel.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has a right, under the United Nations
Charter, to demand that uninvited foreign forces depart
its territory. The Governments of Rwanda and Uganda
have a right, under the United Nations Charter, to
demand that the Congolese territory not be used as a
launching pad for attacks against their countries.

There is an obvious political settlement here. The
Governments of the region need to work together,
rather than against each other, to bring about what they
and the entire region need: a stable and secure
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The pursuit of
common interests is the only means by which this crisis
will be resolved.

While foreign Powers cannot dictate the internal
politics of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
believe that the call for democratization is not a foreign
demand. The new political dispensation called for
under the Lusaka Agreement is and must remain the
sovereign domain of the Congolese people. As the
Security Council delegation witnessed in Kinshasa,
political parties, civil society, organizations and
religious communities are calling for political
participation and accountable governance in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. United States
support for democratic development within the Congo
is based on the belief that democracy and long-term
stability are inseparable. We also believe that the best
means to delegitimize armed opposition is to allow
unarmed political opposition to flourish.

The Lusaka Agreement provides for an inter-
Congolese dialogue under neutral facilitation. We hope
for early progress in re-engaging the facilitation
appointed by the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), and we hope also that the dialogue can begin.
We continue to believe that Sir Ketumile Masire is an
outstanding former head of State who can fulfil his
mandate, and we hope that he will reach out to the
parties in the spirit of compromise and democracy for
which his country is so well known.

It has been almost a year since the Security
Council authorized phase II of the United Nations
mission in the Congo. The Secretary-General delayed
the deployment of additional United Nations personnel
because conditions on the ground were not yet
conducive to a successful mission. This was not a
popular decision, but we believe that it was the right
one, as neither the Lusaka Agreement nor the Council's
resolutions had been implemented. If President
Kabila's recent statements are followed by concrete
actions by all the parties, the United Nations will, at
last, be able to play its full role in the peace process,
and my Government wants that to happen.

The critical short-term task remains a fully
effective cease-fire and the disengagement of forces.
While disengagement cannot substitute for a broader
peace process, it will provide the enabling environment
for progress on the political front. The Secretary-
General is revising the concept of operations to reflect
the changing situation on the ground. Just as we have
supported his decision not to deploy additional
personnel until the situation allows, we will support
deployment as soon as conditions permit, and we look
forward to his advice.

Pueto in Katanga province remains a potential
flashpoint, but it also represents an opportunity for the
parties to put the peace process on track. In this zone in
recent months the cease-fire was violated. We welcome
Rwanda's readiness to withdraw from Pueto, and we
urge movement there as soon as possible.

President Kabila has created an opening for the
peace process by his reaffirmation of the Lusaka
Agreement, his offer to work with his neighbours on
security issues and a pledge of full cooperation with
MONUC. It is up to the other Lusaka signatories to
respond with initiatives oftheir own.

Turning the Congo into a battleground of foreign
armies inflicts misery on the Congolese people and
adds to instability in the region. Rwanda and Uganda
must present the Government of Kinshasa with
credible, concrete actions that demonstrate that they are
committed to peace, the withdrawal of their forces and
the territorial sovereignty of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as a unified nation. All the State parties
need to work together based on the mutual recognition
that armed non-State actors using the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo pose a threat to
regional stability. Whether we are discussing UNITA,
the Front pour la defense de la democratic (FDD) or
the Allied Democratic Front (ADF), the common
denominator is that the Congolese people want them all
to leave their country.

One group in particular, former members of the
Rwandese Armed Forces (FAR) and Interahamwe,
poses a major threat to regional stability and to the
successful implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.
Just as the international community is justified in
calling for the withdrawal of Rwandan and Ugandan
forces from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, so
too must we call on all the Lusaka signatories to
abandon support for the ex-FAR and Interahamwe. In
that way, the path will be open for the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement of the
ex-FAR and Interahamwe, as well as of other armed
groups in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.
At the end of the day, common security interests
of all the States in the region converge, and those
common interests can form the basis for peace. All
involved have the responsibility to achieve the peace
their people so clearly need and so justly deserve. We
reiterate our call for the parties to go beyond
statements and to use the coming days to take concrete
steps needed to disengage their forces, bring about the
conditions for further deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and begin the national dialogue
called for in the Lusaka Accords.

My Government wishes President Kabila every
success.

