Mr. Pleuger (Germany): At the outset, I would
also like to say how much we, my delegation and I
myself, regret seeing Ambassador Wang depart, and I
would like to thank him for his always friendly and
professional collegiality that he has shared with
everyone in this Council. I would like to wish him well
in his future very responsible job that he is about to
take up. I would also like to welcome Mr. Mufioz in the
crowd here and to wish him a good start. I promise him
our collegial support.

I would then like to thank Mr. Guehenno and
Mr. Costa for the detailed and comprehensive reports
they gave us this morning. I would also say that my
delegation fully associates itself with the statement that
will be made by Greece on behalf of the European
Union later in this discussion.

As we have heard this morning in the impressive
statements of Mr. Costa and Mr. Guehenno, security is
of the essence in the present state of the
implementation of the Bonn process in Afghanistan.
Security in Afghanistan at present is severely
threatened by terrorism and organized crime, the major
challenges facing foreign policy in the twenty-first
century. These plagues of humanity can be defeated
only if we join forces and take action on a global scale.
In this context, the issue of drug production and
smuggling from Afghanistan is of paramount
importance, and I therefore welcome the initiative of
the Russian presidency to have this discussion here
today. The presidential statement that will be adopted
at the end of this meeting will provide further evidence
of the resolve of the international community to make
use of its tools in the fight again the drug problem. The
relevance of today's debate has, once again, been sadly
confirmed by the recent killing of seven Afghans
involved in anti-drug programmes in Uruzgan
province.

Sadly, opium and heroin production in
Afghanistan has risen again dramatically in recent
times. Afghanistan, once again, is expected to be the
largest producer of opium in 2003. All efforts of the
international community in this regard have so far
proven to be insufficient. Therefore, we must search
for comprehensive ways of effectively reducing and
combating this threat to Afghanistan itself, the region
and other countries. This fight is not just about drugs.
There are close links between drug crimes and other
forms of organized crime: arms smuggling, human
trafficking, money laundering, corruption and
terrorism.

The current situation in Afghanistan is marked by
the fact that more than 20 years of armed conflict
eradicated many basic State structures, prevented
economic development and produced a fragmented, yet
fully armed, society. A continuing atmosphere of
insecurity and instability, in particular outside Kabul,
makes security-sector reform the most important and
pressing task, as well as a prerequisite for the fight
against illicit opium production and trafficking.

Drug smuggling and the structures of organized
crime pose a particular threat to young democracies.
The rule of law and State authority are being
undermined, and, especially along the smuggling
routes, ever more serious addiction problems emerge,
with all their consequences. The reconstruction of a
functioning police system throughout Afghanistan is a
Vital pillar of the international efforts to create security
for this war-torn country. Against that background and
at the request of the United Nations and the former
Afghan Interim Administration, Germany assumed the
lead role in rebuilding the Afghan police force,
including the anti-drug and border police forces - a task
that is closely linked to that done by the other four lead
nations in the security sector and in their respective
areas of responsibility.

In particular, our support in training personnel
and in providing equipment for the Afghan anti-drug
police force is being closely coordinated with other
States and institutions. In addition to Britain, which has
assumed the leading role in the fight against illicit
drugs, I would like to give special mention to the
United States and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We are pleased that France, too, wants to
help establish a national drugs laboratory.

We can be proud of what has been achieved so far
in this context. The infrastructures of the national
criminal police and the national drug police have been
re-established with contributions from the United
Kingdom, the United States and the United Nations
Drug Control Programme. The police force in Kabul is
able to work again, thanks to the reconstruction of its
buildings and to new equipment. The reorganization of
the police and of the Ministry of the Interior is making
good progress. A structure for the national police and
the new Afghan Border Police, comprising border
patrol and immigration units, has been established, and
Afghanistan has become a member of Interpol.
Building the Border Police will be another Vital task,
linking both the anti-drug efforts and the rebuilding of
the Afghan National Army with the police project.

However, we will not have any real success until
the Afghan police force can ensure law and order in
those provinces hit especially hard by drugs. We know
that the Afghan Government has good intentions but
neither the means nor the strength necessary to assert
its authority outside Kabul. Extending the
reconstruction of the security sector to the provinces is
the big challenge now. In many provinces, that
challenge will be chiefly financial and organizational.
In others, it will also entail important security problems
that cannot be tackled by police means alone. To
successfully integrate all provinces by the end of 2004,
instability resulting from fighting among regional
commanders, ethnic groups and their militias must end.

In the reconstruction of the Afghan police,
financing has been a problem, though not a restricting
factor as yet. The principal source for police salaries,
the Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan,
administered by the United Nations Development
Programme is struggling with insufficient funding,
among other difficulties. International contributions
towards police reconstruction also do not fully meet the
needs. The overall cost of reconstruction, equipment
and training for the national police over the next four
years has been estimated at approximately 180 million
euros, excluding salaries. The reconstruction of the
Afghan Border Police is estimated at approximately
200 million euros over the next four years. The
targeted amount of donor participation has, to this
point, fallen short of that mark. The level of
development and achievement in the security sector
and the success of the fight against opium production
and trafficking in Afghanistan will depend not only on
positive developments in the general security situation,
but in particular on the participation of the
international community.

Combating drug production and trafficking will
be the litmus test of the ability of lead nations in the
security sector to achieve synergies in their
overlapping fields of responsibility. That will continue
to require well coordinated efforts and commitment
from all Afghan and international actors in the security
sector. However, the success of all our efforts to
eradicate illicit drugs depends not only on credible
enforcement measures but, at the same time, on the
availability of alternative sources of livelihood for
farmers and on a comprehensive improvement of the
socio-political environment. Germany is ready to
continue its contribution in that regard in the interest of
the people of Afghanistan.

