Ms. Plepyte (Lithuania): Allow me to start by
commending the Netherlands, as President of the
Security Council for the month of March, for convening
this timely open debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I
would like to make some additional remarks in our
national capacity.

As a troop-contributing country, Lithuania has a
great interest in making United Nations peacekeeping
more efficient and capable of addressing the needs
of the twenty-first century. Since October last year,
Lithuania has significantly increased its United Nations
peacekeeping contingent. Currently, 39 Lithuanians,
both men and women in uniform, are deployed to
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, serving in high-risk
security environments. The safety and security of
personnel deployed to overseas missions are of the
highest priority for us. In that regard, we fully support
all efforts to implement the plan of action and to take
concrete measures to improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers and other mission personnel, as proposed
by Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz
in his recent report.

In environments where peacekeepers are directly
targeted, where widespread violence is ongoing or
where thousands of civilians need protection from
unthinkable acts of violence, peacekeeping operations
must remain fit for purpose. To confront the unique
challenges of this century, peacekeepers require the
tools and capabilities of the twenty-first century. In
addition, missions require well-trained and skilled
troops. Due to the increasing focus on the protection of
civilians, training on humanitarian issues, human rights
and gender sensitivity are essential for peacekeepers to
be able to carry out their tasks properly.

Predeployment assessment is critical to ensuring
that peacekeeping contingents meet United Nations
standards and, even more important, respect the
values and principles of United Nations peacekeeping.
All allegations of misconduct must be examined
thoroughly and those responsible for such conduct must
be brought to account. In cases of shortcomings or
misconduct, repatriation should be accepted as the only
solution. A zero-tolerance policy with regard to sexual
misconduct, wherever and whenever it occurs, must be
strictly implemented.

However, making United Nations peacekeeping
missions more efficient and fit for purpose is not
limited to the better training of troops or a better chain
of command or to ensuring adequate logistical support.
The participation of women at all levels greatly
increases the operational effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions and should therefore be strengthened. We also
agree with those who call for a clear mandate and exit
strategy from the very beginning of the engagement.
It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
set sound, realistic and achievable mandates for
peacekeeping missions. However, that should not justify
inaction. Regular, robust and independent reviews are
necessary in order to evaluate the progress and to adapt
the objectives.

Moreover, continuous horizon-scanning and early
warning provide us with the opportunity to use other
tools at the disposal of the United Nations. More
investment in preventive diplomacy, early action and
mediation, through full use of the United Nations
standing mediation capacity, remain vital. Greater
commitment and engagement must be devoted to
supporting political processes and to preserving the
continuum of peace.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the need to seek a more
holistic United Nations response to peace operations. We
need better complementarity ofpeacekeeping, conflict-
prevention and peacebuilding work to be carried out
in close cooperation and coordination among all the
actors involved. However, even more fundamentally, it
is time to focus all our efforts on implementation of
the recommendations related to peacekeeping. We can
no longer afford to live from one report to the next,
while failing to fully implement the recommendations
and ideas generated. The continuous efforts of the
Secretariat, including the Strategic Force Generation
and Capability Planning Cell, as well as the long-term
commitment of Member States to implementing such
recommendations, are of fundamental importance to
improving peacekeeping operations. Lithuania remains
committed to doing its part.
