Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In order to ensure the
smooth running of this meeting, I will now read a
summarized version of the statement that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has the honour to address to the
Council on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. The
complete text of the statement will be published on the
page ofthe presidency ofthe Coordinating Bureau ofthe
Movement. After reading out the summarized version,
I will then make a few remarks in my national capacity.

First and foremost, I should like, on behalf of the
States members of the Non-Aligned Movement, to
convey our respects to Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine. We also wish the
Ukrainian delegation and Ambassador Volodymyr
Yelchenko a very successful month in guiding the
work of the Security Council. I wish also to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the very diligent way in
which the Swedish delegation, under the leadership of
Ambassador Skoog, led the work of the Council during
the month of January.

During the seventeenth summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in September 2016 on Margarita
Island, Venezuela, the Heads of State and Government
reaffirmed that terrorism constitutes one of the major
threats to international peace and security and reiterated
that any act of terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable,
irrespective of its motives and of wherever, whenever
and by whomsoever committed, as it also constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law.

By the same token, the Heads of State and
Government reaffirmed that terrorism cannot and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group, nor should such
associations be used to justify terrorism or measures to
fight it, including, inter alia, profiling or intrusions into
individual privacy.

The most recent terrorist attacks, particularly those
committed by Da'esh, demonstrate that vulnerability
to this scourge and to the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters is now global. In this regard, it
should be noted that the destruction of the physical and
economic infrastructure of States, including critical
infrastructure, has always been a major goal of terrorist
groups. This sows terror among the general public and
also generates massive publicity at the global level.

The protection of critical infrastructure plays
a significant role in the fight against terrorism
and its prevention and could be incorporated in a
comprehensive way into national plans to combat this
scourge and prevent it. We therefore need to strengthen
international and regional cooperation, in particular
through the adoption of timely and effective measures
to eliminate this scourge and the establishment of
relevant partnerships; this will be very important.

The Movement is of the View that the fight against
terrorism must be waged in strict adherence to existing
regional and international instruments in this area,
including the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in line with the rule of law and obligations
under international law.

Moreover, the provision of technical assistance, on
request, for capacity-building and the development of
appropriate infrastructure, mechanisms and processes,
including through the exchange of information, good
practices and the identification of areas ofvulnerability,
will all be decisive in the fight against terrorism.

In this regard, the support and the resources that
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre could

provide to Member States upon request and in line with
its mandate would be very useful in efforts to combat
and prevent terrorism. The same is true of the expertise
that could be provided to Member States that make such
a request by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force Working Group on Protection of Critical
Infrastructure including Vulnerable Targets, Internet
and Tourism Security.

In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its full commitment to the fight against
terrorism. It is important that we undertake such efforts
in a frank, decisive and coordinated manner, including
through the full and balanced implementation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Likewise, we must also
adopt in the near future a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism under the auspices of the
United Nations, which would strengthen multilateral
cooperation in this area.

I should now like to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.

We wish to emphasize the fact that Venezuela's
position in response to the threat posed by terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations has been reiterated on
various occasions in the bodies charged with addressing
this issue. We have always robustly condemned terrorist
acts, irrespective of their motivations or perpetrators,
because oftheir egregious effects on international peace
and security, human rights and development. During
our membership in the Security Council, we lobbied
hard for the strengthening of international cooperation
efforts to prevent, combat and eliminate the horrific
phenomenon that is terrorism. We also made it clear
that we needed to take a comprehensive approach to the
issue of terrorism.

We welcome the adoption today of resolution 2341
(2017) as well as the resolutions adopted by the Council
last year, particularly resolution 2286 (2016), on the
protection of hospitals and humanitarian personnel in
conflict situations.

We are convinced that an effective fight against
terrorism requires a shift away from the policy of
double standards and other misconceptions that
hamper the united efforts of Member States to achieve
concrete results for international peace and security.
Unfortunately, in recent years terrorism has been
boosted by interventionism and the armed aggression
of foreign Powers, of which fraternal countries such as
Iraq, Libya and Syria, among others, have been victim.
This is aimed at overthrowing legitimately established
Governments and has provoked the collapse of the
institutional fabric of those States and made them
vulnerable to violence and to the narrative of hatred
and intolerance promoted by terrorist groups.

Nor can we ignore the terrorist acts perpetrated
by State actors, such as the terror sown by the Israeli
military aggression almost three years ago against
the Palestinian population of the Gaza Strip. That
caused the loss of human lives, including women and
children, and the destruction of critical infrastructure
essential for the alleviation of the already dramatic
humanitarian situation of the Palestinians resulting
from the imposition of an illegal blockade since 2007.
Hospitals, drinking water services, access roads and
schools, among other targets, were indiscriminately
and deliberately bombed during that armed conflict
to punish and attack all the civilian population. The
aftermath of the destruction continues to be felt today.
It manifests itself in a population beset by despair as
they confront a reconstruction process hampered by the
policies of the Israeli authorities that block access to
materials and services.

For that reason, when we speak of the prevention
and fight against terrorist barbarism, it is necessary to
bear in mind that policies of interventionism and foreign
occupation are a fundamental cause of instability,
and therefore constitute favourable conditions that
contribute to the birth and expansion of violent
non-State actors who become terrorist groups. In that
regard, we call for the cessation of armed aggression
and interventionism in the internal affairs of countries
as illegal practices of foreign policy as elements of
power at the international level.

Likewise, any sincere discussion about the scope of
the strategy to successfully confront the terrorist threat
necessarily involves recognizing the current problem of
financing, training and supplying weapons to violent
non-State actors by foreign Powers.

Those factors have had a serious impact on the
peace, stability and development of Syria, Iraq, Libya
and other nations affected by terrorism, with the well-
known consequences of the destruction of critical
infrastructure, including the productive apparatus
and cultural heritage, the use of chemical weapons
against the civilian population, and massive violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Those opprobrious acts constitute a list of war crimes.

The fight against terrorism in general and the
protection of critical infrastructure in particular
requires that the international community activate
a global strategy against terrorism that includes, on
the one hand, a genuine cooperation scheme based
on international law, and, on the other, an impetus to
national public policies to prevent and combat terrorist
acts. Those must be designed and implemented in
accordance with the rule of law, including respect for
human rights and without generating discrimination or
prejudiced views of an ethnic or religious nature that
could be a breeding ground for resentment and violent
extremism promoted by terrorist groups. In that regard,
we sympathize with those countries whose citizens may
be included in restrictive lists for no other reason than
their national origin and religious faith. We believe that
this approach is not an appropriate way to deal with the
terrorist threat.

Finally, we reiterate that the United Nations and
its States Members are responsible for overseeing
the effective and timely implementation of General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions and of
the obligations arising from the relevant international
treaties in order to address this global phenomenon and
to safeguard critical infrastructure and the population
from the indiscriminate violence of terrorist groups.

