Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Australian Ambassador for his presentation of the
quarterly report of the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and
for all the work he has accomplished with his team for
nearly two years.

The Iranian nuclear programme has for more than a
decade now been a serious threat to international peace
and security and a constant cause for concern for the
Security Council. Uncertainties about the exclusively
peaceful purpose of the programme and Iran's years-
long refusal to engage in dialogue have led us to
develop a sanctions regime. However, the Council has
always been careful to keep the door to dialogue open.
On 24 November last year, Iran and the E3+3 reached
agreement on a Joint Plan of Action, providing for the
suspension by Iran of the most sensitive activities in
its nuclear programme for six months. The Plan has
allowed for the turning ofa new page in the discussions
between the E3+3 and Iran with a view to finding a long-
term solution. After six months of intense discussion,
the P5+1 and Iran were unfortunately unable to reach
an agreement; still, they have decided to extend the
deadline for discussions until next 24 November.

Significant differences remain between Iran
and the E3+3 with respect to several key aspects.
Negotiations will resume in a few days here in New
York on the sidelines of the general debate of the
General Assembly. We approach them with an open
mind, but we are not complacent. With our partners
in the P5+1, we are determined to achieve a long-term
solution that would allow us to establish and ensure in
the long term the exclusively peaceful purpose of Iran's
nuclear programme. Iran must assume all the technical
consequences of its commitment to not developing
nuclear weapons, and it is only on that condition that
we can obtain an acceptable agreement.

It is also essential that the dialogue undertaken
by Iran with the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) produce concrete results, particularly with
regard to the possible military dimension, past and
present, of its nuclear programme. It is with concern
that we read the latest report of the Director General
of the IAEA citing Iran's lack of cooperation with the
Agency, including on issues related to the possible
military dimensions of the nuclear programme.
Mr. Amano reiterated his concerns today to the press
on the sidelines ofa meeting of the Board of Governors.

We also note that this is the first time the Agency
has publicly reported a lack of economic cooperation
on the part of Iran since President Rohani's assumption
of power. That is not a positive development. The
resolution of all issues related to the possible military
dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme is a key
element in restoring confidence and thus for the long-
term agreement that we all seek.

Finally, I recall that the Security Council's
resolutions on Iran remain fully in force pending a
comprehensive settlement of the proliferation crisis,
as the Joint Plan of Action explicitly sets forth. A
few months ago, we became aware of the disturbing
findings of the inquiry by the Committee's Panel of
Experts on the interception of the vessel Klos C by
the Israeli authorities. The Experts' report confirmed
that the cargo shipment of arms from Iran containing
rockets, mortar shells and ammunition was a violation
of the arms embargo decided by the Council. It is up to
the Sanctions Committee to take appropriate action to
respond to the incident.

In conclusion, we hope that the Committee will be
able to make rapid progress in the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the final report of the
Panel of Experts (S/2014/394, annex). They are simple
and operational and would allow for great improvement
in the implementation of the resolutions.

