Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you personally,
Mr. President, and your Government for acceding to
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
to thank you for convening this high-level ministerial
meeting on an issue that is of great concern to us as an
African country. Allow me also to thank and congratulate
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, as well as our briefers,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya, Ms. Amina
Chawahir Mohamed, and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Smail Chergui,
for their important statements, to which Senegal fully
subscribes.

Taking stock of our efforts to promote peace
and security in Africa, it is regrettable that the bulk
of those efforts is devoted to peacebuilding in post-
conflict situations. Despite the continued engagement
of the Peacebuilding Commission in Africa for over a
decade now, as well as the commendable efforts of the
African Union and African subregional organizations,
several African countries in crisis or emerging from
crisis remain vulnerable and are still struggling to
achieve lasting stability. The fact that all six countries
on the Peacebuilding Commission's agenda are African
is sufficiently illustrative. This fragility, which is
partly the result of factors whose root causes are not
always easy to grasp, casts doubt on the effectiveness
of peacebuilding strategies developed several decades,
particularly in Africa.

Clearly, a new approach to the way we work to
consolidate peace - as the conclusions of the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts (S/2015/490) on the
review of the peacebuilding architecture suggest - is
essential if we are to be more effective and to attain
sustainable results. Thus, taking into account the
specificity of each country and each situation, we must
mark a break in our approach, focusing on strategies
and actions aimed at creating conditions conducive to
the emergence of resilient societies and States able to
address the challenges of sustainable peace. Without
a doubt, this will require us to redefine the order of
priorities in our actions and strategies. In that regard,
I would particularly like to emphasize four basic
directions that should guide, it seems to us, our efforts
if we wish to achieve meaningful results.

We must first invest more in prevention by also
addressing the root causes of conflicts in Africa. The
tools at our disposal in this regard are certainly many,
but too often it is the political will that is lacking and that
becomes an obstacle to any early action, particularly
by the Security Council. This has often resulted in late
interventions or reactions after the fact, which have
sometimes been ineffective and very expensive.

Moreover, beyond the cyclical causes, our actions
must also move towards resolving the root causes of
conflict, the only guarantee of lasting solutions. Make
no mistake; the efficiency and effectiveness of our
action will depend largely on our ability to prevent
conflicts and emerging threats. It is no coincidence
that the comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects, the review
of the peacebuilding architecture and the review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security all converge on the need to give a
new impetus to prevention. Obviously, the cross-cutting
dimension of prevention calls for building synergies
between these three complementary reviews, with a
view to developing coherent and holistic strategies and
approaches to promoting sustainable peace. In order
to achieve a lasting peace, we must give primacy to
political solutions.

That is why we must improve our prevention and
mediation tools by setting up more effective strategies.
Admittedly, under Article 33 of the Charter, the
responsibility for prevention lies with Member States.
But the Organization - particularly the Security
Council, which has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security - has a
crucial role to play in that regard. This brings me to
welcome the Council's adoption justbefore this debate of
the presidential statement on the United Nations Office
in West Africa and the Sahel region (S/PRST/2016/11).
The success of the Office's activities teaches us that
preventive diplomacy is within reach if it is backed
by the strong political will of the leaders of the region
with the constant support of the African Union and the
United Nations. This is the intrinsic reality of good-
neighbour diplomacy as we try to develop it in Senegal.

The African Union and African regional
organizations are actively involved in mediation
and conflict prevention in Africa. Thanks to their
interventions, several crises and tensions have
been defused at an early stage. Better still, with the
establishment of its peace and security architecture,
the African Union has made clear its ambition to play
a more active role in conflict prevention. I therefore
call for greater support for efforts to operationalize the
peace and security architecture.

This brings me to the second point of my speech,
namely, strengthening cooperation with the African
Union and African subregional organizations.
Incidentally, it should be noted that the lessons learned
from peace consolidation in Africa reveal the crucial role
they play in this area. The example of the involvement
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), particularly in Guinea-Bissau and several
other countries of the subregion, in collaboration
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary General for West Africa and other regional
and international partners, is quite illustrative of the
importance of this action.

Another important issue to consider in the
framework of enhanced cooperation with the African
Union and subregional organizations is coordinating
the activities of the various actors involved in the
process of consolidating peace in Africa, with a view
to promoting concerted and coherent actions. Greater
interaction between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the relevant organs of the African Union would
promote better coordination and streamlining of efforts
on the ground. Furthermore, joint assessments of the
nature and challenges of peacebuilding in Africa, as
well as ongoing dialogue on the best way to harmonize
support to countries on the peacebuilding agenda, are
other actions that may give more added value to this
cooperation.

The third point I would like to address today
is the management of the transition to sustainable
peace. We all agree that the success of this critical
phase of peace consolidation is a fundamental element
in preventing renewed conflict, while providing a
guarantee of lasting stability. We have learned from
the experience of countries coming out of conflict that
the transition to sustainable peace is a very demanding
undertaking, one that, moreover, requires planning at
an early stage. Such planning should duly take into
account the conditions and goals that must be met to
end a peacekeeping operation and to safeguard the
transition to an integrated peacebuilding office or
some other arrangement. In that respect, it is important
to guarantee from the outset that peace missions can
create the conditions for a smooth transition, drawdown
and withdrawal without compromising efforts to attain
the long-term goals of peace and stability.

To that end, we should start developing
peacebuilding activities in the early stages of missions,
directing efforts towards strengthening national
capacities and addressing the deeper structural and
socioeconomic problems that these countries often
face, while promoting an ongoing political dialogue and
effective coordination between the various stakeholders.
Steps should be taken to create the conditions for the
transfer of functions to the countries concerned as soon
as peacekeeping operations withdraw.

I would also like to emphasize the importance
of maintaining and strengthening support and
assistance for countries in transition to peace so that
they can continue to benefit from the attention of the
international community, particularly in terms of
receiving sustainable and predictable funding. While
countries emerging from conflict require significant
funding over long periods, it is clear that that funding is
limited, irregular and unpredictable. However, in order
for peace to be durable, the restoration of security must
go hand in hand with economic development.

The lessons learned from the consolidation process
in Guinea Bissau, in particular, give us the full measure
of this dimension. The example of the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) is a case study
that documents the difficulties that regional and
subregional African organizations face in financing
peacebuilding measures. Here, we would like to
welcome the valuable support of the European Union,
without which ECOMIB could not continue its work in
Guinea-Bissau today.

Countries involved in peacebuilding are still
politically fragile. Their institutions are often weak,
their economies are vulnerable, and their young people
face the challenges of idleness and unemployment.
These are often countries where everything has to be
rebuilt. The challenges they face in the peacebuilding
process are enormous, as is their need of assistance.
They require assistance with electoral affairs,
judicial and security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, strengthening the
health and education systems, relaunching activity, and
supporting agriculture and job creation, particularly for
the young.

Meeting these challenges is a complex undertaking
that cannot be successful without a comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated approach by the various
actors and stakeholders in the peacebuilding process.
The adoption of an identical resolution by the General
Assembly (resolution 70/262) and the Security Council
(resolution 2282 (2016)) on the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture represents a
historic step in that it reflects a desire to make a break
in our approach to peacebuilding. The resolution sets
the parameters for developing more coordinated,
comprehensive and coherent strategies capable of laying
the true foundations for a lasting peace as it addresses
the areas ofpeace, development and human rights. These
strategies should now focus on strengthening synergies
so as to ensure greater impact on the ground. This is

where the relevance of the concept of the sustainability
ofpeace is found.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
resolution 2282 (2016) is an important step forward in
our efforts to adapt the peacebuilding architecture to
today's challenges and that we should now mobilize
further in order to implement it effectively.

