Mr. Blix: The United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
was established by Security Council resolution 1284
( 1999) and was enabled to enter Iraq and carry out its
inspection work almost three years later.

It might seem strange that we are presenting a
draft work programme only after having already
performed the inspections for three and a half months.
However, there were good reasons why the Council
wanted to give us some time after the start of
inspections to prepare this programme. During the
months of the build-up of our resources in Iraq,
Larnaca and New York and of inspections in Iraq we
have - as was indeed the purpose - learned a great
deal that has been useful to know for the drafting of
our work programme and for the selection of key
remaining disarmament tasks. It would have been
difficult to draft it without this knowledge and practical
experience.

The time lines established in resolution 1284
(1999) have been understood to mean that the work
programme was to be presented for the approval of the
Council at the latest on 27 March. In order to meet the
wishes of members of the Council we made the draft
work programme available already on Monday this
week. I note that on the very same day we were
constrained together with other United Nations units to
order the withdrawal of all our inspectors and other
international staff from Iraq.

I naturally feel sadness that three and a half
months of work carried out in Iraq have not brought the
assurances needed about the absence of weapons of
mass destruction or other proscribed items in Iraq, that
no more time is available for our inspections and that
armed action now seems imminent.

At the same time I feel a sense of relief that it
was possible to withdraw yesterday all United Nations
international staff, including that of UNMOVIC and
the International Atomic Energy Agency. I note that the
Iraqi authorities gave full cooperation to achieve this
and that our withdrawal to Larnaca took place in a safe
and orderly manner. Some sensitive equipment was
also taken to Larnaca, while other equipment was left,
and our offices in Baghdad have been scaled. Some
inspection staff will now remain for a short time in
Larnaca to prepare inspection reports. Others who have
come from our roster of trained staff, will go home to
their previous positions and could be available again, if
the need arises.

I would like to make some specific comments that
relate to the draft programme. I am aware of ideas that
have been advanced that specific groups of
disarmament issues could be tackled and solved within
specific time lines. The programme does not propose
such an approach, in which, say, we would aim at
addressing and resolving the issues of anthrax and VX
in March and unmanned aerial vehicles and remotely
piloted vehicles in April. In the work we have pursued
until now, we have worked broadly and did not neglect
any identified disarmament issues. However, it is
evidently possible for the Council to single out a few
issues for resolution within a specific time, just as the
draft programme before members select 12 key tasks,
progress on which could have an impact on the
Council's assessment of cooperation of Iraq under
resolution 1284 (1999). Whatever approach is
followed, results will depend on Iraq's active
cooperation on substance.

May I add that, in my last report, I commented on
the information provided by Iraq on a number of
unresolved issues. Since then, Iraq has sent several
more letters on such issues. These efforts by Iraq
should be acknowledged, but, as I noted in this Council
on 7 March, the value of the information thus provided
must be soberly judged. Our experts have found so far
that, in substance, only limited new information has
been provided that will help to resolve remaining
questions.

Under resolution 1284 (1999), UNMOVIC's work
programme is to be submitted to the Council for
approval. I note, however, that what was drafted and
prepared for implementation by a large staff of
UNMOVIC inspectors and other resources deployed to
Iraq would seem to have only limited practical
relevance in the current situation.

UNMOVIC is a subsidiary organ of the Security
Council. Until the Council takes a new decision
regarding the role and functions of the Commission,
the previous resolutions remain valid to the extent this
is practicable. It is evidently for the Council to
consider the next steps.

In its further deliberations, I hope the Council
will be aware that it has in UNMOVIC staff a unique
body of international experts who owe their allegiance
to the United Nations and who are trained as inspectors
in the field of weapons of mass destruction. While the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has a
large department of skilled nuclear inspectors and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
has a large staff of skilled chemical weapons
inspectors, no other international organization has
trained inspectors in the field of biological weapons
and missiles. There is also in the secretariat of
UNMOVIC staff familiar with and trained in the
analysis of both discipline-specific issues and the broad
questions of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. With increasing attention being devoted to
the proliferation of these weapons, this capability may
be valuable to the Council.

