Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom
for having organized this debate on the link between
natural resources and conflicts, six years after this
was initiated, in 2007, by Belgium. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson;
the Chair of the Africa Progress Panel, Mr. Kofi
Annan; and the representatives of the World Bank and
the United Nations Development Programme for their
briefings introducing the issue.

Togo welcomes the increasingly established
recognition of the link between the access, control,
exploitation and management of natural resources,
on the one hand, and, on the other, the emergence,
escalation and prolongation of conflicts. With regard
to what is at stake with those resources in the context
of the maintenance of international peace and security,
this issue should not be seen exclusively from the
perspective of development. The issue of natural
resources should, rather, be of greater interest to the
Council, not just with regard to conflict management,
but it should also be increasingly considered from the
point of view of prevention. We believe that the Security
Council should not take a wait-and-see approach,
nor wait to manage conflicts once they break out. On
the contrary, we should try to anticipate conflicts by
adopting appropriate measures in conformity with
the norms and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

In the majority of countries on the agenda of our
Council, particularly in Africa, the conflicts that
have broken out are, broadly speaking, fuelled by
covetousness for the natural resources of the given
country. During the conflicts, the illegal exploitation
and trade in natural resources helps to finance the
purchasing of weapons and ammunition and to pay
combatants, which, in turn, fuels the conflicts. In
certain cases, the conflicts simply serve to enrich the
leaders of the militias and armed groups, who benefit
from the economy and state of war. There are examples
of many countries in Africa, Asia and the Middle East
that illustrate that during civil wars, diamonds and
other precious minerals, timber and oil in particular,
have been used to finance military action and have
given rise to systematic violations of human rights.

The drive for natural resources that results from
the economic and strategic stakes associated with
the exploitation of natural resources, renewable
or non-renewable, leads multinational companies,
economic and political lobbies and foreign Powers to
take advantage situations of underlying crises or to
benefit from ongoing conflicts to gain control over
those resources in order to obtain disproportionate
concessions. That direct or indirect involvement by
multinationals and foreign Powers in conflicts is often
illustrated by the contracts that are signed, sometimes
before the end of the conflict, between said companies
and the future victors.

Although there are judicial mechanisms in place
to ensure that belligerents are held responsible for the
crimes and violations of human rights they commit,
private multinational companies and States involved
enjoy complete impunity. In order to put an end to that
situation of impunity for multinationals, Togo feels that
international justice institutions and the States where
the companies are based should have the duty to carry
out transparent investigations on the role that they
have played in the outbreak and the continuation of a
conflict.

With respect to monitoring mechanisms and
the exploitation of and trade in natural resources,
Togo believes that the Kimberley Process, which has
logged some successes, should be adapted to make it
more effective in reducing the predatory mining of
diamonds, which has often been used to finance certain
crises in Africa. Togo also supports the idea to extend
the principle of transparency and traceability to natural
resources other than diamonds.

We firmly believe that transparency in the
exploitation and management of those resources is a key
tool in ensuring the accountability ofboth Governments
and multinational corporations that are active in the
sector. That is why my country encourages all of the
national and international mechanisms aimed at greater
transparency and accountability, such as the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative, which Togo signed
on 22 May. We also welcome the positive impact of
the threat or imposition of sanctions in encouraging
Governments or partners to carry out reforms in the
area of natural resources.

Natural resources need not become a cursed
element of conflict in the countries so endowed. In
the case of Togo, if measures are taken early enough
to reduce domestic conflict by promoting good
management and the improved redistribution of profits,
then the exploitation of such resources should help
to avoid economic marginalization, while ensuring
development, security and peace.

To that end, it is important to strengthen State
capacities to establish efficient governance in the
natural resources sector in order to optimize revenue,
particularly through transparent procedures in the
allocation of mining and trading licenses, as well as in
controlling the sector. Such strengthened capacity should
also complement the political and legal framework

established by Africa Mining Vision - whose
outcome document was adopted in 2009 by the African
Union - with a view to establishing a strategic

planning framework linking mining with development
and transforming the same into a potential economic
source of wealth in Africa to benefit peace.

It is important to call for the greater involvement
of civil society in the good management of natural
resources and for deeper consideration of the risks
associated with mining and oil extraction activities,
particularly in terms of society and the environment.

I would like to conclude by expressing my country's
disappointment that, owing to certain inflexible
positions, the Council has been unable to agree on a
presidential statement that could have reflected the
attention that it should pay to the link between natural
resources and conflict. My country hopes, however,
that today's debate will enable the drafting of new
measures or the improvement of existing ones aimed
at breaking the links between natural resources and
conflict, so those resources will no longer serve as a
curse, but will become a blessing for the countries so
endowed, in particular the African countries.

