Mr. Osman (Somalia): It is a great honour to be
addressing the Security Council today on behalf of
Somalia. I am delighted to be sharing our experiences
with our key partners, all of whom have stood by our
nation and our people in our greatest period of need.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General and his team, both in New York and
in Somalia, for their committment to peace, stability
and prosperity in Somalia.

As the Council is aware, Somalia successfully
concluded a long and complicated election process on
8 February. That day, representatives of the Somali
people voted for change and a new direction for
our country when they elected President Mohamed
Abdullahi Farmajo. We are also aware of the enormous
public support received by the Federal Government
following the election. However, we should be very
aware of the high expectations of the Somali people
following the election of President Farmajo and the
subsequent appointment of Prime Minister Hassan
Ali Kheyre, in the areas of improving security and
providing basic services such as health and education.
Although the Federal Government is working tirelessly
to meet everyone's expectations, the immediate hope is
to gradually improve the lives of our citizens.

Despite the enormous challenge we face, Somalia is
striving for lasting security to ensure that our country
may remain at peace with itself and with the global
community. We believe that the only way for Somalia to
fully recover is to strengthen its democratic institutions.
To that end, President Farmajo's Government will spare
no effort in working towards the promise at the heart
of his election campaign to fight Somalia's three major
enemies: terrorism, corruption and poverty.

The Federal Government focuses on getting
the politics right. We believe that good politics must
be inclusive, participatory, vibrant and practiced
on a level playing field. In that regard, the Federal
Government is committed to solidifying the federal
system of governance, which has only been in place
since 2004. Our overall vision is to achieve a strong
and cooperative union that works for all Somali people
and enhances equity and good governance. Thankfully,
we are a step closer to that objective, as illustrated by
the historic formation of the new National Security
Council, which includes Federal member states. The
National Security Council is a platform for dialogue
not only on security issues, but on broader matters of
national importance too.

The Federal Government and Federal member
states, along with other stakeholders, are currently
engaged in an in-depth discussion on matters ofnational
importance, including a dialogue on the sharing of
natural and national resources. This and other issues
will be discussed in the context of the constitutional
review process. The leaders of Somalia recognize that
the Constitution is a document that binds them together
and serves as the foundational text upon which future
decisions are built.

Security remains paramount for the Federal
Government. The new national security architecture
and the security pact provide the tools we need to
strengthen the Somali National Army and introduce an
improved policing model. Together with the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we are confident
that we can defeat Al-Shabaab in the next couple of
years. Once we recover the remaining territories and
secure supply routes, we will stabilize the country by
building local administrations in collaboration with the
Federal member states. We believe that communities
are best placed to collaborate with the local, state and
Federal Governments to stabilize the country.

However, the Federal Government cannot defeat
Al-Shabaab without the necessary tools. For far too
long, our security forces have been in combat with
terrorist groups using the same light weapons - mostly
AK-47s. Despite the bravery of our men and women
in uniform, we were locked in asymmetrical battles
with the terrorists. Without AMISOM. forces, who are
supplied with heavy weaponry, we would not have been
able to defeat Al-Shabaab. The long-standing arms
embargo on Somalia severely restricts our ability to
procure heavy weapons, despite the partial lifting of
the embargo in 2013. The time has come for Somalia
to be granted access to qualitatively better weapons
than the terrorists. In that regard, we are asking this
organ, the Security Council, to consider and develop
a clearly defined road map to grant the full lifting of
the arms embargo. That would include improvements
to our weapons management and our command-and-
control systems.

In the Military Operations Coordination Committee
meeting held on 5 September in Addis Ababa, AMISOM
troop-contributing countries agreed to reduce troop
numbers, as envisaged in resolution 2372 (2017).
AMISOM. will start planning for exit before May
2018 and is likely to complete its withdrawal in May
2018, if there is no predictable and sustainable funding
arrangement beyond that date. My Government and the
people of Somalia are grateful for the sacrifices made
by AMISOM. over the past 10 years to help to restore
peace in Somalia.

AMISOM. has done a great job. However, the
Somali National Army (SNA) and the Somalia National
Security Forces (SNSF) are still faced with many
challenges, including a general lack of capacity and
the effect of the arms embargo. The SNA and SNSF
are not ready to take over security responsibilities in
Somalia and the premature withdrawal of AMISOM. in
May 2018 may be a recipe for disaster. It is crucial that
AMISOM. be provided with predictable and sustainable
funding beyond 31 May 2018.

When it comes to the assistance we have received in
the security sector from our friends, we are grateful to
all partners for their unwavering and sustained support
over the years. Many provide financial support, while
others provide technical and logistical support. One
partner I would like to dedicate special gratitude to is
AMISOM. Its peacekeeping forces have been working
with us for the past 10 years - much longer than anyone
expected. During that time, they have sacrificed many
soldiers in the quest to help Somalia defeat Al-Shabaab
and rebuild our security sector.

A vital element of rebuilding our security
apparatus is to substantially improve coordination
among international partners on the security front.
We, the Federal Government of Somalia, welcome the
genuine attempt to address this fundamental problem
through the creation of the Comprehensive Assistance
to Security group. This group, in close collaboration
with the National Security Office, must end duplicity
and fragmentation in the security-support sector. On
our side, the National Security Council is designed to
do the same.

For too long, the conventional wisdom has been that
Somalia is a problem to fix and the people have become
a perfect example due of humanitarian breakdown to
the failure of the State to do its job. Today the Federal
Government of Somalia is committed to seizing this
golden opportunity and to nurturing and delivering
better service - a better, stronger and more prosperous
Somalia led by the hopes and aspirations of its people.
This is the best way to continue the process of changing
the prevailing narrative.

Mr. President, it is with your assistance and your
support of the Federal Government-led security iniative
that the darkest chapter of Somali history will come
to a close. The Somali people are hopeful and their
Government aims to meet their expectations with
action.

As we are also aware, the Gu rainy season, which
was between March and June, was late, in some areas was
below the average and in many parts of Somalia resulted
in an elevated risk of famine. The United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affaris estimated

some time in February or March that 3.2 million people
needed immediate assitance. While the war has been
averted thanks to the help of our partners, the threat of
famine has still persisted in the second half of this year.
The Federal Government of Somalia remains extremely
concerned about the humanitarian crisis. We appeal
again to our international partners to help by providing
us with additional funding to sustain the current level
of humanitarian response and save the lives of many
Somalis.

