Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, and the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for
their briefings. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his initiative to despatch a high-level mission to South
Sudan to further clarify for the Council the most recent
attacks on civilians in the country.

Chad once again expresses its concern at the
widespread violence perpetrated in Bentiu and Bor,
which has led to hundreds of deaths and wounded
many more people, including women and children. We
strongly condemn the systematic targeting of civilians
on the basis of their ethnic origins and the use of radio
broadcasts to incite hatred and sexual violence, not to
mention the persecution in places that should be safe,
including mosques, churches and hospitals.

The two parties are seeking a military solution on
the ground instead of a negotiated solution, the prospects
for which seem ever weaker, despite mediation efforts,
especially those deployed under the auspices of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to revive
negotiations. In this regard, we urgently call on the
international community to bring pressure to bear on
the parties to immediate cease violence against civilians
and sites protected by the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), and to commit to an inclusive
peace process. We reiterate our unmitigated support for
the peacekeeping forces of UNMISS, who are working
in very difficult situations to protect civilians in South
Sudan.

We welcome the decision made by neighbouring
countries and countries of the region to send troops to
aid in the protection of civilians, which is a priority of
the UNMISS mandate. We welcome the freeing of four
political prisoners and hope that it will have a positive
effect on the peace talks. We condemn all attacks on
civilians and United Nations facilities, and call on all
of the parties concerned to immediately cease acts of
intimidation and harassment against UNMISS in order
to allow it to fully implement its mandate. We welcome
the assessment carried out by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights regarding recent
events and we eagerly await its report. We hope that
the first mission of the African Union commission of
inquiry currently under way can shed further light on
these attacks so that the perpetrators of the atrocious
acts may face justice.

We call once again on all parties concerned to
choose the path of dialogue and national reconciliation
in the interests of the people of South Sudan.

