Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of the Polish presidency of
the Security Council to hold today's high-level public
meeting on upholding international law and welcomes
His Excellency President Duda to New York to preside
over it.

I would like to thank Ms. Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of
the Secretary-General; Judge Owada, Senior Judge on,
and President Emeritus of, the International Court of
Justice; and Judge Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, for
their briefings.

The current global landscape is undergoing
profound and complex changes. Local conflicts and
turbulence keep popping up, terrorism is rife and
regional security threats are on the rise. The authority
and effectiveness of the system of international law,
based on the Charter of the United Nations, face severe
challenges. How to strengthen the status and role of the
Charter and the principles of international law, which
are based on the purposes and principles of the Charter,
and thereby enhance international peace and security is
a question that warrants in-depth reflection on the part
of all States Members of the United Nations. I would
like to address the following points.

First, all countries should stand by the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and reinforce
the cornerstone of the principles of international law.
The principles set out in the Charter, such as sovereign
equality, non-interference in a State's internal affairs,
the pacific settlement of disputes, the non-use or threat
of use of force and the fulfilment of international
obligations in good faith underpin contemporary
international law and remain a yardstick by which to
judge whether or not a given State act is legal orjust and
ifit should be universally upheld by all Member States.

Secondly, all countries must effectively safeguard
the mission and authority of the Security Council. The
collective security mechanism of which the Council
is the centre is a solid guarantee of the maintenance
of international peace and security. In fulfilling its
responsibilities for international peace and security, the
Council represents the will of all Member States. The
international community must support the Council in
its efforts to resolve differences by political means and
through constructive dialogue and consultation, in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter.

Thirdly, all countries must adhere to the
principle of the peaceful resolution of international
disputes. The sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of all countries must be respected.
Unilateral military operations that are not authorized
by the Security Council or that are not carried out in
exercise of the right of self-defence run counter to
the purposes and principles of the Charter and violate
international law and the basic norms of international
relations. The international community must adhere to
multilateralism, renounce the Cold War mindset and
zero-sum thinking, promote democracy and the rule
of law in international relations and facilitate global
governance through consultations.

Fourthly, all countries must implement and
harmonize applicable international law in good faith.
The lifeblood of the law is its implementation. All
countries must commit to upholding the authority of
international justice, exercise their rights under the
law and fulfil their obligations in good faith. National
and international judicial bodies should ensure that
international law is applied in an equal and uniform
manner, with no double standards or imposition of
one country's will on another. The implementation of
unilateral sanctions hinders and weakens the integrity
and effectiveness of measures taken by the Council and
should therefore be abandoned.

Peace and development are the current leitmotiv.
Win-win cooperation is a general trend, and advancing
the international rule of law is a common aspiration.
Looking forward, we must adhere to the five principles
of peaceful coexistence. We must respect the sovereign
rights of States to choose their own social systems
and paths to development and respect one another's
core interests and concerns. No country is entitled
to wilful breaches of international law. All countries
should follow a new approach to inter-State relations
that features dialogue rather than confrontation, and
partnerships rather than the forming of alliances, in
order to properly manage contradictions and differences
and achieve lasting peace.

Looking forward, we must foster a new philosophy
of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security. All countries should strengthen cooperation
efforts so as to coordinate responses to traditional and
non-traditional security threats and prevent the scourge
of war in the first place. We must deepen bilateral
and multilateral cooperation, promote coordination,
tolerance, complementarity and cooperation among the
various security mechanisms and implement common
and shared security.

As a founding Member of the United Nations and
a permanent member of the Security Council, China
will continue to contribute to world peace and global
development and to uphold the international order.
China stands ready to work with all countries to promote
the establishment of a global governance concept of
cooperation, joint development and sharing; maintain
and strengthen an international order and system
based on the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter; and actively promote a new model
of international relations of mutual respect, fairness,
justice and win-win cooperation, in a joint effort to
build a community for a shared future for humankind.

