Ms. Loj (Denmark): In my capacity as Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) I would
like to review the Committee's activities over the past
three months, and to submit to the Security Council the
Committee's seventeenth work programme for the
current three months period, lasting until 31 December
2005.

I want to thank the Head of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
Mr. Javier Ruperez, and his team, as well as the
Secretariat staff, for the valuable support they give to
the CTC.
Before I elaborate on the work of the Committee,
I would like to point out that we now have a fully
staffed Executive Directorate. The Committee will
therefore benefit fully from the assistance envisaged in
the revitalization documents. More significantly, the
Committee hopes Member States will begin to profit
from the fact that we now have the resources to give
them the guidance and advice they might want in
fulfilling the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). I
sincerely hope that States will take advantage of that
valuable resource and ask for whatever assistance they
need to further their counter-terrorism efforts.

Over the past three months, the Committee has
focused on the following priority areas: we are
engaging with regional organizations, which have more
recently developed a counter-terrorism agenda; we are
catching up on the backlog of reports from States; we
are continuing to look at ways to do our job better as
facilitators of technical assistance; we continue to visit
States, always with their consent; we are enhancing our
dialogue and cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations, inter alia, through their
involvement in the CTC visits to States and by
engaging them to help us strengthen our capacity to
promote implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We
are also taking steps to ensure follow-up to Security
Council resolution 1624 (2005) on incitement of
terrorism adopted at the summit meeting in September;
and finally, we are engaging in policy discussions
aimed at giving CTED the guidance foreseen in the
revitalization documents.

Let me brief you in greater detail on each of those
areas and explain to you what we hope to accomplish
by the end of the year.

First, the Committee regularly stresses the
importance of regional organizations in the fight
against terrorism. Regional groups are increasingly
vital as we move towards facilitating technical
assistance to States that are unable to do everything
they would like in the fight against terrorism. The
importance of regional organizations in this regard was
also reflected in resolution 1631 (2005) passed in
connection with the Security Council debate on 17
October 2005 on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security.

I am, therefore, pleased to note that an increasing
number of regional organizations continue to develop
their counter-terrorism agendas and include efforts to
help their members implement the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). The CTC and its CTED stand
ready to provide guidance and assistance to such
organizations in those endeavours, and I urge
organizations to come forward as they realize they can
benefit from closer contact with the Committee and its
CTED. For its part, the Committee too will take
advantage of CTED's improved resources to do more
to reach out to regional groups.

In that light, I am pleased to note the
strengthening of the Committee's dialogue with several
regional organizations over the past three months. For
example, the Committee welcomed a briefing on
21 July 2005, by the Director of the Peace and Security
Division of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). Several IGAD members are
behind in reporting to the Committee and are asking
for help in building their capacity to fight terrorism. I
hope the CTC will be able to provide IGAD with the
necessary guidance and assistance for it to succeed in
its endeavour to develop its counter-terrorism agenda
and to help its members.

I also welcome the initiative taken by the Pacific
Islands Forum to enhance its dialogue with the CTC
about timely reporting and the possible facilitation of
assistance to its needy member States. Similarly, CTC
welcomes that the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
has decided to establish a crime and security taskforce,
which includes counter-terrorism in its mandate. The
Committee is looking forward to cooperate with it.

At the same time, CTC and its CTED are
continuing cooperation with organizations such as the
European Union, the African Union, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Council of Europe, the
Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the Organization of American States, to
name a few.

In that regard we also note the essential
contribution made by such international organizations
as the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), the International Maritime Organization
(IMO), the World Customs Organization (WCO), the
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering
(FATF), the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) to CTC visits to Member States
and the finalization of reports from such visits. We
continue our interaction with those organizations in the
preparation of new visits. The Committee encourages
the international, regional and subregional
organizations to consider ways to enhance their
bilateral cooperation in order to assist each other in
developing their counter-terrorism agenda.

In that connection, it is time for the Committee to
consider how to follow-up on the latest special meeting
with international, regional, and subregional groups.
Previous gatherings have done a lot to enhance the
common effort. The Committee will be considering
how to approach future meetings in order to ensure that
they will be equally useful for everyone concerned.

A second priority for the Committee is reflected
in its determination to eliminate the backlog of reports
from States on their implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by the end of the year. Moreover, as indicated in
the seventeenth work programme, we will examine
ways of updating the reporting regime. This includes
looking at how to ensure that all aspects of resolution
1373 (2001) are included in future dialogues with
States. Also, in cooperation with the 1540 and 1267
Committees, we will discuss ways ofjointly addressing
the so-called reporting fatigue referred to by several
States at public meetings such as this. We are
conscious of the recent summit's call for the Council to
consider streamlining the reporting procedure.

Thirdly, it is already well established that the
CTC assesses assistance needs when discussing how
far States have come in implementing resolution 1373
(2001). In the most recent reporting period, the
Committee has assessed assistance needs and obtained
agreement to share needs with potential donors for 25
States. We started sharing the needs assessments with
the Counter-Terrorism Action Group, and we are in
touch with a number of potential donors.

Over the next months, the Committee intends to
strengthen its dialogue with States to determine what
each one needs in order to reach agreement on such
needs and to stress the importance of meeting those
needs. In this process, the CTC will also enhance its
cooperation with the relevant international
organizations, which often have the required
experience in specific areas of resolution 1373 (2001).
The CTC will also look at how its dialogue with
potential donors can become more result-oriented. As
part of the Committee's consideration and dialogue, the
technical assistance providers and recipients will
include issues of prioritization and focus, in order to be
able to make the greatest impact on the global counter-
terrorism effort. The Committee is well aware that
much has been said about facilitation and that the time
has come to produce concrete results.
Fourthly, visits to States continue to be an
important part of monitoring implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and of gaining a better
understanding of assistance needs. Since I last reported
to the Council, the Committee has finalized reports
from its first four visits, in cooperation with the visited
States and the involved international and regional
organizations. The Committee must now ensure the
appropriate follow-up to such visits, while the States,
for their part, work to meet their commitments to
further their implementation of 1373 (2001), as agreed
in the respective visit reports. Moreover, the
Committee has decided to visit four more States, with
their consent.

Fifthly, resolution 1624 (2005), adopted during
the September summit, calls upon States to report to
the CTC on implementation of this resolution. The
Committee was directed to include Member States'
efforts to implement 1624 (2005) in its dialogue with
those States. To launch this dialogue, the Committee
has decided that its letters to States on implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) will also contain questions
on resolution 1624 (2005). I encourage States to
provide the Committee with detailed information about
their efforts in this regard to enable the Committee to
report back to the Council on their implementation.

Before I conclude, I should like to stress that the
CTC puts great emphasis on its responsibility to
provide policy guidance to the CTED. The Committee
will continue its discussions about how to provide
transparent guidance on implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) through the development of best practices.
Also, the Committee will discuss how a human rights
perspective might be appropriately incorporated into
the Committee's policy and substantive work while, at
the same time, respecting the various aspects of its
Security Council mandate.

In this connection, I should mention that before
the end of the year, the CTC will take steps to provide
for the Council's comprehensive review of the CTED,
in line with resolution 1535 (2004).

The CTC remains a crucial instrument in the
international community's fight against terrorism.
Developments during the last three months have again
proven that its task remains vital and urgent. The
support from and cooperation with Member States
remains invaluable. On behalf of the CTC, I should
like to thank Member States and again encourage them
to look on the fully staffed CTED as an opportunity to
obtain the guidance and assistance they need in their
efforts to fulfil the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001).

