Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. Let me also join others in
thanking you for your prompt response to the request,
including from my delegation on behalf of the Islamic
Group at the United Nations, for an urgent meeting of
the Council to consider the grave situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.
Like other members of the international community,
Malaysia continues to follow closely the grave
developments there with the greatest of concern, in the
fervent hope that the continuing violence will subside,
thereby sparing the Palestinian people further needless
deaths and injuries.

My delegation listened very carefully and with
deep empathy to the statement made by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, to whom I am most grateful. I
am also grateful to those speakers before me who have
exposed the hostile and uncompromising policies
maintained by successive Israeli Governments while
they glibly talked about the need to have peaceful
relations with their Palestinian and Arab neighbours.

Since 18 December 2000, when the Security
Council failed to adopt a draft resolution that would
have led to the establishment of a United Nations force
comprising military and police observers to be
dispatched throughout the territories occupied by Israel
since 1967, nearly 100 more Palestinians have been
killed and thousands injured. By some accounts, to date
nearly 400 Palestinians have lost their lives in the
continuing violence on the ground, mainly as a direct
result of the excessive use of force by Israeli security
forces. We believe that the additional loss of lives and
injuries sustained by the Palestinians could have been
prevented had the Council discharged its
responsibilities and acted decisively on that day to
establish the proposed United Nations observer or
monitoring force.

It was for this purpose that my Minister of
Foreign Affairs travelled to New York, along with
several of his colleagues from the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC), under the leadership of the
Foreign Minister of Qatar, representing the
Chairmanship of the OIC. My Minister and his
colleagues addressed this Council and made a strong
plea for the establishment of a United Nations
protections force. They had hoped that their pleas
would convince the Council to make the right decision.
Regrettably, this was not the case and the draft
resolution was voted down by a very slim margin.

Those members of the Council that abstained in
the voting on the draft resolution last December argued
that more time was needed to allow Israel and Palestine
to arrive at an agreement between themselves over
larger issues, which might include the establishment of
such an observer force. My delegation argued that, by
doing so, the Council would be subjecting the
establishment of the United Nations force to the
vagaries of a tortuous and uncertain peace process. We
did not believe then, nor do we believe now, that the
fate of such an important - indeed, indispensable -
United Nations force should be subjected to these
uncertainties. We believed instead that the
establishment of a United Nations force would have
calmed the situation and certainly would have
prevented the needless deaths and injuries sustained by
Palestinian civilians these last several months. It would
have sent a powerful message to Israel of the serious
concern of the Council and the international
community over its use of excessive force in handling
the situation. It would also have demonstrated, in a
tangible way, the Council's concern and sympathy for
the dire plight of the Palestinian civilians, the victims
of the current situation. It would be most unfortunate
indeed if, in spite of these past tragic events, the
Council were to continue to do nothing and to bear
witness to more deaths and injuries in the coming
months.
Malaysia joins the rest of the international
community in its indignation over Israel's continued
reliance on the use of massive and unmitigated forceful
response to individual outbreaks of Palestinian protest
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. Protracted closures of the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem;
tight restrictions on the movement of people and
goods; the withholding of customs and tax incomes
from the Palestinian Authority that rightfully belong to
it; and other measures of collective punishment have
had a disastrous effect on the Palestinian economy.
These draconian and inhumane measures have made
life for the Palestinians a daily struggle for sheer
survival. They have, inevitably, increased tension,
provoked further violence and led to a further crisis of
trust and confidence between the two sides, thereby
making it even more difficult for the peace process to
be put back on track.

My delegation recalls that some members of the
Council made the point then that the issue of the
United Nations monitoring force was still on the table
and could be revisited at a later date. We therefore call
on the Council to reconsider the proposal and to act
now, and decisively, to stop the killing of Palestinian
civilians in the occupied Territories. It cannot afford to
continue to sit on the sidelines and do nothing on the
argument that it is for the two sides to resolve their
problem, knowing full well that this is not likely to
happen anytime soon, especially in the wake of the
recent elections in Israel and the formation of a new
Government headed by Mr. Ariel Sharon. Clearly, the
onus lies with Mr. Sharon, who, as we all know,
precipitated the crisis in the first place.

This urgent meeting of the Council should send a
clear signal of the expectation of the Council and the
international community of an immediate end of the
violence, and the early despatch of a United Nations
observer force to the occupied territories would be a
concrete step in that direction. We do not subscribe to
the argument made in this Chamber today that Council
action on this proposal would interfere in the peace
process. Arguments for non-action by the Council are
as unconvincing and self-serving today as they were in
the past. Surely, they cannot hope to convince anyone
but the speakers themselves.

We believe, on the contrary, that the easing of
tensions following the establishment of a United
Nations observer force would contribute substantively
to the peace process. It would create a climate that
would be conducive to dialogue and negotiations.
Continued tension through non-action by the Council
would only exacerbate the situation and ensure the
continuing spiral of violence.

This Council, which is quick to intervene in other
conflict situations in order to protect civilians caught in
armed conflict, cannot have a different set of standards
in respect of the protection of Palestinian civilians. We
believe that the establishment of a United Nations
observer or monitoring force will be a concrete step in
providing protection for them. The very credibility of
the Council is at stake if nothing is done to deal with
the situation immediately. Non-action by the Council,
as advocated in some quarters, would be to consign the
Palestinian issue and, in particular, the current grave
situation in the occupied territories to continued
neglect and indifference and to further cynical
manipulation of the issue by Israel. My delegation is
therefore encouraged to observe today the positive
attitudes of most members of the Council on this
important proposal.

May I conclude by expressing my delegation's
deep and sincere appreciation for the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by the United Nations Special Coordinator
in the Occupied Territories. We thank him for his
tireless efforts made towards what is likely to be a
protracted process. We also support the efforts of the
Secretary-General and continue to believe that such
efforts can be pursued in parallel with those of the
Council.

