Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank the United States for convening this meeting,
and the Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Djinnit, for his briefing. China will continue to
actively support his work.

The Great Lakes Region lies at the heart of the
African continent and the countries of the region
share the same destiny, with interconnected interests.
China appreciates the efforts of the countries of the
region to actively implement the Peace, Security and
Cooperation (PSC) Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region and promote
peace and stability in the region. At the same time, the
countries of the region face numerous challenges in
terms of addressing the threats posed by armed groups
and attaining sustainable development. They need the
assistance and support of the international community.
I will emphasize the following four points.

First, we must continue to energetically implement
the PSC Framework. China encourages the countries
of the region to respect one another's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. They must build
up political trust, strengthen good neighbourly relations
and solve their differences through dialogue and
consultations. We hope that the international community
will, on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and
opinion of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, help the country to implement political
agreements, deepen the reform of the security sector,
strengthen governance in the eastern areas of the
country, promote national reconciliation and work to
attain peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region.

Secondly, we must strengthen the security
cooperation among countries of the region. China
welcomes the cooperation among those countries in
addressing the threats posed by armed groups. We
encourage those countries to actively implement the
Nairobi Declarations and expedite the repatriation of
ex-M-23 combatants. We hope that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will, in accordance with its
mandate from the Security Council , play an active
role in helping the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo to fight armed groups.

Thirdly, we must promote the economic development
of the region. Poverty and underdevelopment are
two of the fundamental causes behind the incessant
conflicts of the Great Lakes Region. China calls
upon the international community to increase its
investment in countries of the region in the fields of
agriculture, energy, infrastructure, communications
and tourism, and promote the economic integration
and interconnectedness among those countries, so
that those countries can share the dividends of peace.
We hope that the relevant donors will honour their
assistance commitments and lend strong support to the
countries of the region for their economic development
and the improvement of peoples' livelihoods.

Fourthly, we must give full play to the role of
regional and subregional organizations. The African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the East African Community enjoy
unique advantages in solving the question of Burundi,
the question of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other questions. All of those organizations have
played important roles. China supports Africa in
solving African problems in African ways. We support
African regional and subregional organizations as
they continue to promote the political settlement of
regional hotspot issues through dialogue, mediation
and good offices. We hope that the United Nations will
strengthen its coordination with other African regional
and subregional organizations so as to create synergies.

China has consistently supported the countries
of the Great Lakes Region in their efforts to promote
the peace process. On many occasions, China has
dispatched its Special Representative for African
Affairs to countries of the region for mediation. China
participates actively in the peacekeeping operations
of the United Nations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, while helping regional and subregional
organizations to maintain peace in the region. We stand
ready to work with the international community and
will continue to play a constructive role in achieving
peace and stability and promoting development in the
Great Lakes Region.

