Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): Today we
have heard some Iranophobic and hysterical statements
from a few delegations. We have been hearing such
statements recently from those who are badly in need
of an imaginary enemy to whom to sell their beautiful
weapons and from those who have entrenched their
illegal occupations and aggressions by using such
weapons. It is indeed a dirty business and has nothing
to do with peace and security in the Middle East. No
political theatre - such as we saw this morning inside
and outside this Chamber and repeatedly from the
representative of the Israeli regime - can cover up the
aggressive and expansionist policies of that regime or
its behaviour towards its neighbour, which constitute
the main threat to peace and security in the region.

Iran's advisory presence in Syria is at the request of
the Syrian Government and is legitimate in providing
assistance to the Syrian Government to fight and
ultimately eliminate all terrorist groups, especially
Da'esh, and other individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities associated with them. It also seeks to restore the
unity of that country and achieve a political solution.

We categorically reject the Israeli allegations as
baseless and sheer fabrication. It is indeed ironic that
the Israeli regime - famous for its atrocities, apartheid
policies, war crimes that are well-documented
in different United Nations organs and agencies,
non-compliance with many United Nations resolutions
and occupation of lands of other people for many
decades - can allow itself to accuse others in such a
sinister way. It is also preposterous that the same region,
with its highly known record of developing, producing
and stockpiling different kinds of inhumane weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, should
venture to falsely accuse others of trying to acquire
similar weapons.

We believe that this open debate should be devoted
to Palestine. That is why my delegation asked to use
this second opportunity to react to the false accusations
also made by the representative of Saudi Arabia.
The baseless Saudi allegations against Iran and its
provocative and destabilizing behaviour in the region
aim to distract the international community away
from its own widespread systematic crimes, including
its support for Wahhabi takfiri ideology, which is the
source of many terrorist activities and originates in
Saudi Arabia.
The situation in Yemen is another example of the
Saudi Arabia's war of aggression being the underlying
reason for the escalation of the crisis. There have been
various attempts by the aggressors, as well as their
accomplices in the war, to cover up their shameful war
crimes by introducing false charges against others. The
United States is pursuing its lucrative arm business in
Yemen, while those responsible for creating the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world are showcasing how
they hand over their checks to help the victims of their
own atrocities. The Saudi-led coalition's measures and
indiscriminate aerial attacks have resulted in mass
casualties, including among women and children,
displaced millions, and amplified poverty and hunger
in an already poor country and a surge in epidemic
diseases. Such ambitious and expansionist policy
measures, as well as the inhumane blockade and
use of the threat of starvation as an instrument of
war, are tantamount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity that should be carefully investigated and
duly prosecuted.

