Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes this open debate. The Council is dealing
with issues that are of vital importance to us all.

Countries that are not members of the Security
Council last had the opportunity to address these issues
in the debate four months ago, on 16 October. Since
then, pursuant to resolution 1441 (2002), inspectors of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have
returned to Iraq. The Council heard their reports on 27
January and again on 14 February.

The first report suggested that, while Iraq was
cooperating on process, it had not cooperated
sufficiently on substance. The heads of UNMOVIC and
IAEA returned to Baghdad to impress on it that only
full compliance with the requirements of the United
Nations that it disarm and be seen to disarm would
prevent the serious consequences warned of in
resolution 1441 (2002). Last Friday's report suggests
that Iraq has moved, at least in part, to accommodate
some of the inspectors' requests. But it still must
answer serious questions about material related to
weapons of mass destruction that remained unanswered
in 1998 when United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) inspectors left.

The New Zealand Government calls on Iraq to
move rapidly to provide the information and
cooperation requested of it to avert the catastrophe that
war would bring to its people. The New Zealand
Government recognizes that the Security Council must
be able to authorize force as a last resort to uphold its
resolution. It does not, however, believe that such a
decision would be justified at this time. The inspectors'
reports strongly imply that their work is useful in
pursuing the objectives of the United Nations as laid
out in a series of resolutions, and, as long as that is so,
it should continue.

The New Zealand Government has a very strong
preference for a diplomatic solution to this crisis. We
place considerable weight on the inspection and
disarmament process. We believe that it should run its
course. We do not support military action against Iraq
without a mandate from the Security Council, and we
do not believe that the Council would be justified in
giving that mandate at this time. Our position is based
on our strong support for multilateralism, the
international rule of law and our respect for the
authority of the Security Council. We will uphold the
Council's decisions, but we urge it at this time to
ensure that all available diplomatic means are used to
pursue the disarmament of Iraq as set out in the
Council's resolutions.

