Mr. Bouah-Kamon (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the outset, as this is the first time that I
take the floor in the Security Council as the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire to the
United Nations, allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
and the organ that you lead for the sustained attention
paid to my country since the difficult situation that we
have had to deal with in the past few years.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
report (S/2015/320), which underscores the tremendous
progress made in Cote d'Ivoire since the accession of
His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara to the country's
presidency, the specific effects of which can be seen
today in a normalized political situation and a healthy,
growing economy. National reconciliation, as indicated
in the report, displays fresh dynamism through the
political dialogue with the opposition. Social cohesion
is gradually being strengthened. The security index has
significantly improved, and is comparable today to that
of a normal country.

The process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, which is drawing to a conclusion, has one
of the best implementation rates. That is why I would
like to take this opportunity to express our gratitude
to Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire, for the
outstanding work that she has achieved on the ground
in cooperation with the Ivorian authorities. Of course,
a number of challenges remain, as noted in the report,
and the Government has been doing its best to resolve
them. Despite the progress in the area of security, the
Ivorian Government recognizes the importance of
tirelessly continuing our efforts. The same could be
said with regard to meeting social demands and with
regard to the need for national reconciliation.

The highlight of political life this year in C6te
d'Ivoire will be the general elections, to be held in
accordance with the Ivorian Constitution. The elections
will mark a crucial step in the transition towards
stability and peace. The successful completion of the
elections therefore will be a major challenge for the
Ivorian Government, and in that respect we are paying
close attention to the effort. The Government wishes
to see the holding of free, transparent and inclusive
elections, which will require the support of the
international community, especially the support of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).
In that respect, my delegation requests an extension of
the UNOCI mission and a broadening of its mandate to
include logistical support for the electoral process as
proposed in the Secretary-General's report. Assistance
to the Ivorian Government for successful elections will
mark a decisive step towards the successful completion
of the enormous achievements obtained by UNOCI
before its full withdrawal in early 2017.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
the Ivorian Government's gratitude to the Security
Council for its commitment to fully cooperate in
the success of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire.

