Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Two
years ago in December 2009, the Council adopted
resolution 1907 (2009), which established a sanctions
regime against Eritrea. Those sanctions were decided
upon to deal with Eritrea's provision of support to
armed groups that were destabilizing Somalia and as a
resuly of its refusal to engage in constructive dialogue
to resolve its border dispute with the Republic of
Djibouti. For two years, despite the appeals of the
international community, the Eritrean authorities have
failed to meet the expectations of the Security Council.
On the contrary, the information contained in the most
recent report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea (S/2011/433) of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea is a source of concern. Notably, the report
indicates that Eritrea is continuing to carry out
destabilizing activities in several States in the Horn of
Africa.

Moreover, Eritrea has shown neither good faith
nor the will necessary to find a peaceful solution to the
border conflict with the Republic of Djibouti. Indeed, it
has done absolutely nothing to resolve the issue of
prisoners of war, which constitutes a violation of
international humanitarian law.

Given the absence of any constructive gesture
from Eritrea and given that we heard this morning
concerns voiced at the very highest level by the States
members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, a gradual strengthening of sanctions is
justified. That is the purpose of the resolution
introduced by Gabon and Nigeria, and we thank them
for having represented Africa in this African crisis.

We have ensured that the resolution will have no
impact on the population of Eritrea. Its text expresses
the concern of the international community at the
activities of the Eritrean authorities in violation of
international law and Security Council decisions, and it
is intended to bring such actions to an end.

The sanctions decided upon by the Council can
be reversed. Hence, we call upon Eritrea to commit
itself with no further delay to an open approach. That
would involve putting an end to activities that are
destabilizing neighbouring countries and resuming
resolute dialogue in good faith with its neighbours, in
particular the Republic of Djibouti under the auspices
of Qatar's mediation efforts.

