Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): One of the priorities of the national water plan
of action of the Syrian Government is to ensure a supply
of water now and into the future. Prior to the crisis
in Syria, we had registered significant achievements
by providing citizens with 99 per cent of their water
needs in cities, and 90 per cent in rural dwellings.
Unfortunately, these rates have decreased during the
crisis in the light of the fact that most of the water-
pumping stations and water wells have been destroyed
or looted by armed terrorist groups, particularly in
unstable regions.

It is important to stress that using water resources
as a weapon is a gross violation of all relevant provisions
of international humanitarian law. This leads us to take
a closer look at what armed terrorist groups are doing
in my country, Syria. Some like to call them the armed
opposition, or non-State armed groups. Those groups
use water resources as a weapon to bring pressure to
bear on the Government of Syria and civilians.

What has been witnessed in Aleppo and Damascus
is a clear example of this. Civilians in both cities
suffered from long periods of water interruption after
armed terrorist groups bombarded wells and pipelines,
poisoned the water and looted and blew up pumping
stations. This is in addition to the bombing of water and
electricity facilities by what is called the international
coalition, which led to acute water scarcity and had
negative repercussions on the lives of civilians.

In addition to the tremendous harm inflicted on our
water resources because of such terrorist attacks, the
coercive unilateral economic measures imposed on my
country by the European Union and the United States
of America, among other countries, have increased the
pressure on Syria's national efforts to provide its citizens
with water. Such illegitimate measures have made it
impossible to provide the necessary fuel and spare parts
to pumping stations in Syria. Those measures have
obstructed the implementation of projects undertaken
by the Government of Syria in cooperation with United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations. I would cite as an example the inability
of Oxfam recently to provide the fuel needed to operate
the pumping station in Aleppo because of the European
measures imposed on Syria.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
is endeavouring to work according to a strategic
vision that is not limited to emergency humanitarian
assistance but includes adopting a strategy for
rebuilding the infrastructure of all facilities as well
as rehabilitating the affected irrigation networks. This
requires the lifting of the unilateral coercive economic
measures, which have had negative repercussions on
all sustainable development fields in Syria, including
the sustainability of water resources and the ability to
provide for the needs of citizens.

In addressing the issue of the protection of water
resources, we must all be careful to avoid politicizing this
vital water sector, especially among countries sharing
international river waterways. These countries must
respect international law and the relevant international
resolutions as well as the agreements signed when it
comes to such sharing, and also avoiding undermining
the interests of other countries or decreasing their share
for political reasons.

We also stress the need for concerted international
efforts towards supporting the legitimate rights ofpeople
languishing under the yoke of occupation, including the
right to have access to water, especially because they
are the indigenous heirs of those natural resources.

In that vein, we recall what our people are facing
in the occupied Syrian Golan and the intentional
restriction imposed by the Israeli occupation forces on
natural resources, in particular water, which is provided
only to Israeli settlers, while Syrians are deprived of
that natural resource through discriminatory policies
with regard to prices and limitations on drinking and
agricultural water, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the relevant
resolutions of the Organization.

In conclusion, the Government of my country is
anxious to do its utmost to provide for the needs of
Syrians and protect them from terrorism, which is
negatively affecting all aspects of their lives, including
water resources. We try to avoid the use of this vital
resource as a tool to exert pressure on Governments
and civilians.

