Mr. Chinvanno (Thailand): Peace and security
will not be sustainable without development. Likewise,
development cannot be sustainable without peace and
security. Their mutually reinforcing nature has proven
to be indisputable. I thank the United Kingdom and
Chile for their efforts earlier in the year to highlight the
development dimension, aiming at preventing conflict.

Far too often, the international community has
reacted in order to resolve conflicts rather than
proactively prevent them. The Security Council has
had to respond to crises and deal with their sorrowful
aftermath rather than tackling emerging threats early
on. Thailand believes that investing in development
is a cost-effective way to prevent conflict. Conflict
resolution often is too little, too late, following dire
humanitarian consequences.

Often, conflict stems from the absence of just or
inclusive socioeconomic development, which fosters
discontent, discord and strife. When economic fruits
are not fairly shared and distributed, and when the
gap between the haves and the have-nots becomes too
wide and when it cuts across religions, ethnicities and
ideologies, existing tensions tend to be exacerbated,
and the risk of conflict tends to increase.

In Thailand's view, development ought to be
holistic, inclusive and beneficial to all for it to be
sustainable and conducive to peace. It must address
persisting poverty and inequality and ensure equitable
access to resources, quality education, decent work and
justice. We must leave no man, woman or child behind.
As an ardent supporter of the women and peace and
security agenda, Thailand advocates a greater role
for women at all stages of the peace process as well
as in promoting development. We must also focus our
development programmes on our youth so as to help
them realize their full potential and dissuade them from
violent extremist leanings.

Development alone, however, is not enough. We
must also create conditions conducive to a peaceful
society in which human rights, the rule of law and
good governance are promoted and upheld. Thailand
champions a comprehensive approach to peace, security
and development. This is evident in the way in which
our peacekeepers, who are actually more like early
peacebuilders, carry out their duties. They are very much
invested in their peacekeeping responsibilities and in
helping local populations improve their livelihoods and
stand on their own feet. They are strongly committed
to building peace and to preventing any further relapse
into conflict.

The United Nations system can achieve more by
working in a coordinated manner to maximize the
tools at its disposal to reinforce the work of concerned
agencies. When various bodies are acting in concert, the
Security Council in particular can lend the necessary
political weight to support preventive action.

We agree with the Secretary-General that United
Nations conflict-prevention tools must be strengthened,
used proactively and deployed rapidly. We support
the use of good offices and preventive diplomacy, as
well as early-warning systems based on informed
analyses of the dynamics on the ground. Peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and special political missions are
essential to prevent conflict from recurring. These are
tools that need adequate resources.

The United Nations also must work closely with
Member States, who have the primary responsibility
for conflict prevention, to ensure sustainability. United
Nations training and capacity-building programmes in
conflict prevention should be continued and expanded.
It is also crucial to deepen cooperation with regional
organizations, as they are normally better informed and
closely engaged with the dynamics and key players in
the region. Their conflict-prevention capabilities and
tools can complement those of the United Nations, to
the benefit of countries neighbouring the conflict areas.
Today we are facing increasingly complex conflicts
that require a more prompt, effective and coordinated
response. Thailand stands ready to work with the United
Nations and our partners worldwide to tackle the root
causes of conflict, prevent conflict from happening,
and sustain peace through development work.

