Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his briefing. We would
like once again to assure him that Russia supports his
personal efforts, as well as those of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), in
resolving regional crises, addressing issues related
to political mediation and providing assistance to
improving State institutions, as well as supporting the
search for ways to pursue economic development and
the fight against terrorism. The scale and results of his
work deserve the highest praise.

It is encouraging that the political situation in the
region as a whole has remained stable. In the first half
of this year, elections were held in many countries of
the region - Nigeria, Senegal, Guinea-Bissau and
Benin 4 without serious problems. We trust that the
electoral cycles that are in progress in other West
African countries will also take place under conditions
of law and order.

However, the security situation in the Sahara-
Sahel region and in several West African countries
remains complicated. The international terrorists who
have gained a foothold there are increasing the scale
of their activities and attempting to expand their areas
of operation, and new radical groups and leaders are
emerging. This situation is rooted in the external
intervention and subsequent collapse of statehood
in Libya in 2011. The acute domestic political and
socioeconomic problems that persist in countries of
the Sahel, as well as inter-ethnic and interreligious
confrontations, are fuelling the activities of an extensive
network of j ihadist structures. Collective steps taken by
States in the region and external partners to counter
these challenges have not yet led to a breakthrough in
the fight against extremists.

In Mali, a protracted conflict remains ongoing,
aggravated by the intervention of various terrorist
groups in the region and a power vacuum in the north
and the centre of the country. The firmly embedded
international extremists are expanding their activities
into neighbouring countries, such as the Niger, Burkina
Faso and C6te d'Ivoire. The number of victims from
jihadist attacks is on the rise. Disquieting assessments
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/549) and
the conclusions drawn from the Security Council's visit
to the region in March are testament to the infeasibility
of drawing down the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali at this stage.

In Nigeria, the Niger, Chad and Burkina Faso, the

terrorist activities of Boko Haram are expanding, and
Burkina Faso has also seen the appearance of the Ansar
Al-Islam group, which is affiliated with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. The international and
African communities are keeping a constant focus on
the situation in the Sahara-Sahel region. An important
element of the work in this area is the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (UNISS), which
aims to improve the effectiveness of State governance,
strengthen the capacities of national and regional
security mechanisms and carry out development
activities in the countries of the region. Financial,
military and humanitarian assistance continues to be
provided through various international programmes,
United Nations missions and on a bilateral basis. The
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is pursuing its
efforts to ensure the full-fledged deployment of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force in order to combat terrorism,
organized crime and drug trafficking. The Joint Force
has already carried out several operations on the ground
to date.

We greatly appreciate the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and
specialized agencies of the United Nations in providing
a broad range of assistance to West African countries.
It is crucial that such efforts be undertaken in close
coordination with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other
organizations. We believe that it is important to improve
the effectiveness of UNISS and the related United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. In implementing
these instruments, the views of the countries for which
they have been developed are of the primary importance.

We believe that it will be impossible to get
anything done without the proper coordination of
the numerous assistance programmes for the region.
Their effectiveness depends, inter alia, on whether the
structures present there - first and foremost those
within the United Nations system - are acting within
their sphere of responsibility and taking into account
the principle of the division of labour. It is only through
collective focused actions, carried out in relevant
formats that do not create conflicting mandates, that
will we be able to achieve the desired results.

Russia continues to play an active role in resolving
the problems in West Africa and the Sahel. We are
taking steps to establish effective cooperation with
the G-5 Sahel. In April, the Permanent Secretary
of that entity, Mr. Maman Sidikou, and his team,
visited Moscow for the first time. During the visit,
agreements were reached on strengthening full-fledged
practical cooperation.

On a bilateral basis, we continue to provide
assistance to strengthen the combat-readiness of the
armies and security structures of States in the region.
In particular, military personnel and police officers
from Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso continue to
receive training at specialized Russian facilities. We
intend to continue to provide such assistance to our
West African friends.

