Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania welcomes the progress
report of the Secretary-General on ways to combat
subregional and cross-border problems in West Africa
(S/2005/86). That ongoing effort makes it clear that the
challenges facing West Africa are not unique to that
region. We must all therefore have a greater interest in
finding practical and sustainable solutions to the perils
that afflict the African continent.

The West African subregion is a geographical
entity that has reached a significant high level of
integration in Africa, with a common purpose and
shared concerns. The subregion's community of
nations offers a framework for subregional cooperation
and a reference point for the African Union and the rest
of the international community, including the United
Nations, to work with. It is in that context that we have
a platform to discuss a regional approach to cross-
border issues and problems in West Africa, which
should be encouraged and replicated in other parts of
Africa.

The internal conflict in Liberia, which began in
December 1989, triggered a chain of events in other
parts of the subregion. For it is true that internal
conflicts - whether involving various ethnic, religious
or political groupings within one country or cross-
border national clashes across borders - have
contributed to a growing number of civilians being
caught up in fighting and have pushed many internally
displaced persons into unsafe areas or forced them to
flee their own countries to neighbouring countries in
search of safety. That movement away from conflict
areas also risks inciting upheavals in other areas or
exacerbating existing or simmering conflicts.

In the United Republic of Tanzania we know too
well that exiles and refugees sometimes seek to
become active in conflicts in the areas to which they
have been displaced and to influence political events at
home. Sometimes they turn the violence they have
witnessed or perpetrated on the people and country that
have provided them with succour and sanctuary. Those
negative and destructive dynamics need to be
contained and reversed. West Africa has experienced
that cycle of violence and its attendant instability.

It is in that sense that the mixed picture of the
situation in West Africa presented by the Secretary-
General cannot be too comforting. Progress towards
sustainable peace in the region remains critical.
Achievements in Liberia, where it all started, as well as
in Sierra Leone, offer us great hope. But the situation
in the Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau and the recent
events in Togo are a source of continuing concern. The
efforts by the United Nations Office for West Africa,
subregional organizations, United Nations entities and
civil society organizations need to be commended and
supported.

West Africa has demonstrated remarkable
leadership in Africa in the areas of conflict resolution
and the maintenance of regional peace and security. In
recognition of that, it needs the support of the
international community if it is to overcome the
challenges it continues to face. The report highlights
the pressing need to harmonize disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes,
with specific reference to programmes for women and
children. In a region whose borders have historically
been porous and are now becoming increasingly open
as a result of the process of integration, no single
country can overcome that challenge. The United
Nations - and, indeed, the international community as
a whole - must facilitate and support that process.

In a zone where combatants continuously
circulate across borders and where there is a constant
flux of refugees and returnees, it is only through an
effective regional approach to DDR that we can we
hope to contain the negative region-wide effects that
are likely to result from the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. At the same time, in countries such
as Liberia and Sierra Leone, where refugees are ready
to return, they should be helped to integrate and to
participate in post-conflict peacebuilding.

Tanzania notes the encouraging steps that the
members of the Mano River Union have taken to set up
effective mechanisms for consultation and control,
notably on ways to deal with mercenaries. We welcome
further efforts to determine practical ways to promote
the building of confidence, peace and stability in the
subregion in line with the Security Council's call on
the Mano River States to resume dialogue. In that
regard, we commend the role of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and call for more sustained
efforts, including continued contributions, to improve
the capacity of the Economic Community of West
African States in the area of crisis management and to
address the problem of youth unemployment as a factor
of instability in the subregion, in collaboration with
civil society organizations.

In many respects, many of the cross-border
problems facing West Africa - and, indeed, Africa as
a whole - are also related to issues pertaining to
approaches to development. There are practical
contributions that a focus on development can offer in
addressing those phenomena. Development policies
must seek to shape conditions in the region that foster
growth in terms of constitutional structures,
functioning State institutions and the emergence of the
rule of law. The advanced regional institutions which
ECOWAS has evolved so far offer a convenient policy
framework and programmes for development partners
to contribute to national development and regional
integration.

The Millennium Development Goals stress that
good governance is one of the critical factors in
promoting stability and thus in fighting poverty and
insecurity. Conflicts are unlikely to occur when people
are satisfied with their governance structures. We note
with great interest the measures which are being taken
at the national and regional levels in West Africa to
institutionalize democracy, the rule of law and good
governance at all levels.

The aspirations of the people of West Africa to
live in peace, security and prosperity deserve our full
support. The Security Council must leave no doubt that
they have its support. Tanzania fully subscribes to the
draft presidential statement presented to the Council by
Benin.

