Mr. Moreno Fernandez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for the information they
provided.

For years, our country has submitted detailed
information to the Security Council on the terrorist
actions against Cuba. Our denunciations have received
no concrete response to date. Despite having all the
evidence necessary to accuse Luis Posada Carriles - a
person who is rightly considered to be the most
notorious terrorist of the western hemisphere - of
terrorism, the United States Government merely
follows a judicial process against him for minor
crimes. Cuba reiterates that the manner in which the
United States Government has addressed this case
constitutes a clear and flagrant violation of resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and General Assembly, as well as
various international legal instruments related to the
fight against terrorism.

The Government of the Republic of Cuba calls
once again upon the United States authorities to try
Posada Carriles as a terrorist or to return him to the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which has requested
his extradition since 15 June 2005, almost four years
ago.

Cuba supports the position of the 118 States
members of the Non-Aligned Movement that oppose
the compilation of unilateral lists accusing States of
supposedly sponsoring terrorism. Such lists are
incompatible with international law and United Nations
resolutions.

On 30 April, for the twenty-eighth consecutive
year, the United States Government included Cuba on a
list of States that allegedly sponsor international
terrorism. Cuba firmly rejects the inclusion of our
country on that unilateral and spurious list, which is
politically motivated, biased and prepared by the
United States Department of State.

Throughout all these years, the flimsy excuses
cited to include Cuba on such a list have been many,
but their complete lack of veracity and objectivity and
the impossibility of justifying them have always been
evident. With the unjustifiable inclusion of Cuba on
that list, the new United States Government denies the
political rationality it publicly proclaims and follows
the errant trail blazed by its predecessors by resorting
to political manipulations and flagrant lies against
Cuba to justify its discredited, isolated and
unsustainable policy against our country at any cost.

Those preparing such lists have absolutely no
moral authority to present themselves as international
arbiters of terrorism able to certify good or bad
behaviour. The unimpeachable policy on terrorism of
the Cuban revolution is beyond question or doubt, let
alone those raised in Washington, DC. Cuba condemns
all terrorist acts, methods and practices in all their
forms and manifestations, wherever, by whomever,
against whoever committed and whatever their
motivation.

Cuban territory has never and will never be used
for organizing, financing or undertaking terrorist
actions against another country. The United States
Government could not make the same claim. It is not in
Cuba but in the United States that a terrorist mafia,
which has organized, financed and carried out
hundreds of terrorist actions against the Cuban nation,
acts with impunity.

Over the past 50 years, United States
administrations have been involved in repeated
terrorist actions that have killed 3,478 Cubans and
injured 2,099 and caused material losses amounting to
$54 billion. At the beginning of the victorious
revolution, the United States Government not only
welcomed hundreds of henchmen, torturers and
murderers from Batista's tyranny, who had caused over
20,000 deaths and fled revolutionary justice, but has
also maintained for five decades a policy of protecting
and harbouring any criminal reaching United States
territory after having committed crimes against Cuba
and its people.

Since the triumph of the revolution, United States
administrations have tolerated and even organized acts
of sabotage and destruction of civilian objectives in
Cuba; air and sea pirate attacks against defenceless
Cuban populations, coastal facilities and merchant and
fishing vessels; attacks against Cuban facilities and
personnel abroad, including diplomatic headquarters;
and hundreds of assassination attempts against Cuban
leaders. They organized and supported with their
armed forces the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion,
and supported the burning of sugar cane fields, the

machine-gunning of Cuban territory and the murder of
members of our National Police and Coast Guard
troops, to mention just a few examples.

Cuba has relentlessly sought bilateral and
multilateral forms of cooperation to fight international
terrorism based on mutual respect and non-interference
in the internal affairs and the sovereign equality of
States. In that regard, on 29 November 2001, Cuba
offered to sign with the United States Government,
without conditions and in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), a bilateral counter-
terrorism programme. That proposal, reiterated on
several occasions, was rejected by the Bush
Administration with empty and irrational arguments. If
the new United States Administration truly wishes to
prove its commitment to the fight against terrorism, it
now has the opportunity to act firmly and without
double standards against various terrorist organizations
that have been attacking Cuba throughout all these
years from United States territory.

The United States Government has the
opportunity to render justice and free without further
delay five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters who have been
held as political prisoners for over 10 years in high-
security prisons, despite the fact that, with profound
altruism and courage, they were only trying to collect
information on Miami-based terrorist groups in order
to prevent violent acts and save Cuban and American
lives.

The United States has the opportunity to prove to
domestic and international public opinion that it is
capable of setting aside the petty interests of small
anti-Cuba groups and of defending the true interests of
its people and the international community. It is time
for the United States Government to act. It can stop
using the issue of terrorism for political ends and put
and end to the unjustifiable inclusion of Cuba on the
list of countries that supposedly sponsor terrorism.

Cuba reiterates its willingness to provide a more
detailed presentation on these matters to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee or to provide it with any further
information or clarification it considers necessary.

Double standards must not prevail. It is
impossible to eradicate terrorism if some acts of
terrorism are condemned while others are hushed up,
tolerated or justified. As it has always done, Cuba will
continue to abide strictly by the provisions of
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),

and will maintain its cooperation with the subsidiary
bodies created under those resolutions.

