Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): Our delegation thanks
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Bensouda, for her briefing.

We took note of the twenty-sixth report of the
Office of the Prosecutor on the Court's recent work
in implementing resolution 1593 (2005) on Darfur.
Kazakhstan is pleased with the continued progress
made with regard to the security and humanitarian
situation in the Darfur area. We welcome the efforts of
the Government of the Sudan to ensure humanitarian
access to all areas in Darfur, as well as its close
cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union. The trend of decreasing incidents involving
intercommunal clashes is commendable, and the
Government of the Sudan should continue its work in
that area so as to further avoid all tensions. Khartoum's
commitment to stability in Darfur has resulted in the
lifting of economic sanctions imposed by the United
States in 1997.

We encourage the Government of the Sudan to
make all necessary efforts to maintain that positive
momentum and to strengthen its cooperation with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the United Nations country
team so as to achieve peace and prosperity for the entire
Sudanese population. We also call on the Government
to ensure dignified and durable solutions for the more
than 2 million internally displaced persons in Darfur,
a number that has remained unchanged since the
previous report of the International Criminal Court (see S/PV.7963).

Kazakhstan is confident that inclusive dialogue,
in accordance with the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, is the only way to establish peace and stability
in Darfur. We also commend the efforts of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel and UNAMID
to accommodate non-signatories to the Doha Document
in the political process. At the same time, it is necessary
to respect the Government's ownership of the political
process, as well as the sovereignty and independence of
the Sudan, which are all crucial elements for long-term
peace and reconciliation in Darfur. The international
community should therefore avoid any measures that
could affect the achievement of these objectives. We
should rather support the Sudan's capacity to restore
and promote the rule of law, address impunity,
protect human rights and abide by the principles of
international law.

Finally, we underscore the significant role of the
African Union and other regional organizations, as well
as neighbouring countries, in resolving the crisis in
Darfur. We therefore recommend that the united position
of the African Union be taken into consideration and
that we work to lay the foundation for a stable Sudan.

