Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates
the Malaysian initiative to hold this open debate on
children and armed conflict. It is timely and symbolic,
considering that this year we are marking the twentieth
anniversary of the creation of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing, as well as all the briefers for
their contributions. Ukraine commends the work of the
Office of the Special Representative.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union later today.

The progress achieved over the past 20 years on the
implementation of the mandate on children and armed
conflict is quite impressive. We commend the fact that
25 action plans were signed between parties to conflict.
Nine parties to conflict were delisted from the annexes
of the annual reports. Yet Ukraine is deeply concerned
over the increase in grave violations of children's

rights, as outlined in the latest report (S/2016/360) of
the Secretary-General. It is completely unacceptable
that children continue to bear the brunt of suffering
in war and armed conflict. The ongoing crises and
violent conflicts in the Central African Republic,
Iraq, Nigeria, South Sudan, Syria, Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in many other
places have claimed the lives of thousands of children
and disrupted the daily lives of millions of others. The
most recent terrifying example of that is the Syrian city
of Aleppo.

Armed conflicts result not only in senseless injuries
and deaths but also severely disrupt children's lives. In
zones of fighting children become separated from their
parents and families in the chaos. Communities' lives are
ruined. Schools are forced to close and health facilities
cannot provide services, which are needed more than
ever. Ongoing armed conflicts lead to an increase in the
number of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs). That is a challenge with which we have to find a
way to effectively deal. The plight of children displaced
by armed conflict is especially of very serious concern.
In situations of conflict, the risks for displaced children
and child refugees to be recruited, abused or abducted
are chillingly real. We all have to ask ourselves: Have
we as members of the international community done
enough to ensure the protection of those children?

The report highlights the concerns with regard
to Member States' responses to violent extremism.
Ukraine fully shares the Secretary-General's opinion
that we need to identify and address the root causes
of violent extremism. In our view, education is a key
factor in countering extremist narratives. However,
every child's right to a quality education is out of
reach for millions of children affected by conflict. Yet
education alone is not enough. To address the vicious
cycle of conflict, violence and hatred, more must be
done to put an end to impunity for the grave crimes that
take place in various regions. According to UNICEF,
nearly 1 in 4 of approximately 110 million children of
primary and lower-secondary school age - typically
between 6- and 15-years-old - living in conflict areas
is missing out on their education. An average of four
schools or hospitals is attacked or occupied by armed
forces and groups every day. More has to be done to
better protect schools from attack and deter the military
use of them in accordance with international law.

Unfortunately, we know first-hand what negative
impact armed conflicts can have on children. According
to our data, 68 children have been killed and 186 have
been wounded in the eastern part of Ukraine since the
beginning of the conflict masterminded by Russia.
The number of internally displaced persons IDPs in
Ukraine who were forced to leave their homes in war
affected regions now stands at 1.7 million, including
215,000 children. The Ukrainian Government is doing
its utmost to strengthen social protection for displaced
children and families with children, including through
the elaboration of relevant legislation. As UNICEF
reports, the lives of 580,000 children living in
non-government-controlled areas and along the contact
line in eastern Ukraine have been severely effected
as a result of the continuing conflict. According
to the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine, 39 schools,
kindergartens and other facilities for children in the
temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine are used
for military purposes by the Russian-backed illegal
armed groups. They have transformed those sites into
barracks, fortified military outposts and ammunition
and weapons storage facilities.

On numerous occasions Russian-backed separatists
have used school grounds as artillery and mortar
positions. There are also extremely worrying reports
on the establishment of camps in which children are
trained to handle weapons and on the use of children
for intelligence gathering and manning checkpoints.
For example, in May 2015, at a checkpoint on the
outskirts of Makiivka under the control of the so
called Donetsk People's Republic, 10 kilometres to the
east of Donetsk, monitors from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) observed
a child, approximately 12 to 14 years of age, wearing
a camouflage uniform and holding an AK-47 rifle.
The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
has on several occasions reported that irregular armed
formations in the east are allegedly preventing young
men from leaving Donetsk and forcefully recruiting
them to join their ranks, which could amount to human
trafficking. In particular, at checkpoints controlled
by the Donetsk People's Republic, the OSCE Mission
observed young armed persons, with some of the male
individuals estimated to be minors. There have also
been reports from various sources that children as
young as 15 years of age were being recruited to armed
youth groups and taking part in active combat as full-
fledged members of the combined Russian-backed
militant forces, including as youth reconnaissance
and sabotage groups operating within Government-
controlled territory.

It all amounts to child recruitment, which is a
grave violation of international humanitarian law. In
that light, the fact that the Secretary-General's report
on children and armed conflict does not include any
reference to the situation of Ukrainian children affected
by the conflict in the Donbas region of Ukraine is an
omission that should be corrected. Unfortunately, this
is another example of turning a blind eye to the sole
ongoing armed conflict in Europe.

Ukraine highly appreciates the financial and
technical assistance provided to our country by the
United Nations Children's Fund. We are especially
grateful to UNICEF and its partners for their
continuous support of children, in particular those
affected by the consequences of the Russian aggression
against Ukraine.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Ukraine's
commitment to the promotion and protection of the
rights of the Child. We will continue to do our utmost to
that end in the framework of the United Nations system,
regional organizations and civil society.

