Mr. Prendergast (Jamaica): At the outset, on
behalf of the Government of Jamaica, my delegation
wishes to express its condolences to the Governments
and the peoples of India and Pakistan on the recent
earthquakes that have occurred.

The Jamaican delegation joins in welcoming the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello, to the Security Council today.
We wish to thank him for his comprehensive update of
the developments in East Timor. We are also pleased to
welcome the President of the General Assembly, Mr.
Jose Ramos-Horta of the Transitional Cabinet in East
Timor, the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the
representatives of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the World Bank. This meeting today, with
such broad-based participation, is indicative of the
importance the Council attaches to the development of
East Timor in the broadest sense, including through
economic and social development and reconstruction.

My delegation continues to attach importance to
the work of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) as it seeks,
inter alia, to provide security and maintain law and
order; to establish an effective administration; to assist
in the development of the civil and social services; and
to support capacity-building for self-government. We
have observed the work of UNTAET, in collaboration
with the East Timorese people, in fulfilling the
provisions of resolution 1272 (1999), and we express
our unequivocal support for UNTAET as it seeks to
prepare East Timor for independence.

The involvement of the East Timorese in
administration has been of critical importance to my
delegation. Capacity-building and training will ensure
a sustainable future for East Timor. Mr. Vieira de Mello
stated that the capacity-building mandate was just
beginning to be fulfilled. This is critical; and we
encourage UNTAET to continue to forge ahead in this
regard. We also note that in the past six months there
have been concerted efforts to accelerate the transfer of
authority to the East Timorese people, and we welcome
these efforts. We are supportive of the further
progressive delegation of authority until it is finally
transferred to the government ofthe independent State.

We agree that this is an innovative approach
which requires a great deal of understanding and
flexibility from all involved. It is of fundamental
importance, as it fully meets the objective of preparing
the East Timorese for self-government. As Mr. Ramos-
Horta rightly said, the delegation of responsibility is
not sufficient. The East Timorese need to be provided
with the necessary tools to build capacity and develop
human resources. The task of strengthening capacity
must remain a priority.

My delegation is particularly interested in the
assertion in the Secretary-General's report that there is
a growing consensus among the East Timorese to seek
independence by the end of 2001 and possibly to hold
elections by 30 August. We agree that there needs to be
a timetable which elaborates a time-frame for
movement towards independence and, ultimately,
independence. We attach importance to the steps
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General, which
include nationwide consultations, decisions regarding
the Constituent Assembly, drafting a constitution and
eventually the establishment of a Government. We
agree that a phased approach is the most practical route
in this situation.

As a corollary to this, we believe that in order to
move ahead with the timetable, the security situation
must be dealt with, as must other logistical challenges
such as the organization of elections and the decision-
making process. Taken together, these factors are
complementary and can either advance or hamper the
agenda for independence. We are of the view that these
issues must be dealt with in the most comprehensive
manner possible in order to lay a solid foundation for
success.

We wish to underscore the importance of
promoting sustainability in the electoral process, to
come. We therefore support the establishment in the
future of an electoral commission, comprised of
eminent Timorese and others, to oversee the elections.

My delegation, like others here, believes that
even after independence East Timor will still require
substantial assistance from the international
community, as it will no doubt be subject to the
teething pains that many of our countries experienced.
We agree that the international support required will go
beyond the kind of assistance normally provided to a
developing country. There will be a range of areas that
will need to be addressed beyond independence, such
as the judicial system and defence, as Mr. De Mello
pointed out.

The security situation and the refugee situation
remain of primary concern to us. With regard to the
former, we remain concerned at the incidents of militia
activity, although they have decreased somewhat. We
noted Mr. Vieira de Mello's point that there have been
some developments on this front.

The refugee situation is also a continuing concern
to us. We recognize that many continue to live in
difficult conditions. We recognize the commitment of
the Government of Indonesia to dealing with this and
other problems, and we encourage them to continue to
take steps to deal effectively with the difficult and
challenging situation in the camps in West Timor. We
note that the registration of refugees will now take
place in March, and we hope that this will contribute to
addressing the situation. The return of refugees to their
homes in safety will contribute to reconciliation and
rebuilding efforts and will ensure that they are
reintegrated into East Timorese society.

It would be remiss of my delegation not to
mention the work of organizations like the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) in contributing to the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of East Timor. We value the
involvement of these organizations in East Timor over
the past year and wish to emphasize that their presence
points to the importance of a broad-based and
collaborative approach to the development of East
Timor. We note their collaboration with UNTAET in
contributing to local capacity-building and employment
creation and, as Mr. Malloch Brown said, in building a
critical bridge between emergency work and long-term
development.

UNDP's work in governance, poverty alleviation
and reconstruction has undoubtedly contributed to
advances in East Timor. We are supportive of its work
there, and we are particularly interested in its efforts at
reconstruction, supporting employment generation,
vocational training and in the Joint Poverty Assessment
Initiative, which is being done in collaboration with the
World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. The
involvement of the UNDP in East Timor demonstrates
the importance of the flexibility of UNDP's mandate in
addressing the particular needs of developing countries
at different stages of development.

Similarly, the role of the World Bank in East
Timor has been of fundamental importance. We note
the range of programmes under the auspices of the
Bank, beginning with the short-term focus on the
basics, through to assistance in preparing for
independence. Of significance again to my delegation
is the focus on building local capacity and ownership
of the development process at all levels through joint
project planning and broad consultation with the East
Timorese leadership and civil society, in order to
empower the indigenous East Timorese institutions to
carry out the functions effectively on their own.

We wish to underscore the importance of these
particular elements as political transition takes place, in
order to develop the administrative, human and social
capital needed to manage a State.

The challenges in creating a viable entity in the
international community are great, particularly as the
movement towards independence looms larger. We
recognize the complexities, but we encourage the
relevant actors to continue their efforts to ensure that
the transition process is as smooth as possible.
Effective collaboration between UNTAET, the World
Bank, UNDP, IMF, civil society and the people of East
Timor will ensure that the consultative process is as
broad as possible and takes into account differing
perspectives.

We wish, in closing, to commend the work of
UNTAET, and we support the extension ofits mandate.

