Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We thank the Italian
presidency for having organized today's open debate
and initiating the adoption earlier today of resolution
2388 (2017), aimed at facilitating the global fight
against human trafficking. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2017/939) and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons for their briefings.

Trafficking in human beings is a global challenge
and should be addressed collectively and holistically
at all levels. The Government of Armenia declared
the fight against human trafficking a priority and has
initiated numerous reforms at the national level and
cooperated closely with all international organizations
active in the field. Activities aimed at fighting
human trafficking in Armenia are coordinated by an
interministerial council on the fight against trafficking
in human beings and exploitation.

With a view to structuring the fight against
trafficking in persons and to fully aligning Armenia's
efforts with international best practices in the area of
combatting this scourge, consecutive national action
plans on fighting exploitation and trafficking in human
beings in the Republic of Armenia have been adopted
and implemented. Over the past decade, Armenia
has successfully implemented four national action
plans. While the main objective of the initial action
plans was to create a sound legislative framework
and to carry out assistance and protection projects
for the victims of trafficking, the focus has now
shifted towards prevention-related activities through
relevant structural, sub-legislative and financial
frameworks, along with strengthening the professional
and institutional capacities of the main stakeholders
involved. Armenia's efforts in combatting trafficking
have been widely recognized in reputable reports on
trafficking in persons.

The prevention of trafficking is a crucial
component of the global fight against this scourge.
The identification of situations involving trafficking
or risks of trafficking, and assistance to and the
protection of victims and potential victims, through
strong partnership between national authorities and
civil society organizations, are especially important.

Armenia is committed to the global fight against
trafficking in persons in all circumstances and
remains ready to continue its active engagement
and cooperation with international partners. We
also highlight the need for adequate training for all
stakeholders, including peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel, in identifying and tackling the risks of
trafficking, especially as regards women and children,
in cooperation with United Nations agencies and
programmes, international organizations and civil
society institutions.
The activities ofterrorist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (lSlL) and other armed
groups engaged in human trafficking continue to be of
grave concern. We fully agree with the assertion in the
Secretary-General's report that as the ISIL stronghold

in Iraq and the Syrian Arabic Republic rapidly recedes,
it is imperative that the perpetrators of these heinous
crimes he brought to justice and held accountable.

The meeting rose at 5.10pm.
