Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to see you, Sir, in the chair of
the President of the Security Council.

We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

In recent times, we have heard about the issue
of water here at the Security Council with enviable
regularity. We agree that the issues of access to
water resources, their sustainable use, recovery and
preservation play an important role because of the
timeless importance of water to life, human and
economic activity and to maintaining ecosystem
balance. As we see it, the discussions and debates on
those issues have been valuable and have reaffirmed
our understanding that the time has come to move
from words to action and to take specific measures
that could alleviate the international community's
concerns about water. It would be appropriate to turn
to the long-standing outputs of specialized bodies, both
within the United Nations and outside of it, that day in
and day out use statistical and analytical data and the
practical experience of interacting with Member States
to implement targeted strategies in the area of water
resources that take specific political, geographical and
other factors into consideration.

There are many solutions on the surface. They
include raising the level of social, economic and
scientific and technological development of countries,
strengtheningtheirpotentialinthe areaofwater-resource
management and extending financial and technical
assistance, while bearing in mind specific needs and
development strategies. All ofthose measures, insofar as
they apply to water management, are listed as principal
ways ofimplementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of
the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development. They open up additional opportunities
for further cooperation among States on the issue of
water resources, while balancing the three dimensions
of sustainable development. The International Decade
for Action, "Water for Sustainable Development",
2018-2028, whose proclamation was supported by more
than 100 countries, including Russia, can and should
become a platform and a catalyst for the implementation
of those measures.

A major source of help in the area of water resource
management are regional and international legal
documents and mechanisms, such as the Convention on
the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, the Mekong River Basin Commission
and others. In our view, the main issue lies in the fact
that the potential of the existing specialized platforms
and mechanisms is unjustifiably underestimated and
not fully utilized. Instead of guiding countries towards
taking mutually acceptable decisions within specialized
organizations, we are seeing increasingly frequent
attempts to situate transboundary water resources
within the context of discussing issues of peace and

security. That could lead to their being regulated
pursuant to the top-down principle and could also harm
the interests of countries concerned. In that regard, we
also recall that water, like other national resources, is a
subject of national sovereignty.

With regard to the possibility of using preventive
diplomacy on water resources, over the decade of its
existence preventive diplomacy has proven to be a good
tool for reducing tensions when they arise for specific
reasons and for guiding situations along an alternative,
peaceful course. The main characteristic of preventive
diplomacy, and precisely what makes it so useful, is
the fact that it is used exclusively at the request of the
State concerned and in line with that State's national
strategies. That precludes any automatic recourse to
the mechanism and, at the same time, ensures that
the sovereignty of the country and its primary right
to prevent conflict and overcome its consequences are
respected. Therefore, any attempt to dictate under the
pretext of preventive assistance could discredit the very
idea of so-called preventive diplomacy and result in
growing distrust in it on the part of those countries that
find themselves a step away from an armed conflict.

