We welcome you, Sir, to preside over this meeting. We congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for July, and wish you every success. We carefully listened to the Secretary-General's briefing and would like to thank him for his initiatives on how to counter this serious challenge. I note that Russia supported the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire the day after he issued his appeal. We also thank Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Commissioner Amira Mohammed for their briefings. We welcome the consensual adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), on coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and on the call for a ceasefire. In the context of the spread of the disease, from which we must draw new lessons, we need to use the experience of the international community in combating previous major outbreaks of infectious diseases, including the Ebola virus. Pandemics can exacerbate the humanitarian consequences of armed conflict. Among other things, they affect food security through the disruption of agro-food systems and supply chains. Important peace processes are being hindered by COVID-19-related restrictions. United Nations peacekeeping missions are also experiencing additional difficulties in their work. We are concerned that countries affected by armed conflict already face a deteriorating humanitarian situation, even before the pandemic. The prolongation of armed conflict is detrimental to the effective implementation of the required anti-epidemic measures. National health sectors also suffer physical damage on medical infrastructure, due to the hostilities, and must also face the inability of national Governments to reallocate additional critical funding for health care. In that context, economic coercive measures have an extremely destructive effect on the ability of countries suffering under the burden of sanctions to purchase vital personal protective equipment and medications. The Secretary-General has repeatedly signalled, in his reports, the particular vulnerability of developing countries under unilateral restrictions. The current situation requires an urgent review and abolition of that illegal practice. Through its adoption yesterday of resolution 2532 (2020), the Council contributed to raising awareness of this problem. We believe that the Council's efforts to help combat the pandemic should focus, first and foremost, on its impact on the functioning of peacekeeping missions, ensuring the continuity of peace processes and supporting the implementation of the Secretary-General's ceasefire initiative. The potential sharp deterioration of humanitarian situations in armed conflicts compounded by COVID-19 should be considered primarily in relation to the situation of specific countries on the Council's agenda. Moreover, over the past three months, the Council has been taking a nuanced approach to discussing the impact of the pandemic on the situation in a given country. Attempts to generalize such a discussion will clearly take us outside of the scope of the Council's mandate. As for the medical aspects of the international response to the outbreak and the global response to its socioeconomic impact, they fall to the relevant United Nations entities and agencies, namely, the World Health Organization (WHO), the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. The Russian Federation has consistently advocated for the strengthening of the leading role of WHO in international efforts in the field of health and response to infectious disease outbreaks, especially when coordinating multilateral efforts to counter COVID-19. In that regard, Russia has allocated financial aid and methodological resources to support the activities of this specialized United Nations agency. In addition, our national experts took part in WHO country missions to combat the coronavirus outbreak. We consider it extremely important that the international community unanimously and unequivocally support the work of WHO, which is at the forefront of this challenge today. We would like to assure the Council that Russia will continue to make a significant contribution to global efforts to counter the pandemic and its consequences. We are contributing to multilateral efforts through WHO, the United Nations Development Program and other United Nations agencies. We are continuing our bilateral assistance to the countries in need by providing personal protective equipment, testing systems and laboratory supplies to 19 countries, as well as by sending medical teams upon request. In Russia, a number of innovative medicines for the treatment of coronavirus infections, as well as their most serious complications, have been developed based on the results of clinical studies. Our scientists are continuing their research on other promising products, including vaccines against COVID-19. We are ready to cooperate with all interested partners to ensure a coordinated international response to the spread of the coronavirus, and look forward to its early and final retreat.
