Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): I would like to thank
the Security Council, and in particular you yourself,
Sir, for organizing today's debate and for inviting
Sierra Leone to participate in it, and to express my
delegation's satisfaction at seeing you preside over
such an important meeting.

Our appreciation also goes to the Chairman of the
ad hoc Working Group, the Ambassador of Mauritius,
for his initiative.

Since this is the first time my delegation is taking
the floor since the election of the new members of the
Council - Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and
the Syrian Arab Republic - we would also like to
salute their election and to wish them all success in the
fulfilment of their arduous mandate.

Today's debate certainly attests to the Security
Council's commitment to seeking long-term solutions
to the problems of Africa. The report of the Secretary-
General on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa - which was considered by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council - contains a series of specific as well
as broad recommendations on issues ranging from
post-conflict peace-building to the mobilization of
resources for development. We also salute the
importance of the follow-up work of the Open-Ended
Ad Hoc Working Group of the General Assembly on
the Causes of Conflict and the Promotion of Durable
Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa.

The causes and solutions to conflicts in African
countries are nearly always linked to a wider, regional
problem of instability. The Council needs to maintain
its attention, as it has done in the past, on the overall
regional problems. West Africa, in particular, is a
region where the intricate net of individual conflicts,
fed by poverty, has heightened the risk of the region
becoming the world's first failed region.

Sierra Leone has preoccupied the Council over
the past few years, but today I can assure you that,
thanks to the constant involvement of the United
Nations, the Sierra Leonean people have been given
hope. The imminent establishment of the Special Court
and the peacefully held presidential and legislative
elections are testimony enough to encourage the
Council to further support the peace process.

However, as long as the situation in neighbouring
countries, such as Liberia and Guinea-Bissau, remains
dire, the threat of instability spilling back into Sierra
Leone is still very real. Equally, the huge number of
refugees and internally displaced persons still on the
move in a number of countries in West Africa troubles
us.

In that sense, it has always been our view that the
efforts of subregional organizations, such as the
Economic Community of West African States, in the
context of Chapter VIII of the Charter are absolutely
essential and that cooperation should be given a very
practical focus. Indeed, the subregional organization's
efforts must continue to be enhanced. The Council
should not, however, concentrate only on conflict. It
ought to properly integrate all the economic, social and
political problems that create conflict and poverty.

Sierra Leone wishes to acknowledge the support
provided for certain African initiatives to resolve
disputes. In this respect, we would like to pay tribute to
the United Nations Development Program for its
contribution to the Mano River Women's Peace
Network.

Another example is the work of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women towards gender
mainstreaming in its peace programme in East Africa,
Central Africa and the Horn of Africa, facilitating
women's participation in peace and reconciliation
meetings and negotiations, and supporting their
involvement in advocacy for peace. We strongly
encourage its further development in the rest of the
African region.

The report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa highlighted the
critical nexus between peace and development and
advanced a comprehensive and integrated approach to
conflict prevention, poverty eradication and
development. That approach has been accepted by the
international community, including African countries
themselves, as a framework for the provision of
support to Africa.

Indeed, Sierra Leone, based on its own painful
experience, confirms that peace, democracy and good
governance are prerequisites for sustainable
development in any African country.

One of the elements contributing to violent
conflict in Africa is the rapid accumulation, illicit sale
and indiscriminate use of small arms, which aggravate
conflict situations. Indeed, in Sierra Leone, the illicit
trade in arms and diamonds has shown to be a major
element fuelling the conflict.

An effective way for the United Nations to assist
African countries in the area of peace-building is to
combine measures in support of peace-building and
longer-term development in a comprehensive and
coherent response. A critical element of forging
national reconciliation and social cohesion is to
promote a culture of peace, and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization has a
leading role in that field. We can only agree with the
importance of disseminating the culture of peace
among parliamentarians and members of the armed and
police forces as well, in particular when many of them
were ex-combatants and joined a reintegration
programme.

The public service is weak in a country that has
experienced years of civil war, not to say sometimes
non-existent, and strengthening those countries'
capacity is one of the critical contributions that the
United Nations - especially this Working Group -
can make in assisting these countries to direct and
manage their own development. The work of the
Economic Commission for Africa in enhancing the
administrative capacity of African countries is
commendable.

Building the capacity required for the
consolidation of democratic practices and institutions
is also of crucial importance.

The importance of creating small- and medium-
sized enterprises in Africa in order to increase the
employment prospects of the underemployed and
unemployed needs to be given continued attention.

While special school feeding programmes are
very positive initiatives that help both boy and girl
students to learn in better conditions, special efforts are
still needed to get more girls to enter school and to
improve their attendance, thereby eliminating a form of
discrimination.

In conclusion, the Sierra Leone delegation wishes
to emphasize again its belief that the regional approach
to the prevention and resolution of conflicts is an
efficient one that requires thorough cooperation with
the subregional and international community.

