Ms. Johnson: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Council today. I would like to briefly
revisit the main elements of the report of the Secretary-
General before the Council today (S/2013/l40) and
then focus my remarks on the most recent operational
developments, as well as key political considerations
related to mandate implementation.

Since my last briefing to the Council by
videoconference on 28 November last year, South
Sudan's transition towards a stable, viable State
continued at an uneven pace. During the period covered
by the report, South Sudan continued to face multiple
challenges, while progress was achieved in some areas.

Relations with the Sudan remained tense,
although the 8, 12 and 19 March agreements on the
implementation of the 27 September Cooperation
Agreements could significantly improve the situation in
the coming months. An easing of some of the economic
austerity measures, with a restart of oil production,
would definitely help create an environment conducive
to progress on other crucial political and security
issues. Internal security challenges, in particular
intercommunal violence in several areas and the
activities of armed groups in Jonglei, Upper Nile and
Unity states, continue to be a source of instability and
pose grave threats to the civilian population. Land
disputes also remain a potential source of insecurity in
the country.

Recent Spates of violence in Jonglei and Western
Bahr el-Ghazal states have further highlighted the
importance of the protection of civilians mandate
assigned to the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan (UNMISS). In Western Bahr el-Ghazal,
some 5,000 civilians fleeing from intercommunal
violence in Wau, in December, sought refuge in the
UNMISS camp. Similarly, in Pibor county, Jonglei
state, hundreds of civilians sought protection in
UNMISS bases on many occasions when there were
clashes between the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) and armed groups. The largest numbers were
around 3,000 on 27 January and 1,800 on 6 March.
It is important to note that, while the Pibor County
Commissioner had designated a safe area where he said
the SPLA would protect civilians, the population chose
to come to the two UNMISS bases in the town. We have
just received a message today about a similar message
in Gumuruk, south ofPibor, where civilians also sought
refuge with our contingents.

The situation in Jonglei state remains a source of
major concern and presents complex challenges for
both UNMISS and the Government. The Government
remains committed to finding a peaceful solution to the
threat posed by David Yau Yau's armed group, but has
made it clear that the window for dialogue is closing
and that military operations may soon be launched.
Although the Government is committed to doign its
utmost to protect civilians during such operations, the
civilian population can be at risk from being caught in the
crossfire. We have stressed that any military response
to insecurity must secure the protection of civilians, in
accordance with international humanitarian and human
rights law.

Another source of concern is the intercommunal
tension created by the 8 February deadly attack on a
Lou Nuer community in the Walgak area, which was
migrating to a dry season grazing area. The deadly
attack, allegedly perpetrated by armed youth from the
Murle community, resulted in the killing of over 100
civilians and a number of escorting SPLA troops. Local
and political leaders, including the Vice-President
and several ministers who visited the area, have been
engaged in efforts to convince the Lou Nuer youth not
to resort to revenge attacks but to allow the SPLA and
the police to address the problem. In the meantime,
UNMISS has conducted a human rights investigation
into the Wangar attack. A report into its findings will
be published later this month.

UNMISS has developed contingency plans for
possible Jonglei state scenarios. The Mission has
strengthened its troop presence and increased the
number of integrated civilian-military patrols to
identify the locations of potential attacks, and continues
to engage the vulnerable communities and support
efforts to find a peaceful solution. We also continue
to urge the Government to address the root causes of
violence and chronic instability in the State.

In relation to the violence that broke out in Wau,
Western Bahr el-Ghazal, in December, a number
of disturbing arbitrary detentions were registered.
I have raised this concern with national and state
authorities and urged that due process be respected.
All perpetrators should be held to account. I have also
called for intercommunal reconciliation.

Increased reports of threats to freedom of
expression and respect for human rights in South Sudan
are worrying. We have impressed upon the Government
that it must take immediate steps to reverse this trend
and have pressed for the investigation into the December
2012 killing of the columnist Isaiah Abraham to be
expedited and the perpetrators to be brought to justice.
On a positive note, the Minister of Information and
Broadcasting has committed to the United Nations plan
of action for freedom of expression and the protection of
journalists - initiated by UNESCO and supported by
UNMISS and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights - and has agreed to seek the Council of
Ministers' approval for South Sudan to become a pilot
country.

While investigating the case of a South Sudanese
journalist under threat, two UNMISS human rights
officers were held and interrogated for several hours in
January. UNMISS immediately protested at the highest
levels, and measures are now being worked out between
UNMISS and the relevant security institutions to
prevent a recurrence of such incidents. President Salva
Kiir Mayardit has also pledged that he will take action

against undisciplined elements within the security
organs.

Another welcome development is the establishment
by the Government of a high-level panel to address the
problem of arbitrary/prolonged detention. The panel is
chaired by the Chief Justice, and includes the SPLA
and the Ministers of Justice, National Security, the
Interior and Defence. Also positively, South Sudan
recently signed the African Charter on Human and
People's Rights, but the Government should now fulfil
its commitment to the accession and ratification of this
and other key human rights instruments.

The persistent violence and instability in South
Sudan are deeply rooted. Historical animosities among
communities, dating from the civil, and old divisions
and power struggles among political protagonists
are pervasive. New tensions are emerging from old
wounds. These all need to be addressed. Hence, the
Government's initiative to launch a process of national
reconciliation and healing is welcomed. It is essential,
however, that this important process be inclusive and
broadly owned by all stakeholders. To this end, the
United Nations system is working closely with all
stakeholders in supporting the preparations for the
reconciliation process.

The humanitarian situation in South Sudan remains
challenging. There is a constant stream of refugees
arriving in South Sudan from Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile in the Sudan, with over 14,000 new arrivals
thus far in 2013. Meanwhile, humanitarian actors have
continued to report access issues, the presence of
weapons in the camps, and other impediments to their
work. The proliferation of weapons caused clashes
between the police and armed elements in Yida refugee
camp on 17 March. Returnees from the Sudan continue
to face difficulties with sustainable reintegration, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report.

Despite these many challenges, South Sudan
continues to lay the foundations for a viable and
democratic State. Progress has been made, and let me
go through a few key areas.

The democratic foundations of this new and
independent country have been established with a
proper legal framework for multiparty democracy and
elections and concomitant functioning institutions. The
work on reviewing the Transitional Constitution is now
also gaining momentum. On 26 February, the National
Legislative Assembly approved an amendment to the
Transitional Constitution that extended the mandate of
the National Constitutional Review Commission by two
years. The extension will ensure that the Commission
has sufficient time to conduct broad nationwide
consultations down to the county level, and implement
its mandate.

Police reform has continued through implementing
the action plan and scaling up the training of police
at all levels. The registration of all police personnel,
which should greatly facilitate the right-sizing, training
and transformation of the South Sudan National
Police Service (SSNPS), is now complete. To date,
the provisional number of registered police personnel
stands at 46,427, after the rescreening that revised
earlier figures. The SSNPS is now reconciling the
registered figures with the payroll for each State in
order to weed out ghost police officers.

Furthermore, in support of reform of the security
sector, reshuffle has taken place in the SPLA and the
SSNPS, replacing a number of senior military and
police officers with younger officers. This is part of an
overall modernization and professionalization effort.
UNMISS continues to provide training to the SSNPS
and has developed proposals for contributing to the
development of the capacity of the SPLA to protect
civilians. In January, countrywide consultations on
the draft national security policy were launched by the
Government. UNMISS is working with international
partners to provide technical and logistical support to
this process.

Meanwhile, the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission
Council has been established and a pilot disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme is
set to be launched at Mapel on 15 April. With progress
on disengagement from the border areas, it is hoped that
DDR and security sector reform will gather momentum.
The National Legislative Assembly has become more
assertive in carrying out its role with stronger checks
and balances, and more actively performing its oversight
functions, including its handling of audit reports and
budgets and the passage of critical legislation in a
number of key areas.

In the continued context of austerity, the
Government has taken positive steps to stabilize the
country's macroeconomic situation, with reductions in
average monthly Government spending by more than
50 per cent. Non-oil revenues increased lO-fold, to
about 70 million South Sudanese pounds per month.

However, a large fiscal gap still remains and,
pending the resumption of oil flows, a multifaceted
donor support package will be required to bridge it. A
donors conference to address those issues is scheduled
to be held in Washington, DC, on 16 and 17 April.
Even with the full and timely implementation of the
agreement on oil, the conference is very important. I
ask the Council to lend its full support to the success of
the conference.

I regret to inform members that, since my last
briefing to the Council, the United Nations operating
environment has become more challenging due to
a number of grave violations of the status-of-forces
agreement by the Government. We are addressing the
problem through interventions at the highest levels.
We are also launching a sensitization and training
programme for all security institutions.

As members are aware, the most egregious
violation occurred on 21 December, when SPLA forces
shot down an UNMISS helicopter, killing four Russian
crew members. We have engaged the Government on
the matter at the highest levels to urge a swift and
transparent investigation. We have been coordinating
closely with the Russian aviation company concerned
and with civil aviation authorities to facilitate the
investigations in accordance with International Civil
Aviation Organization rules. We have also regularly
updated the Russian Embassy in Uganda on the
investigation process. The Russian Ambassador has
expressed his Government's appreciation to UNMISS
for its efforts in that regard.

Allow me to conclude by recalling that in both
resolutions 1996 (2011) and 2057 (2012), the Security
Council determined that the situation faced by South
Sudan continued to constitute a threat to international
peace and security in the region. That not only refers to
the situation between South Sudan and the Sudan. With
five other neighbours, the continuing proliferation
of weapons in South Sudan has serious implications
for regional security and stability. That continues
among not only armed militia groups, but also civilian
communities in South Sudan that feel vulnerable.
Furthermore, South Sudan remains afflicted by internal
security and political fault lines, which continue to
render the country fragile and which has potential
spillover effects. Every effort to mitigate that risk and to
keep South Sudan on a path to stability and prosperity
will contribute to the stability of the whole region.

The international community's continued support
is needed more than ever. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Council for its support and its
valuable contribution to the work of UNMISS.

