Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I would like to sincerely
thank you, Madam President, for convening this open
debate on the protection ofjournalists in conflicts.

Unfortunately, we have in the recent years witnessed
many barbaric attacks against journalists and that
number has not been decreasing. Therefore, we find it
extremely important to give regular and more frequent
attention to the issue at the Security Council. Estonia
welcomes the adoption earlier today of resolution 2222
(2015) on the protection of journalists. We have proudly
co-sponsored it and would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency for all their hard work.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

Estonia is a firm believer in the value of the
freedom of expression and the freedom of speech. It
is often through the tireless work of journalists on
the frontline of the most dangerous conflicts that
light is shed on the issues of most serious concern to
the international community. On many occasions, the
credible information provided by j ournalists, sometimes
working under extreme duress and sacrificing their
own well-being, can help save lives.

It has been said, at the outbreak of an armed
conflict, that the first casualty is often the truth. Since
nowadays information moves at the speed of light, it is
of utmost importance to convey accurate and impartial
media reports from conflict zones and to bring them
to public attention as quickly as possible. But that
often comes at a cost. Unfortunately, journalists,
correspondents and media workers, especially those
working in conflict zones, have become deliberate
targets of brutal attacks - attacks that have exceeded
any level of humanity. Journalists are humiliated,
imprisoned, tortured, executed and murdered by their
own Governments, parties to the conflict or terrorist
organisations, whether through beheadings carried
out by Daesh or executions organized by Al-Qaida.
It can also happen in the peaceful office of a cartoon
magazine as in the case of Charlie Heba'o.

Despite increased attention by the international
community, there has been very little progress in
limiting the number ofjournalists killed a 370 in the
past 10 years - and in bringing the perpetrators to
justice. Besides the threat to their lives, journalists also
face other obstructions in theirjob at the conflict areas,
such as denial to access, censorship and harassment,
arbitrary detention and direct attacks.
International organizations, Governments, the
media and other actors must work together to strengthen
the safety of journalists and hold accountable those
responsible for attacks. Given the existing international
instruments, which include the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Third Geneva Convention and its
Additional Protocol, resolution 1738 (2006) and many
others, that necessary judicial framework should be
sufficient to protect journalists even when they report
from conflict zones. Yet, sadly, in almost all cases
the perpetrators of crimes against journalists escape
justice.

It is important to promote human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law and to
continue to recall that an attack against a journalist is
an attack against a civilian and, regardless of whether
it occurs in an international or non-international armed
conflict, also amounts to a war crime under the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.

In our View, tackling impunity and sentencing
the perpetrators of such horrendous crimes against
journalists should be the best possible deterrent for
any future offenders. While we agree that the national
Governments of countries in conflict should be the
first in line to prosecute the perpetrators, we strongly
encourage the Council to consider referring such cases
to the International Criminal Court.

In conclusion, Estonia, as a member ofthe UNESCO
Executive Board, calls upon all relevant actors to
support the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity and urges the
sharing of good practices on the safety ofjournalists.

