Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
at the outset to warmly welcome you, Sir, and to take
this opportunity to express the support of my
delegation in your work as President of the Security
Council at this debate. I wish to thank Mr. Robert H.
Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his detailed briefing on recent
developments in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

Recent developments in the Middle East and
North Africa have generated the ongoing interest of the
international community. Colombia has not been aloof
from this situation; it has repeatedly expressed its
strong support for the legitimate aspirations of the
peoples of the region, respect for their human rights
and individual freedoms, and their right to a better and
dignified life.

We understand the situation in the Middle East as
an integral issue. That is why we advocate a lasting and
structured solution to the unstable situation in the
region. We call for an end to the use of force or threat,
and an end to terrorism. Our country is committed to
addressing the issue with democratic principles and the
ultimate goals of peace and security. We understand the
aspiration of the Palestinian people to receive prompt
recognition of the Palestinian State. We therefore
continue to support the objective of creating a viable
Palestinian State, living in peace alongside Israel and
within defined, secure and internationally recognized
borders based on the 1967 lines and changes mutually
agreed by the parties.

We express our concern over the suspension of
peace talks and ask the parties to resume negotiations
as soon as possible. We believe that negotiation is the
way to achieve a lasting solution. We are convinced
that without an agreement accepted by the parties, we
would be repeating the mistake of 1947.
We support the work of the Quartet and the
implementation of the Road Map. Therefore, we share
the views expressed by Quartet representatives on
11 July regarding the urgent need to call on parties to
overcome current obstacles and find the way to resume
direct negotiations, without delay or preconditions,
starting a preparatory phase of negotiations to
maximize the chances of success. We also support all
efforts we are making through the United Nations.

We believe that settlements are an obstacle to the
search for a lasting peace in the Middle East. They are
not only illegal under international law but constitute a
breach of the agreements established in the Road Map.
We firmly believe in the need for both parties to act
under international law in compliance with their
commitments and obligations.

In addition, the international community must
continue to support the institutional strengthening of
the Palestinian Authority in order to build a viable
State. We share the consensus of the Quartet that
Hamas must renounce to violence, recognize Israel and
specifically reject the use of terrorism as a political
tool.

Israelis and Palestinians cannot continue to be
immersed in confrontation and mistrust. We make an
ardent call to restart talks between the parties on the
basis of mutual respect and recognition of the identity
and rights of each people. The Palestinians are entitled
to their own State living in peace with Israel and
moving toward common prosperity. Future generations
of Palestinians must be able to grow up in hope, not
despair. Similarly, current and future generations of
Israelis must be able to live free from fear of attack and
to enjoy peaceful relations with the neighbouring Arab
countries.

