Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank and commend the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom for the important contributions
she made to the work of the Security Council last
month. I wish also to congratulate you, Madam
President, and the delegation of the United States on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of December and wish to convey to you the
full support of Peru. I wish also to express my gratitude
for the enlightening briefings delivered by the Special
Representative, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert;
Mr. Robert Mardini; and Monsignor Bashar Matti
Warda, Archbishop of Erbil.

Peru has noted with concern the social instability
and protests in Iraq and the fact that they are not
being successfully brought under control or redirected
towards efforts to promote the necessary political
dialogue and ease tensions. We deplore the fact that,
on the contrary, the people's right to peacefully express
themselves is being denied and countered through the
excessive use of force and through attacks against
several cities in which lethal force was used, leading to
a number of deaths and injuries and fostering a vicious
circle of violence and mistrust.

Peru agrees with the Iraqi authorities that it is
necessary to urgently address the legitimate requests
to tackle corruption, promote employment and ensure
better services for the people. However, we believe that
such endeavours must go hand in hand with measures
aimed at ensuring moderation and respect for human
rights as well as at bringing those responsible to justice,
which would contribute to fostering unity, stability
and reconciliation in the country. Such measures must
also go hand in hand with a deep-seated structural
reform process, including in the area of security, so
as to allow for the 2020 provincial elections to be held
peacefully and in a transparent manner. To that end, the
international community must lend its firm support.

In that context, we deem positive the fact that in
recent weeks, the Government has allocated resources
and adopted emergency measures aimed at protecting
the most vulnerable segments of the population and
promoting positive contributions by Iraqi young people
in order to prevent them from being recruited by
extremist groups, which could view them as a sounding
board for their messages of hatred and destruction.

As set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l9/903), we must not play down the terrorist threat
posed by Da'esh and its influence in new arenas. The
same can be said of other armed groups, which continue
to pose a latent threat to national and regional security.
We would also underline the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government to foster a peaceful and cooperative
environment and also point to the efforts made within
the country, in particular the rapprochement with the
Erbil authorities as a prerequisite for the achievement
of lasting peace.

We also commend the fact that women are playing
an increasingly prominent role in the political life of the
country, with the appointment of Ms. Suha Ali Bek as
Minister of Education. As we have already indicated,
the participation of women, as well as that of young
people and minorities, can only be good news when it
comes to strengthening Iraqi democracy.

We would not wish to conclude without stressing
the need to find a timely solution to the situation of
internally displaced persons and refugees and of those
of the more than 30,000 Iraqis who are allegedly
affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
on the basis of their orderly, voluntary, safe and
dignified return.

I conclude by commending the work being carried
out by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
in that context, as well as the Special Representative,
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and her team for their
tireless efforts and dedication to the implementation
of the Mission's mandate, including in a context of
pressing humanitarian needs in a highly volatile and
complex situation.

