Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation for your leadership,
Mr. President, in convening today's open debate. Let
me also thank His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, United
Nations Secretary-General; Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Yoka Brandt,
Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF; and Ms. Eunice
Apio, of Facilitation for Peace and Development, for
their briefings.

Today, I would like to focus on three issues:
the abduction of children, child soldiers and the
rehabilitation and reintegration of child victims.

First, with regard, abduction, I would like to draw
the Security Council's attention to the disturbing,
increasing trend of mass abductions of children. Last
year, it was reported that 276 schoolgirls had been
kidnapped by Boko Haram in Nigeria. There were 153
Kurdish boys and 412 Yazidi children abducted by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), in Syria
and Iraq. According to the Watch List on Children
and Armed Conflict, at least 24,422 children were
kidnapped between 2002 and 2013, of which 95.8 per
cent were taken by non-State armed groups.

The international community, especially the
Security Council, should take all the measures necessary
to alleviate such cruel and inhumane actions by
organizations like Boko Haram and ISIL. In that regard,
we support and have sponsored the new resolution 2225
(2015), which was just adopted today. The addition of
abductions as a trigger for the inclusion of parties in
the annexes of the Secretary-General's annual report
will make a difference. It is essential, however, that
the relevant parties implement resolution 2225 (2015)
through action plans and other mechanisms.

Moreover, Japan would like to pay tribute to the
efforts made by all stakeholders in drafting the Lucens
Guidelines. We welcome the fact that the international
community's recognition of the issue of protecting
schools and education is expanding. Japan will continue
keeping an eye on the development ofthe discussion on
the issue.

Secondly, Japan is commemorating the tenth
anniversary ofresolution 1612 (2005). Japan took in the
adoption of the resolution as a member of the Council
at the time. The resolution marked an important
milestone, by establishing a monitoring and reporting
mechanism on the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
The "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign further
promotes the provisions set out in the resolution. Japan
has repeatedly expressed its support to the campaign.
The achievements made so far via the campaign are
to be commended, including the delisting of Chad and
the release of 400 child soldiers in Myanmar. In that
context, Japan has provided support for child soldier
victims through UNICEF. It is important to note that
the goal of the campaign is to prevent and end the
recruitment and use of children by national security
forces by 2016. In order to achieve that ambitious
goal, further enhancements and commitments are
required. Japan will continue to look into furthering its
contributions to support the campaign.

Lastly, the rehabilitation and reintegration of child
victims deserves as much attention as the prevention
of abduction and recruitment, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General's current annual report (S/2015/409).
The victims of child abduction and recruitment have
been deprived of love and affection and remain aloof
from a normal social life. In the worst cases, those
children become fiends and deviants or mindless
monsters, brainwashed and knowing nothing other than
how to use a Kalashnikov. Those children may have no
families or homes to return to. Even if they do make
it back, they may not be accepted or may be unable to
readapt to society. They have lost the opportunity to
become members of society. Bringing such children
back to a normal life should be an essential part of their
rehabilitation process.

With that aim in mind, in the past fiscal year
Japan provided a total of $23 million in contributions
for programmes to support the rehabilitation and
reintegration of child soldiers. Such programmes have
been implemented in countries such as the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan. For instance, in South Sudan,
we supported efforts to reunite approximately 1,000
children with their families. That project also provided
them with psychological care. In addition, medical
care and counselling are being provided to women and
children who have experienced sexual abuse.

We should not leave anyone behind - especially
the children. When we are dealing with crimes that
have been committed against children, preventing and
rescuing children from such crimes is not sufficient. I
reiterate the necessity of also providing support to the
victims for their rehabilitation and reintegration into
society. By doing so, they can return as fully committed
members of society.

