Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michel Kafando; the
observer of the African Union, Ms. Fatima Mohammed;
and the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Jiirg Lauber, for their
valuable briefings. I would like to address three issues
in my statement

First, the political situation has been returning to
relative calm since the political tensions and acts of
violence began in Burundi in 2015. The Republic of
Burundi witnessed important political developments in
2018, including the constitutional referendum in May
2018, which took place under stable and calm conditions;
the announcement by President Nkurunziza that he
would not run in the presidential elections in 2020; the
announcement of a road map to organize presidential
elections in 2020, as well as the outline of provisions
provided by the National Independent Electoral
Commission; and the decision of the Government of
Burundi to finance the 2020 elections in its entirety
and its intention to begin an inclusive national dialogue
among all sectors of the population.

Those steps represent important political
developments. We hope that they will quickly be put
into action so that the Burundian population can benefit
from the relative calm until the presidential elections.
We also hope that the elections will involve the
participation of the entire population and all political
parties, and that they will be free, fair, transparent and
credible. Free expression by all the different factions of
civil society, including young people, women, regional
and international organizations must be guaranteed.

In that regard, we commend the efforts that have
been made by the African Union and the East African
Community with a view to a peaceful solution to the
political and security situations in Burundi, through
an inclusive dialogue based on the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement. We also welcome Burundi's
participation in the East African Community Summit
that was held on 1 February. We greatly appreciate
as well the mediation efforts facilitated by President
Museveni of Uganda and Mr. Mkapa as part of the
inter-Burundian political dialogue. I especially thank
Mr. Mkapa, since he has come to the end of his
three-year mandate as facilitator. I wish him every
success in his future endeavours.

There is no doubt that cooperation between the
Government of Burundi and international and regional
organizations, including the United Nations, the
African Union and East African Community, as well
as neighbouring countries, is of great importance
to achieve the desired stability. Cooperation is one
of the factors in reaching a sustained solution before
the presidential elections. We are fully confident that
the inter-Burundian dialogue is an important means
that will greatly contribute to facilitating the political
process. In addition, it is important for political leaders
in exile to be able to return to the country, and political
prisoners to be freed following their arrest during the
acts of violence in 2015. There is also the issue of the
return of refugees and their reintegration into society.
All of those different steps are important and necessary
for achieving political, security and economic stability.

I would also like to note the outcome of the thirty-
second African Union summit, which took place last
week, and its recognition of the fact that Burundi is
returning to peace and stability. I welcome the efforts
made by the Government of Burundi to prepare for
free and democratic elections in 2020, as well as
the creation of national mechanisms to prepare for
those elections, and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission in accordance with Arusha Agreement of
2000, which has made welcome efforts with regard to
the security situation in Burundi, which is generally
relatively stable.

Secondly, concerning security and humanitarian
situations, the security situation in Burundi is generally
calm and improving despite some acts of violence
and continued activities by armed groups in certain
regions. We hope that the security situation will remain
stable and that the Government of Burundi will take
the opportunity that provides to intensify its efforts
for holding of the national dialogue so as to bring all
political parties to the negotiating table and guarantee
the holding of peaceful and credible elections in 2020
that are free of acts of violence.

As for the humanitarian situation in Burundi,
although it is improved compared to the last two years,
with a decrease in the number of people who face food
insecurity, it is still a subject of concern due to acts of
violence that constitute violations of human rights and
international law. We call for ending them and bringing
the perpetrators to justice.

I would like to commend the progressive voluntary
return of Burundian refugees. We underscore the
importance of the Government ensuring the social
and economic reintegration of those who have already
returned, while providing guarantees for the remaining
refugees to return to their homes.

Thirdly, and lastly, concerning the economic and
social sector, the including the people in the development
and reform efforts is a vital and important factor to
build societies with a secure and bright future. We look
forward to the establishment of genuine cooperation
among all the people of Burundi and their inclusion in
the decision-making process, including young people
and women.

In conclusion, we hope that the Government of
Burundi will achieve a positive outcome as a result of its
development plans. It is also our hope that those plans
will contribute to permanent stability in the security
and political situations.

