Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): I would like to thank
High Representative Inzko for his report (S/2015/300, annex) and his statement made today. As a next-door
neighbour, Serbia has a vital interest in the stability
and prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this
context, we are firmly committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country as provided for
by the Dayton Agreement.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of Serbia's key
partners in the region and my country is resolved to
continue promoting good-neighbourly relations with
all political structures and in all areas and at all levels
of Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbia
welcomes and fully supports the new Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina on its path to European
integration, as well as the reforms it intends to introduce.

My country is very concerned at the killing of one
and the wounding of two other officers of the Ministry
of the Interior of the Republika Srpska at Zvornik on
27 April. We condemn these heinous acts of terrorism
in the strongest terms and expect the perpetrators to be
prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.

Terrorism and radicalism in general, and the
departure of men and women from our part of the world
to fight in foreign wars, in particular, do not contribute
to the peaceful and prosperous life of our citizens. Both
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina are members of the
global coalition to fight terrorism and have amended
national laws to incriminate foreign terrorist fighters.
Notwithstanding the fact that many of the fighters
fight far from home, the recent terror attack is stark
and sad evidence that our countries will not be spared
from these monstrous practices, for terrorism has no
knowledge of, or will to respect, national borders.
This modern scourge must be confronted, and Serbia
is ready to cooperate with Bosnia and Herzegovina in
fighting terrorism, extremism and organized crime in
all their forms in the belief that regional cooperation
is the mainstay of stability and prosperity of the entire
region.

Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina maintain a
very high level of political dialogue. This is evinced,
among other things, by the visit of Serbia's Prime
Minister Aleksandar Vucie to Sarajevo last year, his
first international Visit upon taking office. He will Visit
Sarajevo again tomorrow. This April, Serbia's Foreign
Minister Ivica Dacic' met Bosnia and Herzegovina's
Foreign Minister Igor Crnadak in Belgrade, while
Foreign Minister Daeic' travelled to Sarajevo on 29 April
in his capacity as Chairperson of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. Furthermore, an
initiative to hold a joint session of the Government of
the Republic of Serbia and the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been launched.

Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina are agreed
that economic cooperation, especially in the field of
transport, infrastructrue and energy, is of paramount
importance to promoting good bilateral and regional
relations. That is particularly significant in the context
of recovery that is taking place in the two countries
in the wake of last year's immense flooding, and
makes it incumbent upon them to address themselves
to rebuilding of infrastructure, without which no
successful country-to-country cooperation would be
possible, and which, just as importantly, links ordinary
people as they go about their everyday lives.

Serbia is a staunch supporter of the European
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina and welcomes
the conclusion of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union. That is good
news not only for Bosnia and Herzegovina, but for the
region as a whole. We believe that European integration
is the most efficient way to bring overall progress and
economic development to all countries of the region. We
are therefore ready to promote cooperation in that area,
exchange experiences and coordinate our activities. In
that context, of particular importance is the work of
the commission for the implementation of the action
plan of the bilateral agreement on cooperation in the
area of European integration. Also, we are committed
to continuing our cooperation with Bosnia and
Herzegovina within the framework of the programme
of cross-border cooperation of the Instrument for
Pre-Accession Assistance.

At the beginning of this year, my country assumed
the chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Bosnia and Herzegovina will
soon preside over the Council of Europe. That will
provide various possibilities to embark upon a whole
range of joint activities and projects that will contribute
to development, stability and cooperation in the region.
In addition to the fight against terrorism, which
currently preoccupies us all, we intend, in that context,
to include in our agenda the question of young people.
The young people of our countries are our greatest asset
in the long run and the most important building block
as they strive to promote democracy and tolerance and
bring about much-needed stability and prosperity.

Serbia cooperates with Bosnia and Herzegovina
on a partnership basis, with understanding and respect
for mutual interests and differences. In our efforts to
promote mutual relations, we are ready to work hard
to find timely and efficient solutions to all outstanding
issues. To that end, let me point out the concrete
contribution that was made recently by my country to
the efforts ofthe Offices of the War Crimes Prosecutors
of the two countries to investigate and punish all the
perpetrators of war crimes in the territory of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Through constructive cooperation
and partnership, we must continue to work together
to build mutual respect and understanding, thereby
contributing to the prosperity of our citizens. We
stress that overcoming unease with some past legacies
and the promotion of regional cooperation and good-
neighbourliness are what we are after.

Reconciliation and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are in our mutual interest for the future of
new generations. Illustrative of that - and as mentioned
in the report before us - was the visit by the President
of Republika Srpska, Mr. Milorad Dodik, on 16 April
to the Potocari Memorial Centre and the wreath he laid
in honour of the victims.

In conclusion, let me point out that, even though
George Santayana's poignant maxim that those who
cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it is
indeed very true, we must not allow the legacies of the
past to cause us to stumble and go astray on our road to
a common European future.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.
