The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

At the outset I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman; Ambassador Joao
Vale de Almeida, representing the Joint Commission
established by the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA); and Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi,
facilitator of resolution 2231 (2015), for their detailed
briefings on this important topic.

The historic agreement on the JCPOA was achieved
one year ago through earnest negotiations by members
of the international community after years of sanctions.
The successful conclusion of the negotiations on
JCPOA demonstrates that the right combination of
pressure and dialogue can move a country to accept a
good agreement on an important and difficult issue.

The JCPOA must be fully implemented in order
to strengthen the international non-proliferation
regime. We highly value and support the role that the
International Atomic Energy Agency is playing in that
regard. The goal is to make sure that nuclear energy is
used exclusively for peaceful purposes in Iran. Japan
will continue to provide assistance in the field of
nuclear safety, among others, in order to contribute to
ensuring the implementation of the JCPOA.

Another expected result ofthis historic agreement is
the integration of Iran into the international community
and the global economy. On 16 January, we welcomed
the advent of the implementation day of the JCPOA. In
line with resolution 2231 (2015), States Members of the
United Nations have removed measures that had been
applied based on previous Security Council resolutions.

The full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
by Iran and the international community will strengthen
a relationship of trust among Iran and its neighbours,
thereby contributing to peace and security in the Middle
East. As a long-standing friend with historic ties to
Iran, Japan believes that Iran can play an important and
constructive role in such difficult issues as Syria and
Yemen. In that regard, we view Iran's ballistic-missile
launch test in March as unconducive to the stability of
the region. We clearly informed Iran that such actions
ran counter to our expectations.

Last week, the members to the JCPOA celebrated
the first anniversary of this historic agreement and
stated that the JCPOA was being implemented. Mindful
that resolution 2231 (2015) is expected to remain in
force until October 2025, we are reminded that we are
currently taking only the first steps in a long process.
I would like to conclude by urging Iran, the JCPOA
members, the Security Council and the States Members
of the United Nations to continue to work together to
ensure that this historic agreement is fully implemented
to the end.

I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Germany.

