Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and we thank her
for her eighteenth report to the Council, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).

We take note of the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan.

The report before us echoes the many appeals made
by the Council in its resolutions, expressing once again
the collective concern of this body over the current
situation in Darfur and the lack of cooperation on the
part of the Government of the Sudan for the execution
of the arrest warrants mentioned in the report.

We also take note of the updates presented in the
report on recent judicial activities, particularly the
preparations for the trial of Abdallah Banda, the registry
of the trips made by other accused individuals and the
interaction with other States in regard to fulfilling their
obligations to execute the arrest warrants as States
parties to the Court. We regret the fact that notifications
have not been duly addressed in many of those cases.

On the other hand, we are pleased to see the
investigative work being done by the Office of the
Prosecutor to put an end to impunity in the region of
Darfur. From a political point of view, it coincides with
resolution 2113 (2013), which reflects the seriousness
of the situation in Darfur and the very dangerous
situation faced by African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur personnel in carrying out
their mandate.

Once again, the report details supposed aerial
bombardments carried out by the Sudanese Armed
Forces targetting the civilian population, who naturally
are extremely concerned. Similarly, during the recent
period, tensions between the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the rebel movements have continued, which, along
with the intercommunal clashes over natural resources,
have increased the tensions in the region, which is
already suffering.

Also alarming are the reports on incidents
related to sexual and gender-based violence and to
crimes and attacks against human rights officials,
humanitarian workers and peacekeepers. We are
particularly concerned by the loss of 13 members of
the peacekeeping forces and 47 humanitarian workers.
Those events warrant exhaustive investigations, since
they violate the integrity of the civilian population and
have, consequently, a significant impact on the fragile
peace process, which is based on the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur.

Guatemala, as a State party to the International
Criminal Court, cannot ignore the suffering caused
to the population and the serious crimes committed
in Darfur, as well as the results of the investigations,
which report actions that would constitute crimes
against humanity. We reiterate that there cannot be
peace without justice.

We express our concern about the failure to
carry out arrest warrants against the four individuals
identified in the Prosecutor's report who are responsible
for crimes against humanity committed in Darfur.
While we understand how extraordinarily sensitive it
is for the Government of the Sudan to carry out the
investigations, we once again urge the Government to
show its cooperation in accordance with resolution 1593
(2005). We are also concerned that some States parties
to the Court are not complying with the cooperation
required of them to execute those arrest warrants.

We consider it essential to strengthen cooperation
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court. In that context, our delegation hopes that
the existing cooperation can be renewed by combining
the legal and political perspectives for maintaining
international peace and security. That, of course, does
not mean that the Court should be politicized or that the
Council should be judicialized; rather, the combination
of both authorities, each in their respective field of
action, could fulfil their common mandate of conflict
prevention and combating impunity.

Finally, we would like to reiterate to the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court Guatemala's
support and cooperation in carrying out its mandate.

