Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (Spoke in Spanish): My
country is speaking on behalf of the States members of
the Rio Group: Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela and, of
course, Argentina.

First, we thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. It is particularly important to endorse the
legitimacy of the process of revitalizing the Counter-
Terrorism Committee through a meeting open to all
States Members of the United Nations.

The members of the Rio Group reaffirm their
resolute support for the efforts undertaken by the
Security Council in the global fight against terrorism. It
was a little less than three years ago that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee was created. Under the
leadership of its two Chairmen, Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock of the United Kingdom and Ambassador
Inocencio Arias of Spain, the Committee has achieved
unprecedented success in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) through the examination of the
existing legislation and administrative norms of all
States, the facilitation of technical assistance and the
establishment of monitoring and coordination networks
in the global fight against terrorism.

Let us recall that this fight encompasses all
organs and agencies of the United Nations system. In
addition to the intense efforts of the Security Council,
there are the responsibilities of the General Assembly,
which has made notable progress in international law,
and of other United Nations bodies, such as the Vienna
Office, which has a programme devoted specifically to
terrorism. Let us also recall that important activities
have been carried out at the regional level. In our
region, the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism of the Organization of American States
works to enhance cooperation, coordinate national
focal points for the fight against terrorism and improve
the capacity of State officials to deal with this issue. As
a result, universal action should be coordinated and
uniform at every level in order to ensure its maximum
impact.

Let us recall that terrorists often co-opt causes
and use them as a pretext to carry out their criminal
actions. For that reason, the fight against terrorism
cannot be allowed to affect, nor cause us to neglect, the
importance attached to the other priorities of this
Organization, especially those that are linked to the
promotion and protection of human rights and to
economic and social development.

The Committee now intends to review a series of
measures designed to facilitate the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). One of the salient measures is
the establishment of a new structure. This initiative,
which is time-bound and of an experimental nature, is a
very important one, in our opinion.

The new structure will institutionalize, for the
first time, the link between this Committee and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
as well as with other competent bodies in this area. The
countries of the Rio Group would like to express their
satisfaction at this step forward, which we have been
awaiting for some time. We believe that a next step
would be to include in the Committee an expert who
would deal exclusively with this matter - that is,
human rights - as has been suggested by
organizations such as Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International.

Of course, a fundamental aspect of the
Committee's role involves technical assistance. This
essential function, in our opinion, should continue to
be improved and expanded. We believe that this reform
represents an excellent opportunity to see if any
inadequacies exist and to take appropriate measures to
remedy them.

The countries of the Rio Group believe that the
establishment of an Executive Directorate will provide
flexibility, vitality and a greater ability to follow up on
the work of the CTC, and for that reason we support it.
The establishment of structures within the Secretariat,
especially through a decision of the Security Council,
warrants special attention. We believe that the
Executive Directorate should be properly integrated
into the Secretariat, without preventing it from
following the policy guidelines be transmitted to it by
the plenary. We believe that it is essential, in order to
ensure the transparency and legitimacy of this
initiative, strictly to abide by the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations in appointing staff to this
new structure.

The Rio Group would like once again to welcome
this initiative to revitalize the Committee's work and
would like to reiterate once again the commitment of
all its members to continue to ensure the greatest
possible success in the fight against terrorism.

Before concluding, I would like to say, on behalf
of my country, Argentina - which was the victim of
cruel attacks which, in addition to killing hundreds of
innocent people, destroyed the embassy of Israel in
Buenos Aires and the AMIA building - that the
Government of Argentina is ready to make every effort
and provide every possible form of assistance to the
Committee in the fight against terrorism.

