Mr. Corell: I would like to start by referring to
Mr. Guehenno's statement this morning. As the
Security Council will have noted, his statement was
made on behalf of several Departments, including the
Office of Legal Affairs.

But of course, for the Legal Counsel of the
Organization this debate is important. No one could be
more grateful than me and my staff in the Office of
Legal Affairs that the Council is now discussing this
matter. For someone who has devoted the better part of
his career to these issues, it is heartening to see the
Council now specifically addressing the question of the
rule of law. I see that as recognition of the very close
link that exists between peace and security and the rule
of law. Several speakers have made reference to that
fact. Out of those many I would just refer to the
statement made by the representative of Argentina,
who at this meeting said that

(spoke in Spanish)

"Justice and the rule of law are the precondition
for community life. Peace is not possible without
them."

(spoke in English)

The phrase "rule of law" is often used, but what
do we mean by it? To what law are we referring?
Certainly, that is a law that must be adopted under
democratic principles and in the observance of
international standards. Some of the member countries
of the Organization have the luxury of having had their
law developed over centuries at the national level.
Gradually that law has been adapted to present-day
conditions.

In other societies, the situation is different.
Several speakers made reference to local traditions. I
had the privilege of meeting with the chief justices and
ministers of justice of most countries in Africa at a
conference in Abuja in February. It struck me, coming
from a different tradition, what an immense task lies
ahead of them, because there they have local traditions
without which they cannot do. They simply have to
have justice done at the very local level out in the
villages, while at the same time being able to
participate in the international community, in particular
in international commerce, where the laws are set
according to international standards of a very modern
nature.

What I would like to point to here is that, when
we speak we speak about the rule of law, it is important
when one enters an area that one look carefully at the
local traditions, but that one bears in mind the very
important standards that this Organization has set in the
field of human rights. I point to the 1948 Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the important
documents derived from that Declaration.
In this sense, this issue goes far beyond
peacekeeping operations. The Secretary-General
himself, a few years ago, asked us in the Secretariat
about what we thought were the most important issues
he should focus on for the future. Needless to say,
peace and security came out as number one. Number
two was the rule of law in international relations and
the rule of law at the national level. Now, he has been
very faithful to that assessment and he constantly
reverts to it. I refer members to his report before the
Millennium Assembly, to which the General Assembly
responded very forcefully in the Millennium
Declaration. I refer in particular, if I recall correctly, to
paragraphs 9, 24 and 25 of that resolution.

As to the rule of law, most speakers have focused
on the justice system and the importance of having
good administration. I would suggest that one could
look at this as three pillars, the first being the
parliament and the Government of the country itself.
They are the first ones who have to observe the laws of
the country - the Constitution and the laws they have
themselves enacted. In a sense, they are the first ones
who must bow to the dictates of the laws that they have
passed. The second pillar is a responsible and
accountable administration. I would suggest that the
majority of the population in any society will always
encounter the administration of the country, not
necessarily - and thankfully - the judiciary. Third -
and this is what members of the Council have focused
on - is an independent and impartial judiciary.

Who, then, is to form all this when assistance has
been given and countries are left to deal with this on
their own? Ultimately, it comes to the people who are
set to exercise these functions - ordinary people who
emerge from among the citizens of the country. There
are three things, I think, that we should bear in mind
here. The first is that these people must have sufficient
knowledge of how the system works. They must have
the necessary skills. Secondly, they must understand -
and this is very important - that they are set to serve
the society in which they work. Nothing else - they
are servants of their societies. Thirdly, they must have
the integrity to exercise their functions. Here, I would
also focus on the more senior officials in any national
system. They have to set the example as teachers and
mentors of a generation.

Finally, by the same token, it is important that the
Security Council take the lead in setting the example at
the international level. The power of this Council is
far-reaching. I think that this debate initiated by the
United Kingdom becomes of great importance when
the Council is seized with a matter, because then the
situation at the national level is very precarious indeed.
Many of the issues the Council has discussed today are
difficult enough to cope with in the most organized
society, so what, then, is the situation like in the States
with which this Council is engaged?

Let us hope that the work in which we are all
engaged will prove useful in developing our tools to
assist populations in difficulties.

