Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): We too thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her presentation of the ninth report of her

Office to the Security Council pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011).

On matters pertaining to cooperation, we are
pleased to note that the Libyan Prosecutor-General's
Office has been cooperating with the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in the key areas identified in the
report under consideration. We welcome the successful
outcome of the working meetings held in November
and December 2014. It is our expectation that this
will strengthen judicial cooperation between the ICC
and the Libyan authorities, and we encourage the two
parties to continue to work together with a view to
ending impunity in Libya.

Concerning the case against SaifAl-Islam Gaddafi,
we note that the decision of the Pre-trial Chamber
upheld by the Appeals Chamber as to the admissibility
of his case. Libya as a State party to the Rome Statute
has an obligation to surrender him to the Court. In the
case of Abdullah Al-Senussi, we note the conclusion of
the Court that there are currently no new facts emerging
from his ongoing trial in Libya to support a reversal
of the Court's decision that the case is inadmissible.
We welcome the decision of the Court to continue to
monitor the case against Mr. Al-Senussi and its concern
about how it may be affected by the situation in Libya.

With regard to ongoing investigations of crimes
committed by militias and armed groups in Libya, we
are concerned that progress has been hampered by the
situation in Libya and lack of resources. We appreciate
the difficulty presented by the challenging situation in
Libya to the work of the Court and call on the people
of Libya to embrace dialogue and work together for
the establishment of a Government of national unity.
This, we believe, is a critical first step in stabilizing the
country and ending the impunity of militias and armed
groups.

Nigeria notes with deep concern the crimes
allegedly committed by the different parties in Libya
since February 2011. This can be attributed in part to
the current power and security vacuum in the country,
which has created space for terrorist groups and militias
to operate virtually unrestricted. We condemn in the
strongest terms the brutal killings by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and other terrorist groups. We
also condemn the indiscriminate attacks on residential
areas, car bombings and suicide attacks targeting
civilians. Those committing grave crimes such as
torture, illegal detention, abductions and executions
must be held accountable. We welcome the commitment
of the Libyan authorities to bring perpetrators to justice
and encourage them to continue to work with the ICC
to that end.

