Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Sir, we welcome you as President of the
Security Council, and we hope that your personal
participation in today's meeting and Angola's active
role in the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, will contribute to intensification of this organ's
activities in the search for answers to the region's
challenges.

The activities of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region are complemented by the active
efforts ofthe international community to settle conflicts
and to normalize the situation in the region. This
constructive involvement is demonstrated by, among
other things, the Secretary-General's recent visit to the
subregion and by the successful Great Lakes Private
Sector Investment Conference. We hope that it will give
impetus to economic cooperation among the countries
in the region and will facilitate the strengthening of
peace and trust there. I take this opportunity to note
the role of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, in organizing
that Conference.

A cornerstone of stability in the Great Lakes region
is the 2013 Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region. Russia advocates all signatories fulfilling all
of their obligations, including respect for sovereignty,
non-intervention in the internal affairs of one another's
countries, and the consolidation of trust among the
countries of the subregion. In that context, we cannot
help but be concerned by the mutual accusations we
have heard recently, including about the recruitment of
militants from among refugees. We call on the parties
to exercise maximum restraint and to take steps for
de-escalation, including the utilization of the broadened
joint monitoring mechanism, which is stipulated by the
Framework.

We are compelled to note that, three years after the
signing of the Framework, its military component is
still far from fully realized. We pay tribute to the efforts
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which remains committed to the fight against
militias and to stabilizing the situation. However, armed
groups remain active in the country and in the region as
a whole, contributing to the prolongation of inter-ethnic
conflict, the illegal proliferation of weapons and
the worsening humanitarian situation. It is clear that
there is no solution through the simple use of force.
Comprehensive measures are needed to eradicate the
root causes of the conflict, including via consolidating
State power in the areas freed from rebels. At the same
time, we call on country's Government and on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to quickly renew
their full-scale joint operations to neutralize militias,
and we welcome the January signing of an agreement
on the resumption of cooperation in that area.

We are also concerned by the state of affairs
regarding repatriations from Uganda and Rwanda to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular of
several hundred former combatants of the Mouvement
du 23 mars. Despite active efforts through the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
this process has practically ground to a halt. The
lack of practical results might lead to recidivism
among the former militants from the Movement. The
implementation of the Framework might be made easier
by the consolidation of its governing structures. We
welcome the measures being taken by the signatory
countries to increase the effectiveness of the functioning
of the regional monitoring mechanism, as well as the
efforts by the Technical Support Committee.

Many countries in the region are actively
establishing or reforming democratic institutions.
Some of them are entering an important pre-election
period. We welcome the mediation and good offices
through the United Nations and regional organizations
in helping to start national mechanisms for political
dialogue in those countries. Having said that, there
can be no doubt that any internal political conclusions
will lead to long-term stability only if they are reached
and adopted by the countries themselves. Imposing
solutions in such affairs is unacceptable.

As a member of the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes Region, Russia intends to assist further in the
search for a peaceful process in the region.

