Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
country Croatia and the candidate country Montenegro
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union stands by the Syrian people
in its courageous struggle for freedom, dignity and
democracy. The use offorce by the Syrian regime against
civilians, including with heavy weapons and aerial
bombardments, has reached unprecedented levels and
can only exacerbate further the violence and endanger
the stability of the whole region. The European Union
recalls that the priorities should be to end oppression,
stop all violence, deliver humanitarian aid for all those
in need, prevent further regional instability and be
prepared for the post-conflict period. The European
Union underlines that those whose presence would
undermine the political transition should be excluded
and that, in that regard, President Al-Assad has no
place in the future of Syria. The European Union
remains committed to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria.

The European Union remains deeply concerned by
the spillover effects of the Syrian crisis in neighbouring
countries in terms of security and stability. The
European Union strongly condemns the shelling by
Syrian forces of Turkish territory, particularly on the
border town of Akcakale on 3 October. The European
Union calls on all to prevent escalation. The EU calls
again on the Syrian authorities to fully respect the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of all neighbouring
countries.

Recalling that the main responsibility for the
current crisis lies with the Syrian authorities, the
European Union warns against further militarization
and radicalization of the conflict and sectarian violence,
which can only bring further suffering to Syria and risks
having a tragic impact in the region. In that regard, the
European Union expresses concern about the protection
of civilians, in particular vulnerable groups and
religious communities. The intensification of violence
and the recent series of terrorist attacks demonstrate
the urgent need for a political transition that would
meet the democratic aspirations of the Syrian people
and bring stability in Syria.

The European Union reiterates its full support for
the endeavours of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States for Syria and stands ready to strengthen
its cooperation with him. The EU emphasizes the need
to focus international and regional efforts to solve the
Syrian crisis through a political solution and calls on
key actors in the region and all members of the Security
Council to uphold their responsibilities and support
Mr. Brahimi's efforts.

In View of the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and of the approaching winter, the European
Union recalls the moral imperative to step up assistance
to all affected populations throughout Syria and
neighbouring countries. The EU will continue to
provide assistance and calls on all donors to increase
their contributions to the latest United Nations appeals
for funding humanitarian assistance and refugee
assistance. All parties should allow full and safe access
for the delivery of humanitarian aid in all parts of the
country and respect international humanitarian law.
The European Union urges all parties to the conflict
to respect in full their legal and moral obligations to
protect civilians. Particularly alarmed by the dramatic
and growing difficulties in access in Syria to medical
services, the EU urges all parties to commit themselves
to respect in full the inviolability of all medical
facilities, medical personnel and vehicles in respect of
applicable international humanitarian law.

The EU is appalled by the deterioration of the
situation in Syria, in particular by the widespread and
systematic violations of human rights, international
humanitarian law and fundamental freedoms by the
Syrian authorities. The EU welcomes the extension of
the independent international commission of inquiry on
Syria and its strengthening through the nomination of
two new members. The EU reaffirms its support to the
commission's investigations into alleged violations of
international human rights law with a View to holding
to account those responsible for such violations,
including for those that may amount to crimes against
humanity and war crimes according to the definition of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
The EU underlines the importance of documenting
the widespread, systematic and gross human rights
violations and recalls that all those responsible must be
held accountable.

The EU recalls that an inclusive and coordinated
opposition is essential to starting a political transition.
The EU continues to urge all opposition groups, inside
and outside Syria, to put aside their differences and to
agree on a set of shared principles and start working
towards an inclusive, orderly and peaceful transition
in Syria .The European Union will continue to work
closely with the League of Arab States and facilitate
further dialogue initiatives to complement its efforts to
encourage the opposition to form an inclusive common
platform.

Today the European Union approved additional
restrictive measures against Syria. The European
Union stands ready to engage with those seriously
committed to a genuine democratic transition. The EU
will continue its policy of imposing additional measures
targeting the regime, not the civilian population, as
long as repression continues. It calls on all Syrians to
dissociate themselves from the repressive policy of the
regime in order to facilitate a political transition. The
EU commits to working closely and comprehensively
with international partners on planning to ensure that
the international community is ready to provide rapid

support to Syria once transition takes place.

On the Middle East peace process, political changes
across the region underline the urgent need for progress.
The European Union is convinced that heeding the
aspirations of the people in the region, including those
of Palestinians for statehood and those of Israelis for
security, is a crucial element for lasting peace, stability
and prosperity in the region as a whole.

It is in the fundamental interest of the European
Union, of the parties and of the wider region to
resolve the conflict, which can be achieved through a
comprehensive peace settlement based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the road map, the agreements previously reached by
the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative. The European
Union stresses once again the central role of the Quartet
in this context.

The EU recognizes the additional challenges that
both parties currently face. The Palestinian Authority
continues to face severe financial difficulties, which
risk undermining everything that has been achieved to
date, including the State readiness of the Palestinian
Authority regarding its institutions in key sectors.
This has been acknowledged by the international
community, most recently at the meeting of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians, held here on
23 September. In this regard, the European Union calls
on international donors to increase their support to
the Palestinian Authority treasury, on the Palestinian
Authority to continue reforms and improve the business
environment, and on Israel to take further and broader
steps to enable Palestinian sustainable economic
development, including in Area C and the Gaza Strip.

The changes under way in the region continue
to present Israel with uncertainty, but also offer
opportunities in its relations with the Arab world.
At the same time, progress on the Middle East peace
process would contribute to regional stability and offer
new opportunities for the region as a whole.

The EU and its member States reaffirm their
fundamental commitment to the security of Israel,
including with regard to vital threats in the region, and
are committed to a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that would
guarantee security and prosperity for both Israel and a
future Palestinian State.

The European Union is appalled by the recurring

rocket attacks from Gaza and condemns in the strongest
terms violence deliberately targeting civilians.

Our position as to how to achieve such a resolution
is clear. Direct negotiations between the parties in the
framework of a credible set of parameters, including
those established in the Quartet's statement of
23 September 2011, remain the best way forward. The
European Union will continue to contribute, including
within the Quartet, to the work for that solution.

The European Union encourages others in the
region to facilitate a return to negotiations, and
calls on the parties themselves to demonstrate their
commitment to a peaceful solution by actions that
can create the environment of trust necessary to
ensure that meaningful negotiations can start without
delay. Now more than ever, bold decisions by both
parties are needed, and both parties must respect their
obligations under the road map. Settlement expansion,
which constitutes a violation of international law and
threatens to make a two-State solution impossible, must
cease immediately.

The EU reiterates its grave concerns about
these developments, including the acceleration of
settlement construction and the serious limitations
on the Palestinian Authority's ability to promote the
economic development of Palestinian communities in
Area C. Continuing demolitions of Palestinian-owned
structures, displacement and plans of forced transfer, as
well as settler violence, also remain a serious concern.
The EU reiterates its call on Israel to work together with
the Palestinian Authority to allow more access to and
control of the Palestinian Authority over Area C. Social
and economic development in Area C is of critical
importance for the viability of a future Palestinian
State, as Area C is its main land reserve. A way must
also be found through negotiations to resolve the status
of Jerusalem as the future capital of two States.

The European Union continues to call for
intra-Palestinian reconciliation behind President
Abbas, in line with the principles set out in his speech
of4 May 2011, as an important element for the unity of
a future Palestinian State and for reaching a two-State
solution. The situation in Gaza continues to be of great
concern. Fully recognizing Israel's legitimate security
needs, the EU continues to call for the immediate,
sustained and unconditional opening of crossings for
the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and
persons to and from the Gaza Strip. The EU calls for
full respect for international humanitarian law.

High Representative Catherine Ashton will travel
to Lebanon, Jordan, the occupied Palestinian territory
and Israel later this month and more widely in the region
in November. The European Union also looks forward
to hosting the next meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee in Brussels in the spring of next year. At the
same time, our hope is to not then be simply reiterating
the statements we have made at that forum in recent
years while the parties themselves drift further apart.

