Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to thank the United Nations
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, for
his frank and comprehensive briefing. Mr. Egeland has
told us that a peacekeeping operation will be judged
according to its ability to protect, and we fully agree
with that view.

One of the most effective measures that the
Security Council should take to protect civilians is to
include clear provisions in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations to protect them. Indeed,
where such mandates do not include any such
provisions, the Security Council should adjust them so
to provide them with specific norms on the protection
of civilians. Moreover, the Security Council should
request all peacekeeping missions to report at least
once every six months on progress made in the
implementation of resolutions on the protection of
civilians, in particular resolution 1674 (2006).

My delegation believes that our thematic debate
today on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
will undoubtedly help us to assess the overall progress
achieved under resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000)
and 1674 (2006). Nevertheless, I recall that the
Security Council was created not to address issues
abstractly or academically, but to resolve specific
problems that undermine international peace and
security.

For that reason, any discussion of protection of
civilians in armed conflict obliges us to be precise and
to speak of specific cases. In this instance, we are
addressing Darfur, not only because of the persistent
and flagrant violations of human rights and the lack of
protection of civilians there, but because Darfur is a
great challenge that the Security Council thus far has
not been able to overcome. In the light of the recent
visit by Council members to the region, we were able
to see that despite earlier debates on the protection of
civilians, such civilians still lack international
protection.

The signing of the Darfur Peace Agreement in
May has not yet provided a benefit in terms of the
protection of the civilian population. That is visible
and palpable when one visits camps for refugees or
displaced persons. Moreover, the presence of the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) has many

limitations and has not been sufficient to deter attacks
and violations of civilians' rights because of its low
force level to date.

The attacks on the civilian population continue
and there are problems for humanitarian access.
Moreover, there are still cases of intimidation,
harassment and human rights violations carried out by
those who should be enforcing law and security.
Displaced persons camps in Darfur and in Chad lack
security, and people live under constant threat. This has
prevented the return of displaced persons to their
places of origin. Also, refugees in various areas of
Chad live in precarious conditions with grave health,
food and security problems. During our recent visit to
Chad, we were able to witness such problems.
President Deby indicated that his Government was not
capable of protecting the refugee camps and urged the
international community to guarantee such protection.

In the case of Darfur, my delegation believes that
is urgent to give AMIS a robust mandate to enable it to
protect civilians and at the end of this year to transfer
its functions to a United Nations force with adequate
capacity to protect civilians and implement the Darfur
Peace Agreements. In this regard, given the current
situation, the Security Council should maintain its
firmest resolve to ensure that a United Nations force is
deployed in Darfur. That resolve should be
demonstrated by the Council through support for the
important work of the Secretary-General and the heads
of States of the African Union to bring about the
deployment of a United Nations force and preparations
for transferring the functions of AMIS to the new
United Nations force, which should have a clear
mandate to implement the peace agreements and, above
all, to protect civilians, under Chapter VII of the
Charter and international provisions that punish crimes
against humanity.

My delegation believes that effective protection
of civilians in armed conflict, and in particular in
Darfur, will prove whether the Security Council is
capable of bridging the gap between rhetoric and action
in favour of the protection of civilians and against
violations and crimes against humanity.

Finally, we would like to stress that the Security
Council must also continue to support the activities of
the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court; its investigation will help to put an end
to the sense of impunity that currently prevails in
Darfur.

