The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.

I thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his
briefing. We are grateful for his leadership during this
important transition period.

Five months have passed since the P5+l countries,
the European Union and Iran concluded the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Like others,
I am pleased to note that the JCPOA participants are
making progress in fulfilling their commitments under
the deal. Iran is taking key steps outlined in the JCPOA,
such as removing centrifuges, and it has begun work to
eliminate 98 per cent of its enriched uranium stockpile.
When the International Atomic Energy Agency verifies
that Iran has completed those steps - we call this
implementation day - then we will enter a new phase
of this landmark deal.

After that day, however, the Council will continue
to play a crucial role in JCPOA implementation and in
monitoring compliance with resolution 2231 (2015). Prior
to JCPOA implementation day, all the current Security
Council sanctions remain in place. Nevertheless, we
have seen a troubling tendency to look the other way
when those measures were wilfully violated in recent
months. For example, this past October, Iran launched a
ballistic missile that was obviously capable ofdelivering
a nuclear weapon. Resolution 1929 (2010), which is still
in force, prohibits that kind of launch. After reviewing
that incident, the independent Panel of Experts also
concluded definitively that it was a violation of the
resolution. Yet instead of an effective timely response,
the Security Council has dithered. We intend to keep
working with Council members so as to acknowledge
and respond appropriately to that serious incident.

And there have been other violations. Just last
week, the international affairs adviser to Iran's Supreme
Leader admitted outright that Brigadier General
Qasem Soleimani, who is subject to Security Council
travel ban, visited Russia. That adviser called such
travel "absolutely normal". Also, in late September,
a shipment of arms from Iran was intercepted off
the coast of Oman. That shipment was a violation of
resolution 1747 (2007). We do not see how Council
members can cast doubt on those violations. In many
cases, Iranian officials have boasted publicly about
taking prohibited actions, leaving them no plausible
deniability - no desire on their part for deniability.
After the October launch, Iran's Defence Minister even
declared, "We don't ask permission from anyone", as he
then went on to describe the ballistic missile's technical
capabilities. The Council cannot allow Iran to feel that
it can violate our resolutions with impunity. Some
Council members may not like those resolutions, but
they are our resolutions.

Furthermore, we reject the notion that those
countries that raise those violations in the Security
Council, countries such as the United States, are
somehow responsible for destabilizing the JCPOA.
Implementing Security Council resolutions is the sine
qua non of a credible, enforceable nuclear deal. To
suggest otherwise is to miss the point of the JCPOA and
the point of the Security Council. A sense of impunity
for violators will not help this deal. The Council
members that raise violations of our resolutions, who
seek action from the Council in response to violations,
are not the destabilizers. We are not the rule-breakers.
Iran is, when it violates Council resolutions. It is not
allowed under the resolutions, and they are admitting it.

The United States of America, as well as other
Council members, have appropriately and firmly
condemned those violations. We will continue to
dedicate resources and work with international partners
to make sure that United Nations measures are better
enforced. We will continue to intercept and seize Iranian

arms exports, in accordance with international law. We
will continue to identify and obstruct shipments to Iran
of prohibited ballistic missile-related items. And we
will continue to hold Iran accountable for violations of
the measures imposed by the Council.

But that is not enough. The Security Council
itself- we here, we 15 - must take responsibility to
respond to violations of our resolutions. That will be a
long-term challenge. After J CPOA implementation day,
there will still be measures imposed under Article 41 of
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. That
is part of the JCPOA. Those measures, enforced by the
Security Council, will remain in place for many years.
That includes restrictions relating to arms transfers and
ballistic missile-related items. The United States and
our partners will continue to bring violations to the
Security Council's attention and press for this organ to
respond appropriately.

All of us are very pleased by the JCPOA. We are
glad that it exists. We think it is good for peace and
security. We have to remember how we got this deal;
decisive Security Council action played a major role
in getting Iran to the negotiating table. But our job
here is not done. We have to work together in the same
spirit of resolve that led to the JCPOA to support the
implementation of this nuclear deal and to enforce the
Council's resolutions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The meeting rose at 4.05 pm.
