Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and would like to add some additional remarks
in its national capacity.

Allow me first to thank Senegal for organizing
today's open debate and for all the initiatives that
the country has taken in order to promote dialogue
within the United Nations on the issues of water, peace
and security.

Climate change, the growing world population and
urbanization have led to an increase in water scarcity
and to problems of access to safe drinking water and
sanitation, with significant repercussions on everyday
life for people around the world. Water access and
management is also affected by conflict, with water-
access disruptions, while political exploitation of water
issues is not uncommon. Efforts to ensure control over
water resources may also become a cause of conflict, as
noted in the World Water Development Report of 2015.

Cyprus, being surrounded by water and having
experienced drought and water scarcity on many
occasions throughout its history, has its own extensive
experience and views on the significance of good water
management for sustainable development and for peace.
We have successfully used innovation and technology as
a method of addressing water shortages, with a state-of-
the-art desalination system, among other things. We
stand ready to share our experiences and our lessons
learned and to contribute to the cooperation between
countries, and, given the interconnection between the
Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, to the overall implementation of the
2030 Agenda.

We welcome the increasing focus of the United
Nations on the issues of water and sanitation.
Sustainable Development Goal 6, on the availability
and sustainable management of water and sanitation
for all, is a significant step by the international
community in putting the issues of water and sanitation
at the forefront. The full implementation of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change will have a significant
effect on improving current problems of water scarcity
and water management. We also recognize the positive
contribution of the call to action of the High-Level
Panel on Water. Moreover, we support the relevant
activities and ongoing discussions within the United
Nations aimed at promoting the better coordination and
work of the United Nations system in an effort to better
address water-related challenges around the world.

In order to address water-related issues and their
links to conflict, there needs to be better understanding
of those issues. In that context, we believe that
the dimension of water-related issues should be
incorporated into conflict prevention, where relevant.
We also appreciate the contribution of the Global High-
Level Panel on Water and Peace.

The protections afforded by international
humanitarian law during armed conflict cannot be
stressed enough. In that regard, we believe that it is
important to further study in depth the interlinkages
between conflict, access to water and sanitation, and
violations of international humanitarian law in order to
enable the better implementation of humanitarian law
in those instances.
Furthermore, it is our strong belief that water can
become a source of stability and peace. As such, we
believe that the promotion of transboundary agreements
on water management and the promotion of water-
related confidence-building measures are crucial. Such
agreements and measures should be carefully built on
provisions that will be for the benefit of all countries
concerned, with no winners or losers. They should also
be promoted with a sharp focus on ownership by the
States or parties concerned.

In conclusion, please allow me to reiterate our
support for today's debate and to express the belief
that it will provide useful guidance as to the further
development of this important matter within the United
Nations system.

