Ms. Robinson: I am pleased and honoured to have
this opportunity to speak to the Council this morning,
following my first visit to the Great Lakes since being
appointed on 18 March as the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy to the region. The Council's role in new
efforts to forge peace will be crucial, and it has already
taken important decisions. I look forward to close
consultation with the Council and to its strong support
moving forward.

The reason I accepted the responsibility of Special
Envoy is because I know this to be one of the longest
enduring, most appalling human rights, women's
rights, children's rights and humanitarian crises, with
levels of death, violence and suffering that are totally
unacceptable. This time we have to tackle it differently
and sustain the political will.

I believe we meet at a moment of renewed
opportunity. There is a fresh chance to do more
than just attend to the consequences of conflict or to
manage crises of the kind seen again most recently last
November. There is a chance to resolve its underlying
causes and to stop it for good. Hope and possibility must
now infuse what will be a very challenging process
to implement the Framework for Peace, Security and
Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, signed in Addis Ababa on 24 February
under the auspices of the Secretary-General.

There are reasons to hope that the new Framework
can work. For one, it represents a comprehensive
agreement requiring actions at all levels, by all who
have responsibilities - nationally, regionally and
internationally. It includes mechanisms of oversight,
both in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the region, to ensure that benchmarks are set and met. It
has the support of 11 nations and the involvement of the
four organizations that are its witnesses. It has emerged
at this time precisely as a result of exhaustion with the
continuing cycles of crises and a broad realization that
there is a need for a new approach.

That is why, as I made my first visit in this capacity
to the region, last week, I described that agreement as a
framework ofhope. For ifthis new attempt is to succeed
where others have fallen short, there must be optimism
and courage in place of cynicism. The Governments
and the peoples of the region and the international
community must believe once again that peace can be
achieved and must take the necessary actions to obtain
it. As that process advances, it must bring hope to the
people who are the victims and who will ultimately be
its beneficiaries.

As I carried that message with me around the
region, I also made it clear that my approach as Special
Envoy would be different. I will of course focus much
of my energies on engaging with the leaders and the
Governments of the region in order to build trust and
help them translate their commitments into tangible
plans and actions for peace. At the same time, I will also
be working from the bottom up. I will be engaging with
civil society, as I believe it will be essential to generate
the broadest possible constituency for the agreement. If
people are engaged and take ownership of the process,
they can become a strong force for implementation. I
believe this new effort will have a chance only if many
partners are coordinated and pushing in the same
direction.

I have summarized this personal vision of the
Framework and my approach as Special Envoy in
a document entitled "A framework of hope". I am
sharing it with the Council today, as I did with all my
interlocutors during my trip to the region. It reflects my
own sense of the spirit of the agreement and how I can
contribute most effectively to its implementation.

Having made those introductory comments, let
me turn now to a more detailed summary of my recent
Visit, before leaving the Council with some concluding
remarks.

Between 28 April and 5 May, I Visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo both Kinshasa
and Goma - Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi and South
Africa. I would have liked to have visited the other
countries signatories to the Framework agreement but,
regrettably, time and other scheduling constraints did
not permit. Where I was unable to do so, I wrote to the
leaders concerned and indicated that I would Visit more
countries during subsequent trips to the region in the
coming months.

 

During my first visit to the region, I met with
Presidents Kabila Kabange, Museveni and Nkurunziza,
and had a long telephone conversation with President
Kagame, who was out of the country. I also met with the
Governor of North Kivu, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Paluku, and the Minister of Defence
of Uganda, Mr. Kiyonga, in his capacity as facilitator
of the Kampala talks between the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23). I met with the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Ms. Dlamini-Zuma, her
Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region,
Ambassador Diarra, and the Executive Secretary of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), Mr. Ntumba Luaba.

In all the countries I visited, I also held extensive
meetings with United Nations entities, including the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the United Nations Office in Burundi, the country
teams, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund, the diplomatic corps and the donor community.

Finally, in each place, I expanded my consultations
to include civil society, in the broad sense of the term,
and even more so women's groups, with whom I intend
to work closely to implement my mandate.

I would like to state my heartfelt appreciation to
all the officials and actors that I met during my visit,
for their very warm welcome and their expression of
support for my future activities as Special Envoy.

The purpose ofmy visit to the region was threefold:
first, to seek the views of leaders and others on the
implementation of the Framework, particularly on the
establishment of the oversight mechanisms and the
development of benchmarks for the commitments of
signatories; secondly, to encourage participation in
the first meeting of the "11+4" oversight mechanism,
planned for 26 May on the margins of the African
Union jubilee summit, in Addis Ababa; and, thirdly, to
share my Vision and approach for the Framework, which
I shared with the Council at the outset of this briefing.

While I was familiar with the issues and knew
most of the leaders in the Great Lakes region before
assuming my position, I undertook the visit in my new
capacity first and foremost to listen to the concerns
of those on the ground affected by the crisis in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
from the leadership to the ordinary citizens. I had
frank and warm discussions with all my interlocutors.
During my meetings with each leader and Government
official from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and neighbouring countries, we discussed in detail
their commitments as outlined in the Framework, and
I stressed that they should be fulfilled. I called upon
civil society groups to encourage their Governments to
respect their commitments and to hold them accountable.
Equally important, I stressed that the implementation
of the Framework was a shared responsibility and that
success would be predicated upon each and every party
living up to their commitments, given the monumental
challenges ahead of us.

My Visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in particular took place against the backdrop of
tensions produced by M-23 statements in reaction to
the upcoming deployment of the Intervention Brigade.
In Kinshasa and Goma, the overwhelming majority
of the Congolese I spoke to were enthusiastic about
the deployment of the Brigade - a feeling that is
understandable. I stressed at the same time that the
Intervention Brigade, while an important tool, should
be seen as one element ofa much larger political process
aimed at finding a comprehensive solution to the crisis
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Although at an apparent stalemate for now, the
Kampala talks are also part of the efforts towards
a regional peace initiative, and I called on the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to remain committed to that process with a View to
expediting it as soon as possible. The current focus
on the Intervention Brigade, which in my View should
act mostly preventively, as a deterrent, with limited
strategic military operations, needs to be put in context
to minimize potential adverse impacts. It would be Vital
that it operate in full compliance with international
human rights and humanitarian law and with maximal
consideration for the protection of civilians. Many in
the humanitarian community, as well as officials in
Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, expressed concerns
about the need to manage the potential consequences
of the military operations. I am glad to note that
MONUSCO is already undertaking mitigating measures
in that regard.

President Kabila informed me that his Government
was working on a plan of action for the implementation
ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo's commitments
under the Framework, including on the composition and
modalities of work of the national oversight mechanism.
I stressed the importance of the inclusiveness of such a
national mechanism, which should involve civil society
representatives and have the necessary expertise to
play an effective supervisory role. Both President
Kabila and his Minister for Foreign Affairs assured me
that at least the architecture of the national oversight
mechanism would be ready for the first meeting of the
11+4, to be held in Addis Ababa on 26 May.

I am also glad to report some encouraging news
at the regional level. As with President Kabila, I had
frank discussions with Presidents Museveni, Kagame
and Nkurunziza. All three stated their readiness to
implement their commitments under the Framework
and, as I said earlier, expressed support for my mandate
as Special Envoy. It is encouraging to see that the
leaders in the region, particularly Presidents Kabila
and Kagame, continue to talk to each other, either
bilaterally or through the ICGLR.

In Kampala, I had fruitful discussions with
President Museveni and the facilitator of the Kampala
talks, Minister of Defence Crispus Kiyonga. They both
underlined that the dialogue remains a viable avenue
to end the crisis in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. While recognizing progress on key points of
the agenda of the dialogue, they spoke of stalemate in
others, particularly on the issues of amnesty, integration
and disarmament. We exchanged views on how to move
the process forward.

The ICGLR has played and continues to play a
very important role under the leadership of its Chair,
President Museveni. The regional initiatives have
helped mitigate the impact of the crisis, and it is
important that the international community, including
the Security Council, acknowledge that role if we want
to make progress under the renewed partnership to
end the crisis in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as clearly spelled out in the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region. I intend to work closely with
my African Union and ICGLR partners in Bujumbura
and Addis Ababa to ensure that we have a coordinated
and concerted approach.
It is important that the people in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the Great Lakes region as a
whole, feel that there is a peace dividend to enjoy. There
is room for further regional economic cooperation
provided that trust is restored between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbours. I was told
that the last summit of the Economic Community of
the Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL), which includes
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, was held almost 20 years ago. President
Nkurunziza, who will host a CEPGL ministerial
meeting next week in Burundi, has pledged to continue
his efforts to revitalize that regional economic
institution. As I was departing Kigali, Rwandan
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Louise Mushikiwabo, was
flying to Kinshasa for consultations on joint economic
projects and other peace and security matters. Those
economic consultations had been underway prior to the
straining of their relations due to the past year's crisis.

In discussions in Pretoria with the Department
of International Relations and Cooperation, I learned
about encouraging measures that the South African
Government has taken or plans to take to boost its
economic partnership with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its assistance to Kinshasa in sectors
such as governance, agriculture, infrastructure and
revenue collection. The good will of South Africa
was confirmed in a telephone conversation with the
Minister of International Relations and Cooperation,
Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, and in a meeting with
the Minister of the Presidency, Mr. Collins Chabane.
They confirmed the strong support of President Zuma,
who was on his way back from a meeting in Congo-
Brazzaville at the time.

Those bilateral and trilateral economic initiatives
are positive steps that could greatly contribute to the
restoration of trust between the countries of the region.
We need to support them, and I am very glad that
already there is good will from the donor community
and the international financial institutions, particularly
the World Bank, to help the Great Lakes region.
Looking ahead, as mentioned earlier, the African
Union and the United Nations will be organizing the
first meeting of the ll+4 oversight mechanism on
26 May in Addis Ababa. Between now and then, I
will be working on a concept paper, to be presented
to regional leaders, on how this regional oversight
mechanism and its supporting technical committee
might operate. I am aware that given the short amount
of time and the important events of the jubilee itself,
the meeting may only take the process a small way
forward. However, I intend to continue consultations
with each and every signatory of the Framework on that
matter, so as to present an approved set of benchmarks
to the next meeting of the ll+4 oversight mechanism
at the General Assembly in September. Just after the
Addis Ababa meeting, on 26 May, I will head to Paris
to attend a meeting of the International Contact Group
on the Great Lakes Region on 28 May. I intend to
encourage participants to coordinate their efforts more
in support of the Great Lakes region.

I am heartened that President Museveni will
organize a Summit of the International Conference
on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development
in the Great Lakes Region, probably in July, to take
stock of the recent developments and define ways in
which the region intends to work with the signatories
and partners of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. In the meantime, building on current
initiatives and existing regional forums, including on
a regional plan of action for resolution 1325 (2000)
of my African sister, Bineta Diop, of Femmes Africa
Solidarite', I intend to mobilize the women of the
Great Lakes countries to play an active role in support
of the Framework. I also intend to work closely with
the concerned authorities in Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Committee of the Red Cross to
encourage the organization of a dedicated working
meeting on refugees at a date to be determined. Finally,
I am already planning my second visit to the region
later this month.

Let me conclude by reminding us of the tragic
history that remains inescapably attached to this
problem - one that still scars the Great Lakes and this
very institution of the United Nations, and one that also
fuels my own personal commitment to this assignment.
Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of the
genocidal killings in Rwanda of 1994. I reflected about
that last week when Visiting the genocide memorial site
in Kigali. As President of Ireland, I was the first Head
of State to visit Rwanda in 1994 in the aftermath of the
genocide. In the Hotel Mille Collines, where I stayed,
there were still walls stained with blood. In 1995, I
spoke of those horrors at the fiftieth anniversary of the
United Nations, because it was a reality that had to be
confronted.

Only three years after that first visit after the
genocide, I was back in Rwanda, attending a vibrant
pan-African women's conference in a nation that was
already on the mend and moving forward. Yet two
decades later, that past is not yet fully behind us. Its
echoes remain present in the horrific, cyclical Violence
that continues to deprive so many of the secure and
peaceful lives they deserve. In this framework of hope,
we have an opportunity to get it right - to bring peace,
security and development at long last to the region and
its people. Now is the time to begin translating its broad
commitment into tangible actions for peace.

There are no guarantees that this new push for
peace will succeed. However, we can be sure that, if it
fails, the consequences will be grave. We can also be
sure that, however determined I am personally to this
challenging assignment, the new push for peace will
not succeed through the efforts of one person or one
brigade, or any other action taken in isolation. No - it
will require an all-out concerted series of actions that
are both serious and sustained, at the national, regional
and international levels. It will require doing things
differently, doing them better and not stopping until the
job is finished.

