Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I too would like
to thank Mr. Morris for coming here. It is not an
accident that he is coming to the Security Council. One
might ask why. Mr. Morris deals with food; the
Security Council deals with peace and security. Yet, it
is important that he has come here. I think the link was
established also by what Ambassador Greenstock
touched on.

I think that at one point in Mr. Morris's
presentation, he said that what Africa needs is a green
revolution, meaning the opposite of the type of
revolutions that we have been seeing, which are,
perhaps, red revolutions - we see a lot of blood. We
need to change that. Very often, the inadequacy of food
supplies, famine and the drastic situations that exist in
quite a number of places create conditions conducive to
disturbances.

Let me raise a question. I too have noted a point
that Mr. Morris mentioned: 80 per cent of the resources
of the World Food Programme are devoted to
emergency situations - in other words, food
distribution. Only 20 per cent is devoted to
development, meaning food production or addressing
other conditions. Something that was mentioned was
the question of perhaps investing in more early
warning systems, which are needed to prevent some of
the food crisis situations. My question is, how is this
trend changing? How is Mr. Morris's thinking evolving
towards a situation where we are looking more at food
production and investing more in resources for
development to create the conditions for food
production, rather than at dealing with emergencies.
Granted, there are situations that are emergencies. But
in some of these situations - some of them have been
mentioned, and one of them is in my country - we
will go from crisis situations to post-conflict situations,
and the 80 per cent that we are talking about will
probably be reduced.

In what direction are we moving? In other words,
are we moving in the direction of investing more in
development and less elsewhere, in order to do what
Mr. Morris mentioned in terms of the green revolution
he spoke of?

