Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): In its meeting yesterday (S/PV.7587), the
Security Council took an important step in the fight
against terrorism by adopting resolution 2253 (2015).
Today, we are participating in another important
ministerial meeting on my country, Syria. I should
like to see Council members consider the situation
in Syria objectively and appropriately, rather than by
adopting positions that intensify and prolong the crisis,
thereby promoting the spread of anarchy and terrorism,
the exploitation of my country, and the repetition of
actions that are based on failed assumptions and have
already wrought havoc and destruction in more than
one country.

The Government of Syria favours a fight against
terrorism that is based on legal principles, not on fear
or reaction to terrorist acts taking place outside Syria.
The Syrian Government remains open to any initiative
or sincere effort to help it overcome the present crisis.
As everyone knows, Syria, on the basis of its national
responsibility and the interests of its people, has
extended great cooperation and commitment to the
efforts of the United Nations, starting with the mission
carried out by Mr. Kofi Arman, followed by those of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi and Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
who is with us today but has just this moment left the
Chamber.

Today, I reiterate the readiness of the Syrian
Government to participate effectively in any sincere
effort to ensure that Syrians alone will determine
their choices through an intra-Syrian dialogue under
Syrian leadership and without foreign intervention,
and in a manner that maintains Syria's sovereignty
and territorial integrity. That has been reaffirmed by
all of the relevant Security Council resolutions on
Syria. However, we note that, regrettably, while some
countries affirm Syria's sovereignty in the Council,
they have violated it on the ground by supporting
terrorist groups and sending military aircraft to bomb
oil installations and economic infrastructure, and by
imposing unilateral sanctions on the Syrian people.

The success of any political path in Syria requires
the Government of Syria be an integral part of and
party to the process. Coordination and cooperation
with the Syrian Government are therefore necessary in
all aspects of such a path if we truly desire success.
Furthermore, a successful political track will require
international commitment and sincere, genuine
political will on the part of all parties, including those
countries with a direct influence on the parties that are
undermining the political process and those that are
providing the latter with a lifeline.

While the international community emphasizes that
there is only one solution- the political solution - there
are those that irresponsibly and unaccountably reiterate
that they will resort to a military solution. They have
given names to their failed initiatives, such as "Storm",
"Volcano", "Cyclone" or "Tornado". It has become
quite clear that the success of the political process must
be predicated on a serious, effective and collective fight
againt terrorism.

My country therefore welcomes the Council's
adoption of resolution 2253 (2015) and appreciates
the initiative of our friend the Russian Federation
and its sincere efforts to introduce the resolution,
complementing and strengthening other important
aspects of the issue that have not been fully covered
by previous Security Council resolutions on combating
terrorism. It imposes clear and unambiguous obligations
on countries that support terrorism, thus backing up
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015).

Resolution 2253 (2015) responds to several
concerns that my delegation has been raising for the
past few years. My country therefore joins in the
positive response to its adoption, and hopes that it will
be a turning point in the efforts to close the gap between
our words and deeds and thus to lay a foundation for
a genuine international alliance aimed at combating
terrorism. We have no interest in hollow, unrealistic
alliances that are led by supporters of terrorism that
only erode the provisions of anti-terrorism resolutions,
and in particular in selective alliances that violate
States' sovereignty and serve only the interests of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida and
their questionable ideologies.

We know that the restoration of peace and stability
throughout Syria requires that we deal immediately with
the threat posed by terrorism within the framework of
international legitimacy and that we tackle the realities
on the ground practically and pragmatically. The Syrian
Government is therefore ready to halt the fighting in
areas where Syrian armed groups are present in the
interests of achieving national reconciliation aimed at
restoring normalcy in those regions, including State
institutions and public services, and under which the
armed groups can lay down their weapons so that their
conditions may be met and they can be pardoned. We
have already made successful attempts in some of
those areas, and the Government is seeking to expand
such reconciliation efforts in order to see stability and
security restored. However, where terrorist groups and
mercenaries such as Daesh, Jabhat Al-Nusra and others
are concerned, the Syrian Government will never
engage in dialogue and will continue to fight until they
are eradicated.

We call on all honourable Syrians to participate
in the political process on a national basis in order
to help develop and rebuild Syria by restoring its
security and stability as a priority. A settlement can
be achieved only under a Syrian-led solution reached
via a comprehensive political process that responds to
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. It must
be done through a national dialogue that can bring
everyone together under Government auspices with
the aim of establishing a secular, pluralistic State in
which all are equal before the law - a State in which
opportunities are open to all without discrimination,
led by the Syrian people alone in freedom, transparency
and without foreign interference or influence.

In conclusion, I would like to state that I have
noted glaring contradictions in some of the statements
made today. On the one hand, they emphasize that the
Syrian people alone must decide their future, without
outside intervention, while at the same time they have
raised issues about our sovereignty relating to my
country's presidency, a matter that is the prerogative
of the Syrian people alone, as stated in paragraph 1 of
resolution 2254 (2015), which "stresses that the Syrian
people will decide the future of Syria". Such efforts
to interfere with the foundations of sovereignty in my
country only expose the true intentions behind the
policies of those speakers, who abandoned the context
of the resolution before the ink on it was dry. Taking a
resolution that they had only just adopted and agreed
on, they began interpreting its provisions to suit their
wishes. That is not promising behaviour and does not
give us confidence in what we are hearing and doing.

