Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I would like,
on behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, to congratulate
you, Sir, and South Africa, for your effective
leadership of the work of the Council this month.

Chapter VIII of the Charter clearly defines the
nature, scope and principles of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations. Such
cooperation has been further specified in various
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

More than 60 years have elapsed since the
founding of the United Nations, and mankind continues
to confront numerous threats to its very survival. More
than ever before, the international community shares
the pressing need to draw on the resources of regional
organizations and arrangements in responding to
challenges to regional and international peace and
security. Against such a backdrop, as noted by the
Secretary-General in his 2006 report on the work of the
Organization (A/61/1), there has been a dramatic
increase in the range of partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations in
peacekeeping, peacemaking and responding to
humanitarian emergencies, especially since counter-
terrorism has recently become another area for
meaningful cooperation between these entities.
Regional organizations such as the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization
of American States, the European Union, the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the African Union
(AU), in cooperation with the United Nations, have
made worthy - while not always successful -
contributions to restoring and maintaining peace and
security in and among countries in their respective
regions. The various resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly and the Security Council on
cooperation between the United Nations and specific
regional organizations, as well as the holding of
summits between the United Nations and those
organizations, help to further promote such
cooperation.

Since its inception, in 1999, the African Union
has persevered in improving its partnership with the
United Nations. In tandem with United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the AU has contributed
proactively to the mediation, reconciliation and
reconstruction processes in many countries in the
region, such as Angola, Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the
Sudan, Uganda and Western Sahara. The AU's efforts
and contributions in that connection should be
commended.

At the same time, given the many existing
challenges of the second-largest and second-most-
populous continent, which continues to be torn apart by
civil wars, ethnic strife, extreme poverty and
humanitarian tragedies, the AU should be playing a
greater role. In so doing, it should enjoy greater
cooperation from the United Nations, which should
respond to its need for the capacity-building of its
peacekeeping forces so as to prevent countries in the
region from relapsing into protracted conflicts, poverty
and marginalization.

Resolution 60/1, adopted by the General
Assembly at the 2005 World Summit, encourages and
supports the initiatives of the African Union and
subregional organizations to prevent, mediate and
resolve conflicts with the assistance of the United
Nations. Resolution 1631 (2005), adopted by the
Security Council in October 2005, while reaffirming

the Council's primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
recognizes the growing contributions of regional
organizations.

Viet Nam recognizes the urgency of finding
lasting solutions to the armed conflicts in Africa, which
are depriving many of that continent's peoples of
opportunities for much-needed socio-economic
development. We support measures to ensure the
continuation of emergency humanitarian assistance
aimed at relieving the sufferings of the affected
populations. We share the hope that, in the
implementation of the joint declaration by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Chairperson of the African Union, signed in November
2006, on enhancing the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union in the area of
capacity-building for the next 10 years, new measures
will be undertaken to respond more effectively to the
needs of peace and security on one of the world's most
populous continents.

In Viet Nam's view, peace on a continent such as
Africa, long torn apart by protracted conflicts, can
prevail only when cooperation and trust prevail. And
cooperation and trust are indispensable elements in
ensuring the success of discussions and dialogues
aimed at achieving such needed measures.

