The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Vilovie for his briefing.
09-64650
I shall now deliver the report of Burkina F aso on
the Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolution 1518 (2003) and 1636 (2005).

I have the honour of addressing the Council first
on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003), which I
chaired in 2008 and 2009. I would like to thank the
delegations of Japan and of Belgium for having
effectively fulfilled the functions the Vice-Chairmanship
of the Committee.

Established on 24 November 2003 as the successor
to the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 661 (1990) concerning the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait, the 1518 Committee is
charged with continuing to identify, in compliance with
paragraphs 19 and 23 of resolution 1483 (2003),
individuals and entities whose funds or other financial
assets or economic resources shall be frozen and
transferred to the Development Fund for Iraq.

Under paragraph 23 of resolution 1483 (2003),
that freeze and transfer apply to the funds, other
financial assets and economic resources of individuals
and of entities associated with the former Iraqi regime,
that is, funds, other financial assets and economic
resources removed from Iraq or acquired by Saddam
Hussein or other senior officials of the former Iraqi
regime or their immediate family members, including
entities owned by those individuals or by other persons
acting on their behalf or at their direction or controlled
directly or indirectly by them, as well as funds,
financial assets and economic resources of the former
Iraqi Government or bodies, corporations or State
institutions located outside Iraq.

In resolution 1518 (2003), the Security Council
also decided that the Committee's mandate would be
kept under review and that the Committee would
establish whether Member States fulfilled the
obligations incumbent upon them with respect to the
arms embargo against Iraq, as reaffirmed in paragraph
10 of resolution 1483 (2003).

Since the beginning of our mandate in 2008, the
Committee has actively monitored actions regarding
the issue of the repatriation of certain Iraqi funds. In a
note verbale dated 23 May 2008, the Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Iraq to the United Nations
confirmed to the Committee the third transfer of funds
to the Central Bank of Iraq.
09-64650

Although not having believed it necessary to hold
meetings, the members of the Committee have
continually consulted among themselves and considered
several relevant issues brought to the Committee's
attention, in particular with respect to requests for the
de-listing of individuals and entities targeted by the
freeze and the transfer of assets, transmitted by the
focal point established under resolution 1730 (2006),
as well as to be informed of the communications of
States with regard to two de-listing requests submitted
for an individual and an entity, respectively. Through
the focal point, the Committee strove to provide the
relevant information on its rules of procedure. After
considering those requests, the Committee decided to
keep that individual and that entity on the list, which
now comprises 89 individuals and 208 entities.

In 2009, the Committee received a communication
from a Permanent Mission expressing its concern about
the difficulties encountered by its country in
implementing the Security Council's resolutions, as
well as a letter from a Permanent Mission requesting
information on the decisions taken by the 661
Committee, whose work was terminated by paragraph
19 of resolution 1483 (2003). Although the latter
request did not fall under its purview, the Chairman of
the Committee contributed to providing follow-up by
working with the Secretariat. I note nevertheless that
one request for listing and one for de-listing have
remained pending since 2007. As Chairman of the
Committee, I have initiated informal steps vis-a-vis the
members involved in order to address that question,
which could happen in the near future.

With respect to the arms embargo imposed under
paragraph 10 of resolution 1483 (2003), it remains
ineffective because of the new context in which Iraq
finds itself and the lack of a monitoring mechanism
within the Committee. We therefore recommend that
consideration be given to the Committee's mandate,
despite the fact that resolution 1546 (2004) reminds
States of the need to comply with their obligations in
that regard, and the Government of Iraq to ensure
implementation of the measures.

To conclude, I thank the members of the
Committee for their constructive contribution to its
work and for the quality of their cooperation. Allow me
also to commend all the relevant parties for their
understanding and cooperation. Lastly, I would like to
thank the Secretariat for its tireless and diligent support
to the Committee.
On behalf of the delegation of Burkina Faso, I
wish every success to the next Chairman of the
Committee, whose work contributes significantly, as I
said, to Iraq's reconstruction.

The second report is on the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1636
(2005). The 1636 Committee is charged with listing,
under the travel ban and asset freeze measures
provided for in paragraph 3 (a) of that resolution,
individuals designated by the International Independent
Investigation Commission or the Lebanese Government
as being suspected of involvement in the terrorist bomb
attack of 14 February 2005 in Beirut, which claimed
the lives of the former Lebanese Prime Minister, Rafiq
Hariri, and of 22 other people.

In the same resolution, the Council also decided
that the Committee would approve case by case
requests for exemptions from the travel ban and the
asset freeze measures, and the de-listing of an
individual so that they are no longer affected by the
travel ban and the asset freeze measures. It also
decided to inform all Member States of the identity of
individuals subject to those measures.

On 1 January 2008, when Burkina Faso assumed
the chairmanship, the Committee had not listed any
individual. Similarly, during Burkina Faso's
chairmanship, the Committee held no meetings, given
that, as affirmed in its reports to the Security Council,
the International Independent Investigation Commission
and the Lebanese Government had designated no
individual subject to the measures provided for in
paragraph 3 (a) of resolution 1636 (2005).

We believe that the administration of justice in
the Hariri case will be an important element in
consolidating peace in Lebanon. That is why we
continue to believe that with the successful transfer of
confidential information on this case between the
International Investigation Commission and the Special
Tribunal, the 1636 Committee will surely be called upon
to play a more significant role in the future, in particular
when the investigations and judicial procedures relating
to the terrorist attack of 14 February 2005 enter a
decisive phase.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Ambassador Urbina as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004).

