Mr. Mahmoud (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council has convened its regular meeting to
address the question of the Middle East at a time when
the region is experiencing extremely dangerous and
tragic circumstances in Lebanon and Palestine. The
latest outbreak of violence is yet another episode in the
ongoing turmoil that has plagued the region over the
past six decades. This dire situation reveals the urgent
and vital need for a just, lasting and comprehensive
settlement of a tragic situation that is as old as the
United Nations itself. This ongoing dangerous situation
is the result of a chronic failure to respect international
law and to abide by repeated resolutions adopted by the
Security Council, the General Assembly and other
United Nations bodies over the years.

Every effort to resolve this question outside the
United Nations through parallel channels has failed to
put an end to the continuous suffering of the peoples of
the region and the enormous losses at all levels. The
failure to achieve a just peace based on respect for
legitimate rights will cause further destruction, despair
and extremism.

Once again, Israel is betting on its excessive
military force to settle its problems with its neighbours.
Lebanon is once again the victim of acts of aggression
whose brutality has exceeded all expectations and gone
beyond all previous similar acts. It is as if the Israeli
leaders are scheming to top the atrocities they
perpetrated in Lebanon in their repeated invasions of
1978, 1982, 1993 and 1996, hiding, as always, behind
the right to self-defence. That reveals their twisted
understanding of international law.

Since the beginning of its military operations 10
days ago, Israel has destroyed Lebanon's infrastructure
and targeted its civilians, destroying their livelihoods
and disrupting their movements. The death toll has
risen well over 350, with more than 1,000 injured and
half a million displaced and without shelter. Tens of
thousands of foreigners have fled the country -
foreigners that Lebanon had succeeded in attracting
over the past 15 years after it was able to rebuild itself
and rise from the wreckage to play a constructive role
in the region and the world.

The Israeli aggression has daily targeted the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and put it under siege, preventing it from fulfilling its
mandate, carrying out its functions, and from
communicating with its units or providing them with
necessary supplies.

Prime Minister Fouad Siniora has addressed
several touching appeals to the international
community requesting immediate intervention to end
the tragic suffering of the people of Lebanon caused by
the heavy Israeli bombardment by air, land and sea of
various parts of the country and by the tight maritime
blockade of its ports. That blockade threatens real
catastrophe by preventing the delivery of food,
medicine and fuel.

We all heard the Secretary-General's statement to
the Council yesterday. We appreciate his initiative to
send a senior-level team to the region in order to work
towards a solution to the conflict. We welcome the
positive elements contained in his statement. It painted
an objective picture of the devastating impact that the
Israeli military operations are having in Lebanon and
the scope of the ordeal suffered by the Lebanese
people. The situation calls for an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire and a solution to the current
conflict by peaceful and diplomatic means.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's appeal to
the international community to support the Lebanese
Government and his reaffirmation that the United
Nations will stand by Lebanon to help it to emerge
from the conflict. We also appreciate his position that
the United Nations will provide Lebanon with all that it
needs in the future to rebuild what was destroyed.

The Lebanese Government reiterates once more
its call for, first, an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire under United Nations auspices so as to enable
the Organization, the sisterly Arab countries and other
friendly international parties, in cooperation with the
Lebanese Government, to responsibly and fully resolve
all issues arising from the events of the past few days,
as well as their underlying causes.

Secondly, we call for the preservation and safety
of Lebanon and its citizens through the extension of its
authority throughout its territory, including all
occupied Lebanese territories in the area of the Sheba'a
farms and the exercise by the State of full
responsibility and sovereignty over it, the release of
Lebanese detainees in Israeli prisons and the adherence
to the 1949 armistice agreement, unanimously agreed
upon by Lebanon in the Taif national accord.

Thirdly, Lebanon calls upon its brothers and
friends throughout the world to come to its rescue by
exerting pressure to stop the aggression and end the
blockade and by providing all forms of humanitarian
aid and assistance.

Fourthly, the Lebanese Government holds Israel
responsible for the humanitarian, economic and
reconstruction catastrophe that has befallen Lebanon.
Lebanon has made an enormous effort to recover from
the consequences of the repeated Israeli invasions and
prolonged occupation. It will spare no effort to force
Israel to compensate the Lebanese people for the
damage and devastation that it has inflicted upon their
infrastructure and institutions by its barbaric onslaught.

Fifthly, the Lebanese Government has declared
Lebanon a disaster zone requiring an immediate Arab,
international and comprehensive action plan to rebuild
what was has been destroyed as a result of the
murderous aggression.

What Lebanon is currently going through is an
example of the continuous suffering of the peoples of
the region, who, generation after generation, have been
denied their natural right to a life of dignity as a result
of the rejection of the principles of law and justice -
the very principles for whose sake humanity endured
so much so as to develop, document, codify and adopt
them in the framework of international relations.

Earlier, we heard the representative of Israel
inform us that Israel has agreed to a safe corridor for
humanitarian assistance for the victims of his country's
aggression, as if we are supposed to pay tribute to him
for his compassion. But the entire world has witnessed
how the Israeli military machine has left Lebanon in
ruins, how the Lebanese army was targeted in its
barracks near Beirut and how medical and
humanitarian assistance convoys were attacked. We
hope that the children of Lebanon will feel the
compassion and mercy that the representative of Israel
has expressed here.

More than a year ago, the world watched as tens
of thousands of young Lebanese took to the streets and
filled the squares of Beirut, calling for the unity and
freedom of their country and for hope for a future as
bright as the sun that shines there. But what do they
find today except destruction, frustration, displacement
and death? What kind of future will emerge from those
ashes and ruins except fear, despair, poverty and
extremism? Enough disregard for the lives and the
rights of people. Enough destruction and demolition of
what decent people have built. Enough killing, enough
humiliation, enough displacement of innocent people.
Enough wars that leave future generations with nothing
but hatred and belligerence on both sides.

We appeal to the international community and to
you Excellencies meeting in this Chamber, who have
the primary responsibility for protecting the
achievements of the Lebanese people by supporting the
Government, as was stressed by the Secretary-General
in this very Chamber yesterday, to face the aggression
and to continue along the path of promoting
democracy. Who else but you is in a position to
maintain stability in our region by achieving a just and
comprehensive peace?

Lebanon will remain a country and a land of
interaction, a crossroads and a message for humanity.
As such, we are a nation that Israel has been unable to
emulate - and it will never be able to do so.

