Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
It is an honour for the Security Council to welcome
Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf today. The presence of the
Liberian President is the focal point of our meeting and
highlights its importance.

In various ways, she embodies hope reborn -
first, because she is the first woman to be elected head
of State in Africa in full respect for democratic
principles, and secondly, because her election marks
the end of a civil war that ravaged her country and
destabilized the entire subregion. Her election
demonstrates that the crises on the continent - even
when they achieve extreme intensity - are not
necessarily fatal. It confirms that, even in such
extremity, an African State can emerge from civil war
when its leaders are determined, when the African
community is resolutely involved, and when its
international partners, beginning with the Security
Council, assume their full responsibilities. Finally, her
determination, competence and pragmatism are the best
guarantors for Liberia's recovery.

We are all well aware of the fact that the
President's job is immense. It involves rebuilding the
nation, restoring basic public services, ensuring respect
for the rules of good governance, eradicating
corruption, achieving success in the national
reconciliation process, and fighting impunity. In that
respect, my country welcomes the ongoing discussions
with President Obasanjo on sending Charles Taylor to
the Special Court for Sierra Leone as soon as possible.

Along with those considerable challenges, there
is also a fragile and unstable regional environment, as
reflected in Liberia's neighbour, C6te d'Ivoire, and in
particular the western part of that country that borders
Liberia. The stability of the entire subregion should be

a constant concern and a common objective for us all.

President Johnson-Sirleaf can count on the
support of France and, as she heard our colleagues say,
on the Security Council to assist her in her promising
efforts. We are at her side and her success will also be
the success of the people of Liberia.

