Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
As this is the first time that I have spoken before the
Security Council in May, I should like at the outset to
congratulate you, Madam, and Denmark on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and to
wish you every success in guiding its work. I also wish
to thank you for convening this public meeting to
discuss the situation in Haiti following the mission
dispatched by the Security Council and led by
Ambassador Sardenberg of Brazil in conjunction with
the mission of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of
the Economic and Social Council, chaired by
Ambassador Rock of Canada.
Spain fully subscribes to the statement made by
the representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. I shall therefore limit myself to a few
supplementary observations.

Spain's active commitment to stability,
democratization and development in Haiti is expressed
through our participation in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) with a
military contingent working in close cooperation with
one from Morocco and with a civilian police
contingent, as well as through our activities in the Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and
Social Council, in whose recent mission to the country
we participated. The two missions - of the Security
Council and of the Economic and Social Council -

highlighted the complementarity of those organs when
they address complex crises such as the one in Haiti.
We agree with the recommendations resulting from the
mission, which are set out in the report before the
Council (S/2005/302).

The elections planned for the end of the year are
undoubtedly one of the most important short-term
challenges for the people of Haiti and for the
international community. However, they cannot, in and
of themselves, solve the country's problems, which
also require long-term social, economic and
institutional development efforts.

All political parties that renounce violence must
be able to participate in free, transparent and inclusive
elections in which there is the greatest possible
participation by the people. We believe that, during the
electoral process, the presence of international
observers and the strengthening of security - the
absence of which would pose higher risks for the
success of the process - would be highly appropriate.

With a view to those objectives, the national
dialogue begun on 7 April by Interim President
Boniface Alexandre - which dialogue should be
supported - should immediately serve to create an
inclusive political scenario that will ultimately permit
the governability of the country. The Haitian political
forces have a special responsibility to ensure that the
dialogue moves forward before the electoral process
begins and that it continues after the installation of the
new Government. The national dialogue should make it
possible to define the political framework needed for
the implementation of long-term development
objectives.

The solution to Haiti's fragile situation is not
purely military in nature. However, we all know that
there can be no development without security. The two

are interlinked and require progress in parallel. We

agree with the recommendation that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations review the security situation
in Haiti.

In that context, we believe that a new concept of
operations should be adopted for MINUSTAH through
a revised model of its civilian police component, with
appropriate support for its military personnel - all of
this to take place before the electoral process gets
under way. We should also improve the coordination of
MINUSTAH's civilian police component and
strengthen its cooperation with a reformed Haitian
National Police. The Mission should also be endowed
with the required resources to improve its intelligence-
gathering capabilities and enhance its internal
coordination with respect to the civilian police.

It is clear that MINUSTAH is playing a very
important role in terms of stability and deterrence,
which continues to be pivotal, even in areas where
calm currently prevails, many of which have an
insufficient State presence. We note with concern that
there has been very little progress in terms of
disarmament and that distrust continues to prevail. One
short-term goal is to enhance the people's perception of
the level of security, because very often people hesitate
to take a step forward in terms of disarmament for fear
of losing their capacity for self-defence.

The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme initiated in February by
MINUSTAH should be carried out without delay. That
requires a clear-sighted and resolute attitude on the part
of the Transitional Government as well as the
disbursement of the required financial assistance by the
donor community.

Furthermore, as stated in the interim report Ad
Hoc Advisory Group of the Economic and Social
Council, to which the representative of Canada has just
referred, in order to put an end to the violence, we have
to tackle the underlying socio-economic conditions.
The members of the Security Council and of the Ad
Hoc Group noted in the field the weakness of Haiti's
institutions. Their fragility is very clear in the areas of
law enforcement and administration.

In that respect, reform of the judicial and penal
system, as well as training in the area of human rights
for administrative bodies and security forces, is
indispensable. Any development activity in Haiti has to
be based on rebuilding the State and making it more
answerable to the people, with particular attention paid
to the inland areas.

Regrettably, today the people's frustration is
palpable at the scant international assistance that has
been provided. We must therefore all work together to
remedy that situation, including through the
implementation of quick-impact projects in priority
areas.

Environmental sustainability and capacity-
building in the area of human resources, along with
institutional development throughout the country, are
the areas that most urgently require the use of shock
tactics.

What is required is a continued effort by the
international community. The peacebuilding Mission
undertaken by the United Nations last year, by its very
nature and scope, has to be a long-term operation. We
therefore believe that it would be logical to extend
MINUSTAH's mandate for a 12-month period.

Spain, in keeping with its position within the
European Union and its participation in the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group of the Economic and Social Council
Group and in MINUSTAH, will continue its efforts to
promote peace and development in Haiti. In order to
achieve those goals, it is indispensable, we believe,
that the Core Group referred to in resolution 1542
(2004) fully carry out its mandate and receive support
from all institutions concerned with Haiti's progress.

We are convinced that, with the Council's
support, decisive actions can be taken in the coming
weeks. Spain will contribute to this undertaking to the
fullest extent of its capabilities.

