Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
Nigeria for its continued leadership on the issue of
security sector reform (SSR), a commitment that is all
the more important because most Council-mandated
SSR activities take place on the African continent.
Nigeria's perspective-indeed, the experience of all
African States-must therefore be prominent in any
SSR setting.

New Zealand welcomes today's proposed adoption
of the first-ever stand-alone draft resolution on SSR. The
draft resolution underlines the considerable progress
we have made since the Council's first open debate
on the issue in 2007 (see S/PV.5632). It is progress
that has required acknowledgment of the nature and
significance of the SSR challenge; it is progress that
has required development of a more comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated normative framework; and
it is progress that has required practical operational
tools for the United Nations effective work in that
area. The engagement of local actors, the importance
of close cooperation with regional organizations, the
need for the involvement of all stakeholders, including
women, and the key, underpinning need for a rule of
law environment are all rightly stressed in today's draft
resolution.

SSR is a long-term process - hence the progerss
that the draft resolution records - one that requires
both concerted commitment from national authorities
and sustained engagement by international partners.
The Security Council has a critical role to play in laying
the foundations for those efforts; but other bilateral and
United Nations partners also play very important roles.
It is therefore vital that the Council is able to coordinate
more effectively with those actors. SSR extends beyond
peacekeeping, and it must be considered across the
entire peacebuilding continuum.
SSR challenges occur in a wide variety of settings,
from fragile and conflict-affected States with ineffective
security sectors, through to States emerging from
conflict and seeking United Nations support for the
next phase of their development. However, considerable
scope still remains for the Council to coordinate more
effectively with, and to learn from, regional and United
Nations country team partners in order to ensure that
assistance is tailored to specific national needs and
realities, and that gains can be sustained beyond the life
of a given mission. The Peacebuilding Commission,
with its country-specific configurations, has particular
competence in that regard, so the Council needs to find
new and better ways of working in close partnership
with the Commission.

SSR is often a complex, politically charged process
that entails significant risk; however, in some situations,
it can represent the single most important investment
that international partners can make in a country's
future. New Zealand is an active contributor to SSR,
particularly in the justice sector, both bilaterally and
through United Nations missions. That experience has
taught us valuable lessons about managing the difficult
transition from providing SSR programmes through
peacekeeping missions to longer-term assistance
through bilateral support, as was the case with our
policing assistance to Timor-Leste after the withdrawal
of the United Nations mission in 2012.

For us, that Timor-Leste experience also
underscored the importance of national ownership as
a prerequisite for successful SSR. Indeed, the United
Nations discussions on SSR rightly acknowledge that
the success of SSR processes depends on the sustained
political will of the country concerned. New Zealand
therefore agrees with Egypt that a core objective must
be to assist national political leadership of SSR, and
bringing international technical assistance to the
national, regional and subregional level, where local
actors can apply it to their unique local situation. New
Zealand therefore joins Turkey and Egypt in urging that
the Council avoid a one-size-fits-all approach. Instead,
it should focus on enabling national authorities to
undertake their own, inclusive SSR processes.

Recent history demonstrates that no one has a
monopoly of wisdom on managing SSR processes.
Particularly, we have learned that what works at one
time, in one place, will not always work at a later time.
If SSR fails and there is a return to violence, then
the loss of investment by the host country and by the
wider international community can be huge. We must
all therefore approach the SSR challenge openly and
inclusively, while constantly reviewing whether the
process is working and adapting our efforts accordingly.

With that commitment, and working with those
who have practical, on-the-ground regional experience,
we can certainly make the progress on security sector
reform that is recorded in today's draft resolution.

