Mr. Gertze (Namibia): We thank Peru, as
President of the Security Council for the month of
April, for organizing today's debate on the important
topic of the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. I would also like to thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his comprehensive
and detailed briefing.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.

In the lead-up to the seventieth anniversary
of the 1948 war, which takes place on 15 May, the
demonstrations of the Great March of Return are
being held every Friday at the border fence between
the Gaza Strip and Israel. This sustained campaign is
focused on the return of those Palestinians expelled
in 1948 to their country, Palestine. Since 30 March,
at least 35 demonstrators have been killed and a large
number have been wounded following the excessive
and disproportionate use of force by Israel. On 5 April,
the Secretary-General urged Israel to exercise caution
in the use of force in order to avoid casualties. Civilians
must be able to exercise their right to demonstrate
peacefully. We fully support this statement of the
Secretary-General.

Namibia reaffirms its support for General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947 and Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). Those and subsequent
resolutions affirm Jerusalem as the capital of both
the future Palestinian State and the State of Israel.
The recognition by the United States Administration
of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel alone therefore
contradicts the Council resolutions and clearly further
complicates the prospect of a viable two-State solution.

On 26 March, in his fifth report to the Security
Council on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), Special Coordinator Mladenov noted that,
between December 2017 and March 2018, Israel had
advanced 22 plans for some 1,500 housing units in
Area C settlements and that around a dozen units had
been approved for construction (see S/PV.8214). These
settlements are illegal under international law and are
a serious impediment to the peace process and to any
realization of the two-State solution. The destruction of
Palestinian homes and infrastructure in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, has also continued, albeit
at a slower rate. From December 2017 to March 2018,
92 structures, including 15 that were donor-funded,
were demolished. This destruction also represents an
impediment to peace.

Namibia remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The electricity supply
sees cuts of up to 20 hours a day. The dire situation
is compounded by the recent funding cuts to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Through its
267 schools in Gaza, UNRWA provides education to
262,000 students. Each year, an average of 4 million
patients visit UNRWA's 21 primary health-care
facilities in Gaza.

As the conflict in Syria drags on into its eight
year, we call on the Security Council to live up to
its obligations pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations and to find a lasting solution that brings peace
to Syria through peaceful means. Any unilateral action
is incompatible with the Charter and risks undermining
the effectiveness of the very institution created to
resolve such crises. We urge Security Council members
to remain united in pursuit of common justice, peace,
security and stability through dialogue based on the
principles of multilateralism.

To conclude, we once again call on the Israeli
Government to end all construction of settlements and
the destruction of Palestinian homes and infrastructure.
We call for Israel's complete and unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and urge all parties to
return to negotiations so that the Palestinian people
can exercise their inalienable rights in an independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital
and as a rightful member of the United Nations and its
specialized agencies.

