Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan expresses
its appreciation to the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this meeting, as well as to our briefers,
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zenenga and Special Representative Madeira for their
comprehensive updates on the situation in Somalia. My
delegation would like to make some observations and
recommendations as follows.

As the Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, we welcome the successful
process of building political institutions and outlining
key priorities of the Government's agenda by the
leadership of Somalia. However, terrorist organizations
continue to exercise their destructive activities.
Therefore, it is vitally important to ensure coherent and
coordinated support to the country in peacebuilding
and nation-building efforts.

The 11 May London Conference on Somalia,
co-organized by the Government of the United
Kingdom, the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), as well as the leadership of Somalia, was
historic. We commend the security pact and the new
partnership agreement that were reached as outcomes
of the Conference. We recommend using its momentum
to achieve progress on security sector reform, yet
multilateral action to address the ongoing drought
and humanitarian crisis is required. International
partnership is vital to implementing the political road
map for 2020 elections with the one person, one vote
formula. We advise that this go in parallel with building
State institutions, consolidating the Constitution and
promoting inclusive political dialogue.

The progress made across the country would not
have occurred without the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), the AU,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
particularly the bravery of the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in combating
the increasingly destructive acts of Al-Shabaab. At the
same time, the AU report entitled "Ten-Year Lessons
Learned Study on AMISOM", as well as the joint
strategic review on Somalia and the joint AU-Somalia
task force, will provide future directions for bringing
about stability and effectiveness. We hope that the
upcoming Operation Juba Valley Corridor II will
significantly contribute to neutralizing the Al-Shabaab
threat. We also suggest that we, as the United Nations
system, collectively with the Federal Government
and AU, should help to create a strong national
security architecture with the needed reforms for the
Somali national army and that the police force should
assume greater responsibility from AMISOM. during
the transition.

We consider the security pact, adopted at the
London Conference, to be a road map for strengthening
the fight against Al-Shabaab militants. My delegation
believes that this pact should be the next step towards
implementing the April agreement between the
Government of Somalia and federal subjects for its
defence strategy. At this point of guarded optimism,
the security-development nexus needs to be reinforced,
so that Somalia's national development plan, with its
focus on economic recovery and stabilization, will be
effectively implemented.

The humanitarian situation, caused by the ongoing
drought, continues to concern us. We therefore
wholeheartedly support the appeal of the Secretary-
General for the sum of $900 million needed for the
provision of humanitarian aid. At the same time, we
note with concern the rising insecurity in the various
regional assemblies throughout the country. These
should be addressed quickly so that they do not assume
national proportions and the instability does not worsen
the humanitarian situation and escalate the risk of
famine. The active engagement of women and youth is
particularly essential.

UNSOM. and the Government must work
together with the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to closely monitor and
bring to a halt the human rights abuses against women
and children. We encourage AMISOM. to deploy and
designate protection officers to provide training,
capacity-building and advocacy.

Finally, Kazakhstan is ready to join this multilateral
effort to bring lasting peace, with a new vision and
aspiration, to Somalia.

