Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Kafando for his two and a half years
of service promoting peace and stability in Burundi.
His office has played an important role in working
to stabilize the country and foster political dialogue.
We look forward to working with his successor to
support Burundi through credible elections and the
peaceful transfer of power. I thank Ambassador Lauber
for his briefing and his encouragement to continue
the dialogue.

The Security Council is charged with maintaining
international peace and security, but in so many cases
what that really means is investing in the conditions
that ultimately produce human flourishing. Simply
put, it means investing in the futures of countries and
their peoples.

The May 2020 elections are the key to Burundi's
future. It is therefore critical that, as the representatives
of France and Switzerland and the President have said,
the elections be inclusive, free and fair. Women and
young adults, opposition and ruling party leaders, civil
society representatives, journalists, prominent political
activists and refugees displaced by political violence all
have an equal role to play.

We welcome President Nkurunziza's recent
remarks affirming his commitment to peaceful
elections and encourage the Government to take
tangible steps towards this goal. One of those steps is
to allow international and domestic election observers
unfettered access to the election process.

An open and permissive political environment is
also critical to credible elections. Political candidates
from all parties should be free to campaign without
threat of reprisal or interference. We are concerned by
repeated attacks and harassment targeting members of
opposition parties and reports of politically motivated
violence and intimidation. For example, the recent
destruction of the regional political offices of the
Congres national pour la liberte' party will serve
only to repress opposition voices and undermine free
expression. The extrajudicial arrests, beatings, acts of
intimidation and kidnappings that have been reported
are unacceptable in a free society. We call on all political
parties and their supporters to campaign peacefully and
reject violence.

Those convictions proceed from our broader belief
that basic civic freedoms are essential to democracy.
We urge the Burundian Government to respect the
country's international legal obligations regarding
rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and
free association. Journalist, activist and civil society
organizations must be allowed to operate independently,
free from threats of intimidation and violence. All
Burundian citizens should be free to participate fully
and actively in the electoral process.

The voluntary return of Burundian refugees also
remains a top priority for the future stability of the
country and the region. These citizens are an integral
part of Burundi's national fabric, and their active
participation in political and civil civic life is needed
now more than ever. We urge the Governments of
Burundi and Tanzania to work closely with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), countries of the region and international
non-governmental organizations to facilitate the
voluntary, dignified and safe repatriation of Burundian
nationals without threat or harassment.

While the United States urges Burundi to make
needed investments in its own future, we are investing
in that future as well. Every year we contribute more
than $50 million in bilateral aid, which touches the lives
of nearly every Burundian citizen by supporting the
health sector, economic growth and peacebuilding. We
also partner with the World Food Programme, UNHCR
and UNICEF to provide emergency assistance to
Burundian and Congolese refugees, including children.
We are encouraged by the remarkable progress that
Burundian authorities have made in the fight against
HIV and AIDS. While work remains to be done on
malaria and Ebola preparedness, significant strides
have been made, and we encourage the Government of
Burundi to continue those efforts.

Developments in Burundi directly affect the entire
Great Lakes region, which means that improving
Burundi's human rights situation and holding free,
fair and inclusive elections will brighten not only the
future of Burundi but of all of Central and East Africa.
The United States will continue to invest in this better
future, and we urge all Member States to do the same.

