Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all,
I feel it is necessary to note that this mission was positive
and useful to assess on the ground what is really happening
in Kosovo. Also, allow me to indicate that this mission
could not have been successful without the efforts of its
head, Ambassador Chowdhury, who, with intelligence,
tireless energy, diplomatic tact, common sense and, why not
say it, a sense of humour, led us in this very difficult task.
His work was so excellent, as is his report as head of the
delegation, that my delegation endorses it. Nor can I fail
at this time to recognize the support which the mission
always received from the Secretariat group so efficiently
headed by Mr. Stephanides.

The mission had four objectives, mentioned in
paragraph 2 of the report. I think it fulfilled them
properly. We can inform the Security Council that
resolution 1244 (1999) is being implemented. It has not
been fully implemented yet, and it is possible that it may
not be fully implemented in the immediate future because
of the conditions existing in Kosovo. But it is being
carried out. Specifically, it is being implemented properly,
reasonably well, in accordance with the mandate
contained in paragraph 11 of resolution 1244 (1999). This
is the result of the commendable efforts of the
international community through KFOR and through the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in the ten months since it was established.

In this connection, I believe that the eloquent words
of Ambassador Duval concerning the action of the
representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kouchner,
compounded by the so-called four pillars of UNMIK,
describe the support which we received from all of the
local populations, all of the communities, with regard to
the work of UNMIK. Argentina is proud of having
participated, even modestly, in the work of UNMIK and
KFOR. These words of gratitude should also be extended
to KFOR and to General Ortufio.

KFOR and UNMIK need material and human
resources. They are carrying out their work in very
different circumstances, and it is necessary for the
Council to pay attention to the requirements so that they
can continue to carry out their work normally.

In Kosovo, the basic administrative functions are
being carried out and the reconstruction of infrastructure
is being done, as well as other economic reconstruction
work. The law and public order are being maintained,
human rights are protected and promoted, and the
refugees are being encouraged to return. The
administration of justice is being organized. A multi-
ethnic police is being trained and taught to respect human
rights. All of this in an imperfect framework, replete with
difficulties and very serious economic and social
problems and a high degree of unemployment.

In this framework, the mandate for organizing and
supervising the development of provisional institutions for
the democratic and autonomous self-government is being

 

carried out, including the holding of elections as established
by resolution 1244 (1999). Within this process,
administrative functions will be transferred to the authorities
elected by the people in the forthcoming municipal
elections to be held on 8 October. It is our fervent desire
that the Serbian community participate in these elections.
We understand the causes of insecurity which they invoke
to feel fear and not to register, but we have no doubt that
UNMIK, and in particular the work that Mr. Kouchner is
carrying out, will tend to prevent situations which justify
this legitimate and explainable fear of the Serb community.
As our report says, the insufficient physical, economic
and social security is a cause of grave concern, and
progress towards peaceful coexistence continues to be
fragile.

There are three serious problems in this very serious
and fragile situation: first, the continued inter-ethnic
violence; secondly, the question of missing persons and
detainees and thirdly, the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. These three questions feed one another.
Violence makes the return of refugees and displaced
persons more difficult. The failure to clear up the matter of
people who have disappeared or been detained increases
resentment which, in turns, incites violence. It is essential
to halt the vicious cycle of hatred and resentment and try to
set out on the long road to reconciliation.

I do not believe this will be possible if we do not clear
up the matter of the problem of people who have
disappeared or been detained. In this connection, my
delegation supports the designation of a special envoy to
deal with this issue. I believe this needs to be done
urgently. We hope that once such a person has been named,
he will have the support of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in carrying out his task.

The future of Kosovo, over and above what is spelled
out in the resolutions, depends on the spirit with which the
population implements them. We need to encourage the
spirit of reconciliation, without which the necessary
conditions for substantial autonomy within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia cannot be created, as set forth in
resolution 1244 (1999). In Kosovo UNMIK is seeking to
develop its own institutions for a state of law and
democracy. Given democracy and freedom it would be
possible to create a legal framework for substantial
autonomy. However, this will be difficult, if not impossible,
if that fragile autonomous entity must exist as part of a
larger totalitarian or authoritarian entity.

