Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): Madam President,
I thank you for convening this most important open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.

The Philippines continues to closely follow
developments in the region. There is a continuing
need to take stock of the advances achieved by our
Organization in helping secure a lasting and just peace
in the region. We also need to be fully apprised of the
continuing and emerging challenges that confront us.
Even as we acknowledge the efforts being undertaken
in the Middle East, we clearly realize that more needs
to be done, particularly on humanitarian assistance,
given the toll that conflicts have taken on civilian
populations. The Philippines continues to be concerned
about the situation in Gaza. We welcome the ceasefire
brokered by Egypt between the concerned parties. We
express the sincere hope that all parties will continue
working together for a long-term and durable solution.

Extremism continues to cast its long shadow, and
the emergence of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters further complicates the already complex
terrain in the Middle East, with security implications
extending beyond the region. The scourge that is the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) is particularly
troublesome. The Philippines condemns ISIS and
its atrocities in the strongest terms. The Philippines
co-sponsored resolution 2178 (2014), believing that
resolute and immediate action by the international
community is necessary to suppress that group.

As a responsible member of the international
community, the Philippines will do its part in the
global efforts to thwart ISIS and its false ideologies.
Resolution 2178 (2014) rightly indicates the importance
of countering violent extremism and the need for States
to step up their efforts to do so and to decrease the risk
of radicalization to terrorism in their societies. The
annual General Assembly resolution on interreligious
and intercultural dialogue is a long-standing initiative
of the Philippines and Pakistan that aims to counter
violent extremism. Along with other initiatives, the
international community can learn from the wealth of
experience and expertise in that initiative.

Also worrisome is the existence of non-State actors
in situations of armed conflict that impact the efforts
of our Organization to maintain the line of peace. That
is true for United Nations peacekeeping operations,
particularly the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF). The presence and actions
of anti-Government armed elements have seriously
affected the implementation of the UNDOF mandate.
Peacekeepers, including those from my country, have
been restricted in movement, held in siege conditions or
kidnapped. That situation is unacceptable. While United
Nations peacekeepers are known for their courage
and professionalism, that alone will not help them
implement their mandate. They should be provided wth
the necessary support to deal with emerging factors not
contemplated when the mandate was formulated.

To ensure that UNDOF continues to successfully
implement its mandate, it is necessary to revisit
outstanding operational and tactical issues, including
United Nations command and control vis-a-vis the
safety and security of peacekeepers during kidnapping
and siege incidents, the accountability of peacekeeping
mission leaders for decisions made during crisis
operations, and multidimensional contingency plans
and procedures to address similar situations. The
Philippines believes that much can be learned from
UNDOF's experience. In that regard, the inclusion of
such lessons in the high-level review of peacekeeping
operations called for by the Secretary-General should
be sought and anticipated.

Finally, the situation in the Middle East requires
all stakeholders to work together on the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction. My country is
disappointed that, four years after the 2010 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), we have
not yet convened a conference on the establishment of a
Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other
weapons of mass destruction. I wish to briefly recall
that the issue was an integral part of the grand design
that made the 2010 NPT Review Conference a success.

