Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Two
days ago, on 13 September, we celebrated the twenty-
third anniversary of what is known as the Oslo Accord
between Palestinians and Israelis, by virtue of which it
was agreed to temporarily manage Palestinian affairs
for a period of no more than five years, as of 1993,
provided that negotiations were conducted on final
status issues on the basis of the two-State solution, by
establishing a Palestinian State within the 4 July 1967
borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. The
anniversary of that historic agreement should prompt
the international community, including the Security
Council, to ask itself whether it has been able to help
the Palestinian people to attain a modicum of their
inalienable rights as enshrined in international law and
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. I
would like to underscore that I am confident that our
collective conscience recognizes unequivocally that the
answer to that question does not require any research,
or effort or scrutiny: the realities on the ground speak
for themselves.
Today, 23 years after the Oslo Accord, instead
of seeing a sovereign Palestinian State pursuant to
international legitimacy, we see a pseudo-State of
illegal settlements that contain at least half a million
settlers. Those settlements have proliferated on
Palestinian territories with official support from
the Israeli occupation, which has spared no effort
throughout decades to seize land, destroy houses and
expel Palestinians, as well as with the support provided
by the inability of the Organization and the silence of
the Council, which had to surrender to the passiveness
of the sole super-Power able to end this illegal invasion.

The principle of land-for-peace, which is
internationally accepted, reflects the fact that the
Palestinian question is actually about land. It shows
that the settlements, the destruction of houses, the land
seizures, the Judaization of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, and
the separation wall are the root cause of the disease at
the core of the problem, and the main obstacle to any
possible negotiations to achieve the two-State solution.

Some are wrong to think that the continuing
international powerlessness in the face of those illegal
and inhumane practices has become something routine
that could be acceptable, or that it establishes new
rights other than the right of Palestinians to their land.

Allow me to reiterate that we feel great sorrow
when we see attempts to exploit that powerlessness as a
pretext to promote an alternative narrative concerning
the Palestinian question, or to hold Palestinian people
living under siege behind walls in Gaza responsible
for such powerlessness, or to push for accepting the
occupation and its determination and practices aimed
at altering the fait accompli on the ground. That is an
excuse worse than the crime.

The delay in resolving the Palestinian question
because of the lack of political will on the part of the
major Powers, and the ongoing policy by the occupation
to pursue the illegal settlements on the ground, must
not lead us to forget the main role of the United Nations
and its organs, or divert us from the path set out by
international legitimacy. Perhaps it is necessary to
remind everyone, in particular United Nations bodies
and their representatives, that the obstacles to resolving
this issue do not absolve the Organization of its
responsibility and primary role as legal guarantor of
the rights of the Palestinians throughout history, nor do
they invalidate the relevant the Security Council and
the General Assembly resolutions or the provisions of
international law, without any concessions, regardless
of the balance of power between the parties concerned,
and without the Organization becoming a party to
political arrangements that run counter the international
legitimacy. Those arrangements will have no impact
on the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. And
that will not change regardless of the duration of this
crisis, and even if those rights have been enshrined so
far in the Organization's documents and international
conventions.

Despite the fact this crisis has lasted for so long,
and Israel continues to turn a deaf ear to the calls of
the international community, we still insist on the path
to peace. That has always been made clear in the Arab
Peace Initiative, which confirmed that Arab States are
ready to live normally side by side in peace with Israel
as neighbours, if Israel accepts the basic principles of
good neighbourliness and puts an end to its occupation
of Arab territories by withdrawing from the lands it
occupied in 1967, including the Syrian Golan and the
remaining occupied Lebanese territories in the south of
that country.

As Council members can see, the equation is
simple and does not consist of incitement, or hatred or
even talk about legitimate resistance to occupation. It
simply reflects the desire of Arab States to have normal
relations with Israel, thus guaranteeing security and the
legitimacy of its existence.

We are still waiting for an Israeli response to the
Arab Peace Initiative, put forward years ago. We are
still unable to understand why the Israeli Government
is ignoring the Initiative despite the fact that it deals
directly with Israel. That has been an obsession for
Israel.

We also underscore that the assessments undertaken
in an attempt to distort the Initiative are erroneous and
false. The Arab peoples are too aware to accept any
concessions on the rights of the Palestinian people,
or the rights of the Syrian and Lebanese peoples, to
recover their occupied territories.

Egypt remains committed to the Arab Peace
Initiative and continues to encourage international
parties to relaunch negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis, including the efforts of France, Russia
and United Nations Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov.

Egypt will remain determined to work in multilateral
and bilateral formats to execute its vision for peace in
the region - a vision that was launched 37 years ago
when Israel and Egypt signed a peace treaty. It can still
be implemented, with the necessary political will and if
Israel finally decides to opt for comprehensive and just
peace, for itself and for the States in the region.

