Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): On behalf of the delegation of the Russian
Federation, I should like to thank the leadership of the
Special Court for today's briefings and to note the
considerable contributions made by that institution to
the fight against impunity. We also welcome the
presence of the representative of Sierra Leone at
today's meeting.

Since its establishment, the Special Court has
carried out serious work aimed at prosecuting
individuals who have committed serious violations of
international humanitarian law. It has accumulated
valuable and, in certain respects, unique experience in
the area of international criminal justice. The Court has
demonstrated its effectiveness despite the financial
difficulties facing it.

Of equal importance are the Special Court's
contributions to strengthening stability in Sierra Leone
and throughout the subregion. Critical tasks in that
regard include assisting the country's State institutions,
particularly in the area of security and justice, and
09-40569
resolving problems related to the reintegration of
ex-combatants into peaceful life.

The Special Court's activities have shown that
justice and reconciliation in post-conflict societies
need not conflict with each other, but rather that they
can be complementary elements in the peacebuilding
process. We welcome the momentum in the Court's
proceedings as we approach the deadline for the
completion of its work. Two major cases have been
fully considered thus far, which will make it possible
to focus on the remaining trials. The most complex and
politically sensitive of these is generally recognized to
be the trial of Mr. Charles Taylor, former President of
Liberia. We are closely following the developments in
that regard.

We note the progress made by the Special Court
regarding its future residual mechanism, which we
believe will be a compact and cost-effective temporary
structure.

In conclusion, we note the Special Court's
considerable achievements in the area of public
outreach regarding its activities, as well as its efforts to
build the judicial and law-enforcement capacities of
Sierra Leone. In our view, the projects undertaken by
the Special Court in that area, if successfully
implemented, will become an important part of the
Special Court's future legacy.

