Mr. Rendon Barnica (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): The General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its annexes constitute the most
important international instrument, and the most difficult to
implement, ever signed for the achievement of peace in that
region of the world. Its main goals are the achievement of
national reconciliation based on justice in a country that has
suffered the devastating effects of war; a return of refugees
and displaced persons to their homes in a country where
much of the population was displaced by the civilian
conflict, harassment and fear; and national reconstruction in
a country whose economy is devastated and whose society
must gradually be rebuilt.

A year has gone by since the signing of the Peace
Agreement, and several advances have been made during
this initial period of its implementation. The military and
territorial provisions have been complied with, and
compliance with the political provisions of the Agreement
has gained renewed impetus with the elections held on 14
September last, certified by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In spite of certain
difficulties the elections reflected the will of the peoples
of Bosnia and have paved the way towards the beginning
of the establishment of common institutions in the country
and towards a new constitutional order in which there will
be no room for the structures, practices and institutions of
the past. The peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina must
now seek to ensure that the conditions exist for those
common institutions to be established, to function and to
be duly respected.

My delegation welcomes the achievements made in
the process of implementation of the Peace Agreement.
However, we believe that much remains to be done.
Observance of and respect for human rights in all of the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina remains the key,
central element of the Peace Agreement. Unfortunately, in
this area the situation has not changed. In Bosnia we still
see a pattern of continuous ethnic harassment, which, if
not reversed, will jeopardize the achievement of the goal
of a unified society in that country. If human rights are
not respected there will be no true freedom of movement.
If there are no guarantees that human rights will be
observed, one cannot hope that refugees and displaced
persons will return to their places of origin and thus
contribute to national reconstruction. Therefore, we
believe progress in this area is essential for the
implementation of the peace process.

Similarly, there must be greater cooperation by the
parties with the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia. Not complying with this obligation would
have a negative effect on all the efforts being made to
promote reconciliation between the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We urge all States involved to arrest those
who are accused of committing war crimes and to turn
them over without delay to the Tribunal for trial.
The peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in
a stage of consolidation in which the assistance of the
international community for the tasks of economic
reconstruction is vital. We observe with satisfaction the
renewed commitment by the international community to
contribute substantially to that goal by providing the
necessary human and financial resources. At the same
 

time, however, we recognize that these efforts could be in
vain if the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina do not
respond appropriately by fulfilling their obligations under
the Peace Agreement and adopting the measures needed for
serious economic reform.

While my delegation recognizes that the primary
responsibility for implementation of the obligations
contained in the Peace Agreement falls to the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, we consider that the United
Nations should continue to contribute to that task and to
lend its full support to the High Representative in his
activities of monitoring the implementation of the
Agreement.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution extending the mandate of United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) to 21 December
1997, expanding the mandate of the United Nations
International Police Task Force to tasks related to the
investigation of violations of human rights mentioned in the
conclusions of the London Conference and authorizing the
establishment of a multinational Stabilization Force as the
legal successor of the Implementation Force (IFOR) to
carry out the functions set out in annex 1-A and annex 2 of
the Peace Agreement.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to
the High Representative, the Commander and staff of IFOR
and the international organizations and bodies working in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as to the Special
Representative of the United Nations and the IPTF
Commissioner for all their efforts in the cause of peace.

