Mrs. Nufiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): First, Sir, I would like to commend you for
your work as President of the Security Council during
the month of May. I would also thank the Chairmen of
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for the
information provided.

For more than 45 years, the Cuban people has
been the target of countless terrorist actions, most of
them masterminded and organized from United States
territory, with the support, protection and funding of
the successive Governments of that country. As a result
of those acts, the Cuban people has paid a high cost in
human lives. A total of 3,478 people have died, while
2,099 have been severely injured. The economic losses
for Cuba have also been very high. With full impunity,
funds to carry out terrorist actions are provided and
collected in Miami and other cities of that country. The
bank accounts that finance terrorism are openly and
regularly operated, terrorists are recruited, weapons
purchased and the territory is used by those who
finance, mastermind and commit terrorist acts against
Cuba. Instead of preventing and punishing terrorism
against Cuba, the United States authorities hold
hostage in that country's jails Gerardo Hernandez,
Ramon Labafiino, Fernando Gonzalez, Antonio
Guerrero and Rene Gonzalez. This follows the
unanimous decision of the Court of Appeals of the
Eleventh Circuit of Atlanta to reverse their sentences
and order a new trial, overturning the trial held by a
crooked Miami-based court, without the guaranties of
due process. Those five Cuban youths were only
trying, with great altruism and courage, to obtain
information about terrorist groups based in Miami in
order to prevent their violent actions and to save lives
of Cuban and United States citizens.

New evidence has been revealed about United
States double standards in its so-called fight and
international campaign against terrorism, as well as
acts of this nature against the Cuban people.

The United States continues to fail to meet
international obligations of judging and extraditing the
infamous international terrorist Luis Posada Carriles,
whose extradition has been requested by the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.

This terrorist's impunity is perpetuated by
judging him as a mere illegal immigrant, despite the
fact that the United States Government itself has
acknowledged that he is a dangerous terrorist. That fact
was acknowledged in a letter sent to him in March by
the United States Bureau of Immigration and Customs
Enforcement. The letter stated, inter alia, that due to
his long record of criminal activities and acts of
violence, which caused the death of innocent civilians,
releasing him would mean a risk for the community
and the national security of the United States.
After 13 months of silence with regard to the
Cuban Government's inquiries, Federal Bureau of
Investigation documents were disclosed on 22 April
which proved the complicity of the United States
authorities with the illegal entry of Posada Carriles in
the territory of the United States on board the boat
Santrina, property of the notorious terrorist Santiago
Alvarez Fernandez Magrifia. For several months, the
United States Government denied knowledge of Posada
Carriles' entry into its territory, in spite of the fact that
it is now clear that the United States was aware of this
from the beginning, since an undercover FBI agent
travelled on board the Santrina.

If the Government was aware of this, why was
Posada Carriles not arrested until several months later?
Why were charges not presented immediately against
the other terrorists that helped Mr. Posada Carriles
enter illegally into that country, such as Santiago
Alvarez and Osvaldo Mitat, who are currently in jail

S/l'V.5446

 

for arms smuggling and very serious violations of
United States security laws?

Another example which proves the legitimacy of
Cuba's denunciations was the reported arrest in Los
Angeles, California, on 19 April, of Cuban-born citizen
Robert Ferro. He had in his house an outrageous total
of 1,571 fire arms, including anti-missile weapons and
hand grenades, which were hidden in secret caches and
rooms. After his arrest, Ferro declared he was a
member of the anti-Cuban terrorist organization Alpha
66 and that he had a group of 100 members in
California and Miami ready and trained to carry out
actions against the Cuban Government. Ferro also said
to the press that some of the weapons had secretly been
provided by the United States Government with the
aim of overthrowing Fidel Castro.

It is public knowledge that Robert Ferro, owner
of the arsenal, worked for the Central Intelligence
Agency and was an officer in the United States army's
Special Forces.

Cuba has informed the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), established under resolution 1373
(2001), in detail concerning the terrorist actions of
these and other individuals and organizations, as well
as about the protection afforded to accomplices by the
Government of the United States. To date, we have no
indication that the CTC has taken any action to
evaluate the information submitted or to undertake an
investigation on the breach of the obligations of the
United States pursuant to Security Council resolution
1373 (2001).

The Cuban Government reiterates its request to
the Committee to carry out an evaluation of the
information presented, inter alia, in documents
S/2002/15, S/2004/753 and S/2005/341, thus
contributing to putting an end to the impunity that
those who have carried out terrorist actions against
Cuba enjoy in United States territory.

It is impossible to eradicate terrorism if only
some terrorist actions are condemned while others are
hushed up, tolerated or justified, or if the issue is
simply manipulated in order to promote certain
political interests. In order to make progress, all
hegemonic intentions and acts of aggression must be
condemned and eliminated. In all honesty, all forms
and manifestations of terrorism must be condemned
and punished anywhere in the world. State terrorism
must be no exception under any circumstances.
