Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation, too, welcomes the presence of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan here today. Mexico
decided to vote in favour of the resolution and thus to
join the near-unanimous agreement reached in the
Security Council with respect to this important
instrument, which sets in motion the process of Iraq's
reconstruction.

The motivation behind this decision is the
intention to make a contribution so that, without further
delay, the parties involved can discharge their
responsibilities and attend to the urgent needs of the
Iraqi people. Mexico's immediate goal is to bring about
a normalization of the situation in Iraq, so that the
people themselves, by fully recovering and exercising
their sovereignty, will be in a position, at the earliest
opportunity, to dictate their own political future.

The text of this resolution in undoubtedly a
compromise text. The negotiations were fruitful.
Throughout that process, changes were made and
progress achieved that made possible near-unanimous
agreement. During the intensive discussions that
preceded the vote, the members of the Security Council
had to rebuild their understanding and find new ways
of reconciling their views in order to reclaim the
purpose and direction of the Council as regards Iraq.

Now, in the context of the post-conflict situation,
Mexico believes that the Security Council must look to
the future, act effectively, and take decisions and apply
measures aimed at ensuring that reconstruction brings
about the longed-for well-being of the Iraqi people,
within the framework of the restoration of its
sovereignty and independence, in an atmosphere of
stability and justice for Iraq and security and peace for
the entire region.

The new consensus achieved in the Council with
respect to the adoption of the resolution is based
precisely on the fact that, over and above our
differences, we have an institutional commitment and
obligation that derives from the mandate entrusted to
this organ by the Charter of the United Nations.
Consensus within the Council and the institutional
commitment of its members is expressed through the
agreement to lift all the sanctions - except, in part, the
arms embargo - that were imposed on Iraq, and the
termination within six months of the oil for food
programme - all of this in order to promote the early
reconstruction of Iraq.

This resolution has many other angles and
implications as regards the manner in which the
circumstances in Iraq will be handled, but it serves as
the starting point for a process, the complexity and
challenges of which are still not clearly understood. It
provides for fostering conditions that will lead to what
Mexico hopes will be the prompt termination of the
military occupation and the rapid establishment by the
Iraqi people of an autonomous and legitimate
Government, with full capacity to engage in
international relations.

In parallel, the resolution establishes the
independent role and the tasks to be shouldered by the
United Nations, as regards both the promotion and
coordination of humanitarian assistance, and the
creation of conditions for the establishment of a
sovereign and autonomous Iraqi Government.

On that basis, the challenge of the United Nations
will be to ensure respect for the fundamental principles
on which the Organization is based and vigorously to
become involved in the reconstruction process, to
guide and support the Iraqi people in achieving their
long-term economic and social goals.

Beyond the resolution itself, the United Nations
role in Iraq will depend to a considerable extent, on the
one hand, on the singleness of purpose, the
commitment and the agility of the Security Council,
and on the other, on the professional ability and
capacities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, whose post is created in this
resolution.

Once the Special Representative's office is set up,
the United Nations will have to involve itself
proactively not only in promoting humanitarian
assistance but also in many other tasks, such as
sustainable development, gender equality, the defence
and promotion of human rights including the
investigation of violations committed in recent years,
and the crafting of legislation to bring the perpetrators
to justice.

Under the resolution, both the Secretary-General
and the occupying Powers must keep the Security
Council periodically informed of their activities. This
should make it possible for the Council to remain
vigilant to the situation in Iraq, to be attentive to
circumstances in the field, and thus to modify or update
the terms of the resolution as required.

From my country's perspective, the process of
Iraq's reconstruction, which starts with this resolution,
does indeed require an alert and committed attitude on
the part of the Security Council. We must be careful to
ensure that all the parties involved in Iraq will facilitate
compliance with, or the restoration of, the rights to
which reference is made in the resolution, mainly those
relating to sovereignty and territorial integrity, and to
the Iraqi people's right to their natural resources,
particularly oil, and their inalienable right to endow
themselves with their preferred form of government.

This resolution does not authorize the
establishment of long-term commitments that would
alienate the sovereignty of the Iraqi people over its
petroleum resources. At this stage, all proceeds should
be strictly channelled towards Iraq's development and
the improvement of its people's living conditions.
Mexico has advocated this throughout the negotiations,
and it is in those terms that we understand the
resolution. It contemplates an Advisory and Monitoring
Board that must guarantee that Iraq's oil is handled in a
totally transparent manner during this stage. The
Security Council will be kept informed by the
Secretary-General of the functioning of this Board, and
it will have to make sure that the commitment of
transparency is met.

Iraq's future poses a great challenge to the United
Nations. If we are to confront it squarely, we must
strengthen our own Organization.

