Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda for their excellent briefings
and for the highly commendable service they render
daily to international justice and to our common cause
of combating impunity.

Algeria attaches great importance to the two
Tribunals' accomplishing the missions assigned them
by the international community and implementing the
objectives of the completion strategy. We welcome the
progress made since our Council adopted resolution
1534 (2004) on 26 March. At the same time, the
strategy approved by the Security Council seems
already to be encountering several difficulties that
could jeopardize the 2010 deadline for the completion
of the proceedings. Reports to the Council and the
briefings made this morning shed ample light on the
nature of those difficulties and on the means for
overcoming them.

From the outset, the financial and administrative
dimension has been one of the most significant
obstacles before the Tribunals. Indeed, the lack of staff,
the inability to retain qualified staff, and the hiring
freeze brought on by a lack of resources resulting from
member States' non-payment of their contributions
could seriously impede the Tribunals' work and
compromise their ability to conclude the business
before them. A solution must therefore be found to that
problem as soon as possible. In that regard, the States
concerned must promptly meet their financial
obligations.

Moreover, we feel that the completion strategy
could be facilitated if the intermediate- or lower-rank
accused were referred to competent national
jurisdictions. We therefore welcome the establishment
of the War Crimes Chamber in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and hope that it will be operational early
in 2005. When conditions allow, we would also
welcome the transfer of the cases of some detainees to
the competent Rwandan jurisdictions. We further
believe that the full and complete cooperation of all
member States with the Tribunals in providing access
to essential documents and in apprehending and
bringing to justice all of the accused is necessary to the
implementation of their mandates and objectives.

The Security Council must not and cannot remain
impassive when the authority of the Tribunals and its
own credibility are damaged by any State's failure to
cooperate. It must - and it has the means to do so -
provide full support to the Tribunals in a resolute and
effective manner so that criminals who are still at
large, such as Mr. Karadzic and Mr. Mladic, can be
arrested and justice finally done.

The other challenge facing the Tribunals has to
do with the expiration, on 6 November 2005, of the
current mandate of the permanent judges and, on
11 June 2005, of that of the ad litem judges, at a time
when it appears that the trials may continue beyond
those dates, which could compromise the completion
strategies. We believe that particular attention must be
accorded to that question.

