Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express the thanks and appreciation of the
Government of the Sudan to Council members for being
so understanding and willing to adopt by consensus
resolution 2429 (2018) on the extension of the mandate
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). We have been communicating
with all Council members since the draft resolution was
submitted by the United Kingdom. I would like once
again to thank the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for the recommendations made in their
joint report on the future of UNAMID (S/2018/530), in
accordance with the request of the Security Council.

The reality on the ground in the five states of Darfur
during the recent period is undeniable and unforgettable.
In all our statements and letters to the Security Council
and the Secretary-General, we have recalled that Darfur
has enjoyed security and stability, in particular since
2015, and that the humanitarian situation has become
completely stable. In our assessment of the security,
humanitarian and political situations in Darfur, we
are relying not on only one or two documents, but
entirely on the reality on the ground, as recognized by
the Council through many reports, visits, presidential
statements and other testimonies.

The Government of the Sudan and all its agencies
recognize the importance of the upcoming phase of
the peacebuilding process and enhancing stability
in Darfur in order to rebuild What was destroyed by
years of conflict and repair the social fabric. This will
be done through development projects that address
the root causes of the conflict so that Darfur can
contribute again to building the Sudan. Therefore,
we call on the international community through all
its institutions - the United Nations, donor States
and others - to provide the necessary financial and
development support and to stand with the Government
of the Sudan to implement those plans as swiftly
as possible. We also underscore that the Sudanese
Government is determined to continue to address the
consequences and remnants of the conflict, provide
security and restore State authority throughout
Darfur in order to enable peacebuilding efforts and
enhance stability.

The reality on the ground in Darfur has developed
resolutely. We have started to see signs of that reflected
in the respective reports issued by various entities ofthe
United Nations and of the African Union Commission,
as well as during various visits, including by Council
members. It is also reflected in the removal ofthe Sudan
from the list of violations against children and in the joint
report of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of
the AU Commission. All this has culminated in today's
adoption of resolution 2429 (2018), which we welcome.
Today, we should celebrate this joint achievement. The
adoption of the resolution reaffirms that life in Darfur
has returned to normal after years of conflict and that
the UNAMID formula has proven to be successful.
The Government of my country has played a leading
role in accordance with our primary responsibility
to protect our citizens and our national sovereignty.
That has taken place in extremely complicated
circumstances, including regional tensions, the spread
of small deadly arms, human trafficking and terrorism.
I assure the Council that the Government of the Sudan
stands ready to continue to cooperate with UNAMID
and other United Nations entities in order to bring
normalcy to the situation in Darfur.

It is my pleasure to tell you, Mr. President, that
the implementation of the resolution has started with
the declaration made on 12 July by the President of
the Republic of the Sudan on a complete ceasefire,
which we have already reported on. It also has started
with the positive assessment issued yesterday by the
Implementation Follow-Up Commission of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which includes the
Sudan, neighbouring countries and permanent members
of Security Council, as well as partners of peace, the
United Nations Secretariat and regional organizations.

In conclusion, we are pleased yet again to reaffirm
our great thanks and appreciation to all our friends
around the world. We are sincerely grateful to them, as
they have stood with integrity, strength and honour for
the cause ofpeace in the Sudan. We thank the countries
with wich we have engaged in dialogue, which we
hope will lead to stronger bilateral relations. We also
reiterate our thanks to Council members.

The Government of the Sudan is determined to
honour its commitment to peace in our country and
with our neighbours and the world.

The meeting rose at 11.30 am.
