Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
extending a warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, His Excellency Mr. Hoshyar Zebari,
and thank him for his presentation. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Gambari, Ambassador
Khalilzad and Controller Sach for their briefings to the
Council.

Iraq has shown commendable progress on the
political, economic and security fronts. We are
encouraged by the commitment of the Iraqi
Government to continue to apply those efforts in order
to expand on and consolidate the achievements that
have been reached thus far. The remarkable
macroeconomic indicators point to an expanding
economy, with the Government's efforts at reviving the
economy showing positive upward trends. My country
looks forward to seeing Iraq's vast economic potential
translated into improvements of the infrastructure and
essential services for all Iraqi citizens.

In the legislative area, a number of important
milestones have been achieved this year, notably the
adoption of legislation on de-Baathification reform,
amnesty, provincial powers and the budget. We hope to
see the same progress on the issue of hydrocarbon
resources, the implementation of article 140 of the
Constitution and the constitutional revision process. No
less important is the prompt adoption of legislation
guiding the provincial elections, to be held before the
end of this year. Should it be further delayed, the whole
electoral timetable may be jeopardized.

This year has also witnessed a marked
improvement in security. It has been encouraging to
hear from you, Mr. President, on behalf of the
multinational forces, that the security indicators
continue to improve. A secure environment is without
question a prerequisite for progress in most other
sectors. In recent months, the Iraqi security forces have
demonstrated an increased ability to address security
challenges. With support from the multinational forces,
they have worked, often tirelessly, to improve security
and public order, combat terrorism and sectarian
violence and impose the rule of law. That being said,
we recognize that this is a long-term effort, which will
require the building of professional, impartial and
non-sectarian security forces that enjoy the trust and
respect of all Iraqi communities.

Iraq is undergoing a phase of critical
transformation, and the results achieved thus far allow
us to believe that that process is moving in the right
direction. Notwithstanding, we are aware that the
journey is not without significant challenges of a
political, security and humanitarian nature.

My delegation continues to believe that the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and multinational forces are well placed to play a
central role in leading the international effort to help
Iraq address and overcome the remaining challenges,
notably in assisting the people of Iraq in advancing
political dialogue, extending electoral assistance,
supporting the constitutional review process and
facilitating the regional dialogue process. We commend
and support the efforts of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General De Mistura and the UNAMI staff,
who continue to carry out their mandate and expanded
the Mission's presence under difficult circumstances.
We attach great importance to the role of UNAMI in
resolving the dispute on the internal boundaries and
take note of the recently presented analytical reports on
the four disputed districts proposing a series of specific
confidence-building measures. We also note the
message from Mr. De Mistura that the Government of
Iraq alone has the sovereign responsibility to decide on
that process.

The recent annual review conference of the
International Compact with Iraq, held in Stockholm,
was another demonstration of the continued
involvement of the international community in helping
to advance the vision of a stable, secure and prosperous
Iraq. We are pleased with the progress made since its
launch one year ago. While we recognize that
international support at this stage is still vital, the
implementation of the Compact should be an Iraq-led
effort. National ownership and strong leadership by
Iraq and Iraqis remain crucial for its success. Our
ultimate goal should remain the transformation of Iraq
into a fully integrated member of the international
community.

That integration, both political and economic,
begins at the regional level. We are pleased with the
positive plans being developed under the aegis of the
extended ministerial conference of neighbouring States
and would encourage its further engagement. The

constructive engagement of Iraq's neighbours is critical
for the long-term stabilization and reconstruction of
Iraq. My delegation finds it unacceptable that those
efforts are being jeopardized by armed groups that are
attacking Iraq and the coalition forces in an attempt to
undermine the security and stabilization of Iraq.

Stability, normalization, reconciliation, economic
and social development and the consolidation of
democracy in Iraq remain our shared goals. The
progress achieved thus far gives us hope to believe that
the Iraqi people are determined to overcome the
remaining challenges and, with the assistance of the
international community, consolidate those gains.

