Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the excellent manner in which you
are conducting the work of the Security Council this
month, and to thank you for your presence throughout
this debate. It demonstrates your own interest, as well
as that of your country, in the subject under discussion.

In recent weeks, tensions in the holy city of
Jerusalem, caused by the closure ofthe Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the imposition by Israel, following an incident, of
restrictions on the faithful, was another demonstration
of how easily the situation can escalate and approach
the point of no return.

The Committee aligns itself with other statements
made today reiterating the call to respect the sanctity of
these sites and the right to worship there. The Committee
regrets all loss of human life. In its joint communique
with the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation of21 July,
the Committee called on the international community
to urgently reaffirm respect for the historic status quo
and to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to rescind
all measures that violate this status quo, including
the installation of metal detectors, and to fulfil its
obligations under international law. The restoration of
the status quo at religious sites must be accompanied by
urgent efforts to end the Israeli occupation of the State
of Palestine.

This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the 1967
war and the Israeli occupation of the West Bank, Gaza
and East Jerusalem. The question of Palestine continues
to be the topic on the United Nations agenda that goes
back the furthest in time, and the Israeli occupation is
the longest lasting occupation in contemporary history.
As the Committee has repeatedly pointed out, this is
an unacceptable and unsustainable situation that must
end immediately.

Faced with the five decades of continuous
occupation, and in order to consider concrete ways to end
it, the Committee has been holding events throughout
2017. Last month, on 29 and 30 June, we organized
here at Headquarters the United Nations Forum to
Mark Fifty Years of Occupation, which was opened by
the Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, who delivered a message from
the Secretary-General. The Forum was attended by
experts, politicians, civil society representatives from
Israel, Palestine and other countries, as well as by a
Nobel Prize winner. The Forum served as a platform,
without a doubt, for deliberations that were perhaps
more ground-breaking, balanced and far-reaching
than any that have taken place in a long time under
the auspices of the United Nations on the question
of Palestine.

While the views expressed were diverse, there
was a clear consensus among the participants: the
occupation is illegal, must end and must end now.
I urge the Council to study the report of that Forum,
which will be published in early August. It contains
thought-provoking observations and recommendations,
including on the need for the international community to
redouble its efforts to achieve a viable and just solution,
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, as
well as on the need for States to distinguish, in their
relations, between the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967. In addition, with regard to the
situation in Gaza, the participants called for a shift
from a humanitarian focus to a political and human
rights focus that takes into account the legal obligations
of all parties.

The Committee has continued to fulfil other aspects
of its mandate in support of Palestinian aspirations
to statehood and sovereignty, including promoting
capacity-building for Palestinian civil servants. For
example, the Committee organized a capacity-building
workshop in Beirut in April on the theme "Goal 17 for
Palestine: South-South and Triangular Partnerships for
Sustainable Development". The workshop promoted a
common understanding of the practice of South-South
and triangular cooperation as an important modality
for the achievement of sustainable development
objectives in Palestine and provided participants with
practical tools to understand the inherent challenges
and opportunities.

Last week, on 20 and 21 July, in Baku, the
Committee organized an international conference
on the question of Jerusalem, with the support of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The conference
provided an opportunity to discuss ways in which
the international community could raise economic,
practical and concrete support for the Palestinian
population of East Jerusalem. The issue of current
tensions was also discussed at the conference.

The Committee has repeatedly stressed the
illegality of the blockade on the Gaza Strip, which
is now in its tenth year. That blockade amounts to
collective punishment and has resulted in one of
the worst humanitarian crises, exemplified by the
current electricity outages, the shortage of doctors and
medicine, water and all of the consequences thereof.

Moreover, the Committee has repeatedly spoken
out about the illegality of Israel's settlement activities
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, which remain
a major obstacle to achieving peace and a serious
violation of international law. Paragraph 2 of resolution
2334 (2016) expressly calls on Israel to

"immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem".

Regrettably, the recent announcement by the Israeli
Government concerning an additional 4,000 dwellings
reveals a total lack of respect for the Council's demands
and a total lack of accountability or progress in the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).

The momentum generated by the resolution must
not be squandered, and the Council must fully utilize
its accountability mechanisms to ensure the full
implementation of its resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), which in paragraph 12

"[r]equests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council every three months on the implementation
of the provisions of the... resolution".

While the two informative briefings to date have
highlighted what has been common knowledge for many
years 4 namely, Israel's ongoing flagrant violations
of international law - by way of oral statements, the
Committee calls on the Secretary-General to issue
written reports in the future and provide practical
recommendations to ensure Israel's accountability.

