Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Ijoin
others in thanking Special Representative Jan Kubis for
his briefing, which comes at a critical time for Iraq.
I also welcome his personal commitment to doing
the job that he is leaving and that he carried out with
exemplary determination in difficult circumstances.
I will discuss the latest developments relating to the
electoral process, the remaining challenges that must be
met so as to achieve a stable, inclusive and prosperous
Iraq, and France's full support for those efforts and the
work of the United Nations.

First, as Jan Kubis just made clear, we have seen
a decisive transformation in Iraq this past year. Iraq
was able to defeat Da'esh militarily and meet the
challenge presented by parliamentary elections and
political transition. Despite difficulties, the peaceful
organization of the electoral process within the
timeframe set by the Constitution - one year after
the military victory over Da'esh - is testimony to the
country's recovery. We welcome that progress and the
appointment of new Iraqi authorities.

Despite the tense regional and social environment,
the formation of the Government has demonstrated a
sense of responsibility on the part of the various actors
during the transition period. The relevant figures who
have emerged following the process, including the Prime
Minister, will be solid assets for the future. We hope
that the confirmation of the remaining eight ministers
will take place soon. The new Iraqi Government must
concentrate without delay on the road map for electoral,
economic and financial reform, as well as the reform of
the security sector, all of which are imperative.

Secondly, if that auspicious dynamic is to continue,
much remains to be done. First of all, Iraq's stability,
which is crucial to preventing the resurgence ofDa'esh
in any form, is a major issue for the region and our own
national security. We will remain mobilized in the fight
against terrorism, alongside the Iraqi security forces,
and in support for the international coalition's efforts to
counter Da'esh to end that persistent threat definitively.

On the ground, Iraq continues to contend with
nearly 2 million internally displaced persons, who must
continue to be provided with assistance. The primary
goal of the international community - the stabilization
of the country - entails assisting with the voluntary and
safe return of displaced persons and ensuring security,
mine clearance and restoring basic services, without
which the prospects for sustainable return will remain
dim. More generally, however, as France has continued
to emphasize, only national reconciliation and inclusive
governance serving the interests of all sectors of Iraqi
society will make it possible to defeat terrorism. France
is committed to helping the new Iraqi Government
meet the challenges of national reconciliation and
inclusive governance.

I stress the importance of women's role in the
political process. France calls for progress in that
area. I also recall the important role that the Iraqi
justice system, which must be seen as exemplary
and beyond reproach, must play in ensuring that all
those responsible for crimes be tried with respect for
the rule of law. We also encourage ongoing efforts to
resume negotiations with Erbil so as to resolve pending
disputes. The stability of the country requires that the
Kurds be afforded their rightful place within a united
Iraq that respects its own diversity. In that regard,
France commends the measures put in place by Jan
Kubis, which were decisive in resolving the crisis
triggered by the independence referendum.

The priority that we must collectively accord to the
reconstruction of the country is one of the keys to its
future. Iraq will be able to consolidate its institutions
only if the Government moves quickly to implement the
recovery and resilience programme established at the
Kuwait International Conference for the Reconstruction
of Iraq, which the entire international community
has supported. I recall that Iraq will be incapable of
rebuilding itselfif it is held hostage to regional tensions.
Dissociation is an imperative both for Iraqi leaders and
for external Powers.

Lastly, I reiterate that France fully supports the
people of Iraq in facing those challenges, which are
linked to their sovereignty and unity. France has
donated nearly €60 million to Iraq since 2017, in
addition to a budget loan of 4306 million. That aid
is based on responding to humanitarian needs and
supporting the stabilization of territories liberated from
Da'esh control. France also wishes to fully support Iraq
during its reconstruction phase, which has just begun,
and will remain fully engaged with the Iraqi people in
the coming months.

In conclusion, I commend the role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
under the leadership of Jan Kubis, particularly over
the past several months. Iraq is stronger and more
inclusive and stable today, and together we can all
thank Jan Kubis for his crucial contribution to that
progress and encourage UNAMI to stay the course
in according priority to supporting governance and
national reconciliation.

