Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of the

Russian Federation on your presidency of the Security
Council for the current month, as well as on your
timely initiative to promote this debate on the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Brazil would also like to express its satisfaction
with the Council's decision to appoint South Africa and
Panama as the new members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for 2007,
as well as to commend Denmark and the United
Republic of Tanzania for their constructive
participation in the Commission over the past year.

Through you, Mr. President, Brazil expresses its
satisfaction with the presentation made by the
Chairman of the Commission, the Permanent
Representative of Angola, Ambassador Ismael Gaspar
Martins. We acknowledge the presence of Ms. Carolyn
McAskie, head of the Peacebuilding Support Office,
and would like to thank the Office for its efforts in
assisting the Commission. We also acknowledge the
unprecedented mobilization of institutional speakers
for this morning's session.

More than a year has elapsed since the 2005
Summit decision that created the new Commission, and
six months since the Organizational Committee started
its work. Even though the Peacebuilding Commission
is still in a very initial phase, we welcome the initiative
to take stock of the work done thus far and to prepare
for the next steps. We hope that such an exercise can
also be carried out by the Commission itself, and by
the General Assembly, as proposed by the Chairman of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

It is also appropriate that, at this early stage, in
reviewing the work of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Security Council seek the views of interested
United Nations Members. The exchange might provide
useful insight into the performance of the new body
and ways to improve it, in the light of its particular
situation vis-a-Vis the main bodies of the United
Nations system.

For over a decade prior to the proposal of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change to
set up the Peacebuilding Commission, Brazil had been
advocating a mechanism that would provide for a solid
link between peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable development. After
carefully considering the issue, we continue to hold the
View that those activities are not consecutive stages in
a process; rather, they embrace a set of complementary

actions that are required in order to help establish a
basis on which a country in conflict, or emerging
therefrom, will be able to build lasting peace and a fair
and viable society.

Member States, especially those in post-conflict
situations, have entertained high expectations with the
launching of the new body. The Peacebuilding
Commission has been widely regarded as a powerful
instrument to help in the transition between conflict
and sustained peace. However, even given that it is at
an initial stage, the Commission has achieved very
little, a situation that does not bode well for subsequent
phases if circumstances do not change.

Strenuous negotiations gave birth, during the
2005 Summit, to this new member of the United
Nations family. The built-in imbalance in the
composition of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission generated much acrimony
and can be faulted for such a shaky beginning. We
believe that more focused attention must be paid to the
principle of equitable regional representation.

We should be reminded that, although it is tightly
related to the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission is not a creation of the Council alone. It is
accountable to the whole United Nations membership,
which has in the General Assembly the most
democratic conduit to express its views.

As we have made clear in the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission on many
occasions, the new body has a long way to go to
improve its working methods, should it wish to operate
effectively. It is a matter of concern that little attention
has been given to the drafting of rules of procedure,
which, in turn, has led to long and needless debates on
issues of little or no relevance.

The Peacebuilding Commission is a very
important organ of the United Nations and, as such,
should be supported by the Security Council. For many
countries undergoing the scourge of internecine
conflict, the Commission can be the venue to muster
the much-needed international cooperation to enable
them to recover as early as possible from the problems
engendered by political instability and lack of security.
We take satisfaction in the fact that two sister
African countries, Burundi and Sierra Leone, have
been selected for country-specific meetings. Brazil
supports all efforts in the Commission to achieve a
successful outcome of those meetings, which will be
critical to the future of the Peacebuilding Commission.

It is a matter of concern to my delegation that the
Commission has yet to articulate short-, medium- and
long-term perspectives for the process of peacebuilding
in post-conflict scenarios. However, one thing is quite
clear, as shown by experience: an early withdrawal of
international cooperation from a country in its recovery
process can be disastrous for efforts to create the
foundations of lasting peace.

Brazil believes that the Security Council can help
the Peacebuilding Commission to stand on its feet and
gain legitimacy and authority as an advisory body in
the United Nations family. In this regard, there are
readily available examples of what the Council can do.
It occurs to my delegation, for instance, that, when it
indicates new members, the Council can help the
Commission to have a more balanced membership; or,
when the Council seeks its advice, it can do it in a way
that would not reduce the Commission to a classical
forum of donors and aid-recipient members. Also, we
believe that the Security Council can join with the
General Assembly in affording the Commission
sufficient authority to discharge its functions properly.
In addition, we believe that the Security Council
should not limit itself to seeking advice from the
Commission only after peacekeeping operations have
been discontinued. The Peacebuilding Commission can
play a useful role in countries still subject to conflict as
it procures the international support necessary to put in
place recovery strategies that can lay the foundations
for sustainable peace and reconstruction.

By involving a wider array of actors, the reviews
and discussions undertaken in the Commission should
provide the Council with better-informed analyses of
the possibilities of post-conflict recovery of the
countries concerned, thereby improving the quality of
its decision-making process. We know from experience
that there is no gap between peacekeeping, recovery
and development. International cooperation efforts
should address all three aspects, for it is hardly
imaginable that one can be lastingly secured without
the others.

