Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Nicholas Haysom
for the detailed information on the situation in South
Sudan and the progress in the South Sudanese political
settlement. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Haysom for the work that he has done and
congratulate him on his recent appointment. I wish
him every success in his work at his new post. We also
listened with interest to the briefings by Special Envoy
Ismail Wais and Ms. Grace John.

The Russian Federation's consistent position arises
from the premise that a sustainable ceasefire and the
launch of an inclusive process of national reconciliation
are the key to stabilization in South Sudan. We
therefore welcome the signing of the revitalized Peace
Agreement by the parties to the conflict in South Sudan
on 12 September. We hope that the breakthrough nature
of the agreements reached in Addis Ababa will not be
questioned. We agree that they still require substantial
detail, but that does not detract from their significance.
It is important that the South Sudanese parties
demonstrated their readiness to reach a compromise, as
well as their desire to resolve their existing differences
by peaceful means.
We pay tribute to the effective coordinated efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which enabled the successful completion of
the South Sudanese Peace Agreement revitalization
process. We note that regional actors painstakingly
spent over a year bringing the positions of the parties
together. It was indeed the countries of the region that
were able to start the negotiation process from scratch
at a time when South Sudan's leaders could not even be
seated at the same negotiating table. It was IGAD that
forged ahead in its efforts when many of those in this
very chamber had lost hope and written off the process
of revitalization.

We note the unity demonstrated by the region's
leaders in their approach to the South Sudan settlement,
and we call on them to maintain that approach in their
continued support for the peace process. We also
welcome the efforts of the guarantors to facilitate the
implementation of the Peace Agreement by providing
national contingents from the Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti
and Somalia as part of the Regional Protection Force.

We see this process as a practical manifestation of
the principle of African solutions to African problems,
as well as an opportunity for effective cooperation
between the United Nations and the Security Council
and regional organizations. We are ready to consider
substantive proposals by IGAD regarding the Regional
Protection Force. We encourage South Sudanese
politicians to show goodwill when implementing the
revised Agreement.

Despite clear positive trends, we also note calls

for broadening sanctions on South Sudan, including
in this Chamber. I would therefore once again like to
recall our position on that issue. As before, we think
that excessive pressure applied through sanctions might
entrench the positions of the South Sudanese parties and
may give them the wrong signals. The result might be
the reverse of what is desired, with the parties turning
to a military solution rather than a negotiation process.
That would certainly make it more difficult to achieve
a peace settlement. Finally, in principle, we do not
accept a situation where attempts are made to use the
sanctions regime of the Security Council as a substitute
for serious political and diplomatic work.

