Ms. Rasi (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the
associated countries, Cyprus and Malta, as well the
European Free Trade Association country member of the
European Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with
this statement.

The European Union welcomes the Secretary-General's
progress report (S/ 1999/ 1008) on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in his report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa.

The Council's debate today on Africa takes place at a
very critical moment. The European Union welcomes this
initiative and the opportunity to focus on Africa. On the
one hand, we are able to observe some signs of political
and socio-economic progress; on the other hand, more than
a third of African countries are at present or have recently
been involved in armed conflicts. The European Union is
deeply concerned by the extension of armed conflicts, the
huge influx of arms and military equipment and the
increasing role of non-State actors in armed conflicts. As a
consequence, parts of Africa are suffering the massive
displacement of civilian populations and humanitarian
crises. The prospects of development and prosperity in the
countries directly or indirectly affected by these conflicts
have been shattered by current developments.

Peace, security, sustainable development, human rights
and good governance are interdependent. Crises are
triggered by a range of factors, including social, ethnic or
religious strife, the violation of human rights, poverty, the
inequitable distribution of and the fight for economic
resources and commodities, environmental degradation and
large-scale migration. The European Union is of the View
that the combination of these factors in Africa poses a
serious challenge to the international community.

The primary responsibility for the future of Africa
rests with the African nations themselves. The use of force
is not conducive to lasting peace and security. Power
without responsibility, rule without accountability and force
without control are not acceptable. It is indispensable to
set in motion a process to achieve democracy, power-
sharing and respect for human rights, whether this process
takes the form of promoting broad-based governments and
maintaining the rule of law and effective civil service, or
of securing the legitimacy of elections and the orderly
change of governments. African nations need to have
prospects for and a Vision of their future in a global
context. Broad dialogues on continental and subregional
security, relying on existing regional cooperative
arrangements, should be encouraged.

The international community, including the European
Union, cannot be indifferent to events in Africa. The
European Union is strongly committed to the primary role
of the United Nations in the maintenance and promotion
of international peace. The European Union welcomes the
renewed commitment of the Security Council to
contribute to conflict resolution in Africa. It notes the
Council's determination to improve further its ability to
prevent conflicts and to make its responses to conflicts
more efficient and effective. The European Union looks
forward to further Security Council activity in this regard.
We commend the work of the Secretary-General and
United Nations bodies in their efforts to bring about
solutions to crises in Africa.

At the same time, we need to strengthen the United
Nations capacity for conflict prevention and to address the
root causes of conflict. Potential sources of conflict need
to be addressed at an early stage. The changing nature of
conflicts requires new immediate responses. We could
quote numerous examples to illustrate the fact that
international humanitarian law and human rights continue
to be violated with impunity in many parts of Africa, as
a result of either a combination of brutality and ignorance
or of systematic and organized action.

The European Union considers the safe and
unimpeded access of international humanitarian
organizations to refugees, displaced persons and
vulnerable populations in conflict situations to be a
fundamental principle. We strongly condemn the arbitrary
denial of these rights. The overwhelming majority of
casualties in today's conflicts in Africa are civilian, the
majority of them women and children. In this context, the
European Union calls upon all States and parties to
conflicts in Africa to stop the recruitment and the use of
child soldiers. It is essential to bring to justice those
responsible for violations and to end the culture of
impunity. In this context, we underline the importance of
the effective operation of the international criminal

 

tribunals, especially the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, and the need for other appropriate mechanisms to
deal effectively with questions of impunity and
accountability. The European Union underlines the
importance of the early establishment of the International
Criminal Court and calls upon all States that have not done
so to sign and ratify the Rome Statute without delay.

We commend efforts of African leaders and States and
regional and subregional organizations, in particular the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), to resolve conflicts
by peaceful means. Under its Common Position on conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa, the European Union is
ready to assist in building capacities for conflict prevention
in Africa, particularly through the OAU and African
subregional organizations. We also recognize the
importance of regional peacekeeping efforts in Africa and
express our support for measures to develop African
capacity in this regard.

In its 50-year history of peacekeeping, the United
Nations has deployed more operations in Africa than in any
other single region. These operations remain a vital
instrument in assisting African States to resolve conflicts
with the help of the international community and to create
the conditions for peaceful development. United Nations-
mandated peacekeeping operations can make the difference
between peace and war and lay the foundation for further
peace-building. The European Union is convinced that
progress, lasting peace and sustainable development will be
reached in Africa only if Africa, as well as the international
community, can muster firm political determination and
commitment.

For the European Union, Africa's sustainable
development is a priority. The commitment of the European
Union to Africa is based on shared interests, values and
objectives. We wish to help Africa to achieve peace and
stability in order to improve the quality of life of its people.
An enabling political environment conducive to human
rights, good governance and a vibrant civil society are
essential for sustainable development. In this respect,
development cooperation has to play an important role.

The European Union is the world's leading source of
development assistance to Africa, providing more than two
thirds of total official development assistance flows to sub-
Saharan Africa. Development assistance plays a key role in
supporting the policies pursued by the African countries.
This is particularly the case in the least developed
countries, three quarters of which are in Africa. Donors and
African countries share responsibility for ensuring that
development assistance is used effectively. The European
Union is currently negotiating the renewal of the Lome
Convention, our present partnership with the African,
Caribbean and Pacific countries. The challenge is to put
European Union political, trade and economic cooperation
on a new footing to cope with the scale of poverty, social
and political instability and the effects of globalization.
For the European Union, an active development policy
with the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries is an
important component of the Union's global responsibility.
We are actively committed to improving the operational
coordination of development cooperation amongst
ourselves, with partner Governments and other
international development actors, such as the United
Nations family.

External debt continues to be a serious impediment
to sustainable development in many African countries.
Unless the external debt is reduced to sustainable levels,
especially for the poorest countries, the benefits of reform
risk being swallowed up by increased debt servicing. The
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt (HIPC) Initiative
provides a major opportunity for achieving debt
sustainability and should be speedily extended to more
countries within the terms agreed upon. We welcome the
progress recently achieved at the Cologne economic
Summit, including the recognition that the central purpose
of debt relief is poverty reduction. The 1999 Cologne debt
initiative is designed to provide deeper, broader and faster
relief through major changes to the HIPC framework.

We welcome the favourable response of the OAU to
the European Union's proposal for the holding in April
2000 of a summit of the heads of State and Government
of the European Union and of Africa. We look forward to
starting the preparation for the summit, which should
adopt a balanced approach between political and
economic issues, reflecting the global nature of European
Union-Africa partnership in order to ensure concrete
results.

