Ms. King (Australia): We thank Special
Representative Sandra Honore for her briefing. We
also welcome the Permanent Representative of Haiti
to the Council. We recently had an opportunity to
engage directly with personnel of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) on the
ground in the country and to see first-hand the work being
done by the Mission. We recognize their unwavering
commitment to the stability and reconstruction of the
country.

Of the four stabilization benchmarks of
MINUSTAH's consolidation plan, we would like to
welcome in particular the progress that is being made
in strengthening the capacity of the Haitian National
Police, which is increasingly visible and proactive,
resulting in a decrease of all major crime indices
over the past year. While the Haitian National Police
is on track to meet its target of 15,000 officers by
2016, we would encourage greater efforts to recruit
female cadets. We look forward to the continued
implementation of community-orientated policing
strategies and strengthened resourcing and reform to
support a professional and autonomous force.

We commend the establishment of a sexual and
gender-based violence specialized team by the United
Nations police, with the assistance of the Governments
of Norway and Canada, which is working with the
Haitian National Police to support investigations and
build capacity to address those very serious crimes.

Despite these improvements, progress on the
rule of law is lagging behind, which could jeopardize
progress in other areas. The Government of Haiti
must remain committed to strengthening the rule of
law and promoting the independence of the judiciary.
We remain concerned about prison overcrowding and
prolonged pre-trial detention periods. The fact that
many of those arrested face years of incarceration
before their cases are heard is unacceptable. We urge
MINUSTAH to redouble its efforts in working with the
Government of Haiti to implement effective strategies
to address the management of pre-trial detention and
prison sentences, to increase investigative expertise
and apply legislative reform through the adoption of
draft criminal and criminal procedure codes.

With regard to other human rights issues, we
acknowledge the positive and constructive steps that
the Government of Haiti has taken recently, including
its ratification of some important international human
rights instruments. Notably, in December, the Haitian
Office of the Ombudsperson was internationally
accredited as a national human rights institution and
the Inter-Ministerial Commission on Human Rights
became operational during the period. Those are
important developments.
While there has been some improvement in the
humanitarian situation, the people of Haiti continue to
face numerous challenges. Continued food insecurity
and increases in child malnutrition are of great concern,
which are exacerbated by the ongoing drought in the
north-west of the country. We commend the efforts
of the World Food Programme, which has begun to
distribute food to those affected.

It remains a matter of great concern that long-
overdue local, municipal and partial senatorial
elections have not been held. Since the Council last
discussed Haiti (see S/PV.7040), some much-needed
steps towards holding long-overdue elections have been
taken. The enacting of the Electoral Act and Political
Parties Act are both very welcome. The recent nationa1
dialogue process demonstrated the commitment and
determination of political leaders, and we welcome the
signing of the El Rancho agreement, which should pave
the way for planning of elections later this year. While
such breakthroughs are encouraging, it is essential that
all political leaders continue to work towards consensus
on holding elections in 2014, and for MINUSTAH to
continue to provide electoral assistance and logistical
support for those elections.

We welcome the options presented by the Secretary-
General for the United Nations future engagement in
Haiti post-2016. The considerable progress made in
the stabilization of Haiti since MINUSTAH's initial
deployment, in 2004, leads us to consider that it is
time for the Council to give MINUSTAH's transition
some thoughtful consideration. We remain open to
an accelerated transition to a new United Nations
configuration in Haiti, while cautioning that it needs to
be carefully calibrated to the situation on the ground.

Haiti remains fragile in many areas, and we must
be sure to persevere and sustain the gains that have
been made. We look forward to receiving the strategic
assessment foreshadowed in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/162) and recommendations on the most
appropriate option for the United Nations' future
engagement in Haiti.

