I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. Estonia would like to express its full support for the Secretary-General's efforts concerning the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in conflict-affected countries. We echo the Secretary-General's call to cease hostilities in Yemen and to focus on reaching a negotiated political settlement. Only an immediate ceasefire and a collective response, in full cooperation with the relevant United Nations agencies, can help prevent the spread of the virus, which would have devastating consequences for the people of Yemen, who are already suffering from the world's largest humanitarian crisis. We welcome the announcement of the unilateral ceasefire by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen. We also welcome the Yemeni Government's announcement that it will comply with the ceasefire, and we call on the Houthis to do the same. We are concerned that despite all the efforts to end the violence, deadly clashes continue, with civilian casualties. We urge all parties to cease indiscriminate attacks on civilian infrastructure, which are in direct violation of international humanitarian law, and we stress the need to protect the vulnerable population, especially women and children. We also call on all parties to comply with international human rights law and to ensure accountability for all violations and abuses. With the announcement of the first case of COVID-19 in Yemen, the need to stop fighting and to collectively focus on the common threat is evident. We fully support the Special Envoy in his efforts to end the hostilities and to convene the parties to start the formal political process for ending the crisis. We urge the parties to engage with the Special Envoy constructively and without delay. A sustainable solution to the conflict can be achieved only through a political compromise. We reiterate the need for an inclusive and comprehensive political process mediated by the United Nations, with the full and meaningful participation of women. We urge the parties to guarantee safe, full and unhindered access of humanitarian aid to all people in need. With the potential spread of the deadly pandemic, the need to comply with humanitarian principles and to refrain from obstructing the work of humanitarian agencies is even more important. We also repeat our call on the Houthis to allow United Nations officials access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker without delay in order to prevent an environmental disaster.
