Mr. Molefe (South Africa): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate on the issue of peace
and security in Africa: Strengthening peacekeeping
operations in Africa.

First, we would like to pay tribute to the Blue
Helmets killed in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and other African Union-United Nations
and United Nations operations elsewhere in Africa and
in the world. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, and the African Union (AU)
Commissioner for Peace and Security for their briefings.

Secondly, my delegation aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

South Africa is among the top 20 troop-contributing
countries and is presently deployed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
South Africa has also pledged a formed police unit
ready to be deployed to a United Nations peacekeeping
mission. Furthermore, South Africa is also active in the
finalization of the African Standby Force and its rapid
deployment capability. My delegation further wishes to
emphasize the following four points.

First, we welcome the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, which was launched during
the high-level week in September. Collaboration,
particularly with regional organizations, is the
cornerstone of making peacekeeping more effective.
The complementary relationship between the United
Nations and the AU is demonstrated by the important
role that the African Union plays in peace operations on
the African continent. We should continue to explore
ways to enhance that cooperation, including through
the implementation of resolution 2033 (2012). Both the
AU Peace and Security Council and United Nations
Security Council should undertake regular joint field
missions and make special envoys and representatives
of both organizations available for briefings to
both Councils.

Secondly, we welcome the two agreements signed
between the United Nations and the African Union - the
joint framework for the implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
form the platform for renewed cooperation between
the two organizations. South Africa hopes that those
agreements will be fully implemented in order to help
Africa achieve inclusive and sustainable peace, security
and development and help the continent achieve the
2030 Sustainable Development Goals.

Thirdly, we would like once again to echo the call
of the AU and the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) for
sustained, predictable and flexible funding mechanisms
for African Union peace operations. In that regard, we
welcome the adoption of resolutions 1809 (2008), 2320
(2016) and 2378 (2017), which stress the same need as
the report, particularly for the African Union-led peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council.
Actions taken to implement the resolutions will take
peacekeeping on the African continent to the next level.
Progress in that area will be in line with the partnership
pillar of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its
consistency with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

We call for support of the draft resolution that
will be presented by the three African countries that
are members of the Security Council, which addresses
the issue of financing for AU-led peace operations,
as Africa has the political will and human resources
to deploy, but needs to enhance some of its capacities
in order to respond to conflicts. Furthermore, we also
welcome the AU initiative of establishing the African
Union Peace Fund, aimed at developing a mechanism of
self-financing for Africa's peace and security activities,
which was launched recently at the AU Summit in
Addis Ababa and of which South Africa's Minister of
Finance is a member of the board of trustees.

Lastly, there will never be sustainable peace
without development. Therefore, there is a need to
ensure that the appropriate steps are taken to ensure
that countries emerging from conflict are given the
necessary support to ensure that they do not relapse into
conflict. Post-conflict reconstruction and development,
including peacebuilding, are necessary components
of the peace process. Our approach to peacebuilding
needs to be re-engineered as a supporting mechanism
to peacekeeping and towards restoring institutional
capacity and governance structures in the maintenance
of the rule of law, curbing violence, restoring justice
and socioeconomic development, as well as prioritizing
community and national reconciliation.

In conclusion, we should recall the political
declaration adopted at the Peace Summit (General Assembly resolution 73/1), commemorating the
centenary of the birth of Nelson Mandela, which
highlights the role of the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations that have a multitude of
tools and mechanisms to support peace, and expresses
our desire to continue to review the effectiveness of
the tools at our disposal to address the armed conflicts
at hand.

