Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the United States presidency for
holding this briefing on corruption and conflict. It also
welcomes the presence of Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, whose relevant analysis shed light on the
acuity of corruption and its correlation with conflicts
around the world. My delegation also thanks Mr. John
Prendergast, founding Director of the Enough Project,
for his briefing.

There is no doubt that corruption is one of the
main causes of conflict, and it seems to be one of the
most complex challenges facing our States. Corruption
is morally and legally reprehensible and can create a
fertile breeding ground for social unrest and give rise
to new forms of violence, which can lead to conflicts
that undermine the mechanisms for managing and
distributing national wealth. When it reaches endemic
proportions, corruption can undermine the foundations
of a modern State that aspires to peace, development
and shared prosperity through its impact on the values
of transparency, integrity, morality and justice.

Corruption is a gangrene that is rotting
State institutions by undermining their ability to
carry out their sovereign functions and thereby
represents a source of instability and conflict. In
that regard, my delegation would like to focus its
statement on administrative, judicial and security
institutions, three areas that are emblematic of
the challenges that corruption poses to States.
Indeed, in many countries, corruption in
administrative institutions has a negative impact
on their effectiveness and fairness, in particular
in how they serve their clients, which leads to
frustrations that are factors in social conflicts.
As a result, such institutions often lose all credibility
in collective perceptions and thus struggle to establish
themselves as places of civic equality.

Judicial institutions are equally susceptible, as they
are supposed to guarantee the equality of citizens before
the law, contribute to the control of democratic and
economic governance, and ensure the implementation
of accountability.

With regard to the corruption of security
institutions, which are tools for protecting people and
defending national territory, it represents a break in the
pact of trust with civilians and another source of social
tensions. Those institutions struggle to effectively
control borders and to resolutely combat trafficking of
all kinds, in particular drug trafficking and trafficking
in small arms and light weapons.

In the light of corruption's enormous potential
for harm and its ability to undermine the foundations
of States, in particular those in post-crisis situations,
African leaders declared 2018 the African
Anti-Corruption Year, with the theme: "Winning
the Fight against Corruption: A Sustainable Path to
Africa's Transformation". In doing so, they intend
to demonstrate their collective commitment and
determination to combating that scourge.

In that connection, the African Union Peace and
Security Council, at its 764th meeting held on 12 April,
stressed the need for greater integration of the African
governance architecture within the framework of
structural conflict prevention, while anchoring the
African anti-corruption strategy within a global
perspective. Indeed, as described earlier, corruption
appears to be a major obstacle to good governance,
may lead to large economic disparities, fuels organized
crime and represents an obstacle to democracy. It
therefore creates the conditions for destabilizing States,
while endangering peace and security at the local,
regional and international levels.

That is why, in the final statement of the thirty-first
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State of
the African Union, held on 1 and 2 July in Nouakchott,
emphasis was placed on strengthening South-South
cooperation through the voluntary exchange of
information, mutual legal assistance and the sharing
of best practices among anti-corruption agencies;
combating illicit financial flows through such measures
as the provision of financial information on a country-
by-country basis; and investment in demographic
dividends through education and awareness campaigns
for young people in the fight against corruption. Those
measures require genuine ownership to be taken at the

local level in the fight against corruption, with a view
to sharing experiences for greater effectiveness on the
African continent.
We must also recall that the consequences of
corruption are more pronounced in post-conflict
countries, which are already affected by the absence
or weakness of State institutions and the scarcity of
financial resources. In that context, corruption can
have destabilizing effects on the process of building
and sustaining peace and even increases the likelihood
of the resumption of hostilities. In order to break the
vicious cycle that leads to increasingly inextricable
situations in post-conflict countries, some practical
measures could be considered to limit the corrosive
effects of corruption on their stability and development.
Those could include, among others, explicitly including
the anti-corruption dimension in peace agreements;
ensuring that anti-corruption interventions start in the
immediate aftermath of conflict and take into account
the context and relevant capacities existing in countries;
strengthening collaboration with civil society and
supporting its efforts to combat corruption.

As part of its peacebuilding strategy, and
aware of the fact that corruption can be a potential
factor in the resurgence of conflicts, Cote d'Ivoire
has been working to strengthen its legislative and
institutional framework to combat that scourge.
On 16 April 2014, it set up the High Authority for
Good Governance, which is responsible, among other
tasks, for drawing up and implementing the national
anti-corruption strategy, monitoring the implementation
of prevention policies and the fight against corruption,
and international cooperation in that field.

My country has also strengthened the capacity of
its National Financial Information Processing Unit,
which is responsible for combating illegal financial
transactions and money-laundering. It has also updated
and strengthened the texts governing the Central
Public Procurement Department in order to make
public procurement even more open and transparent.
The pursuit of institutional reforms has also been
marked by the expansion of the auditing powers of the
Court of Auditors, in order to track and repress the
embezzlement of public funds by high-ranking officials
and to closely review the management of those funds.
That institutional overhaul should make it possible
to stem the loss of public funds and to pursue the
establishment ofa council of State and a court of appeal.

My country is deeply convinced that combating
corruption is a matter of national, regional and
international peace and security. We therefore support
not only the preventive approach advocated by the
Secretary-General, but also the need to promote
international cooperation, including the sharing
of experiences and good practices, in the fight
against corruption.

