Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
I wish first of all to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the situation in Haiti; we are grateful too for all
the endeavours of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and of the entire team of the United
Nations Mission in that country.

This is a very special occasion: the culmination of
an important phase in the process of restoring democracy
to a brother country with a tragic political history. It is
also the conclusion of one of the most successful missions
in the history of United Nations peace-keeping operations.
The Security Council and the entire Organization should
draw satisfaction from both these facts.

Moreover, we hail the Council's reaffirmation of its
solidarity with the people of Haiti through the
establishment of the new United Nations Support Mission
in Haiti (UNSMIH). We wish on behalf of the
Government of Chile to express our sincere gratitude to
the delegations of Canada, China, the Russian Federation
and the United States, and to all others that have made it

 

possible to continue the task of political stabilization in
Haiti.

Under the United Nations Charter, the main purpose
of the Organization is the maintenance of international
peace and security. Over the past 50 years, the United
Nations, in carrying out that mandate, has gained broad
experience in neutralizing threats to peace arising from
conflicts between States. Yet in the current decade, the
Security Council has commenced a new approach to its
functions by attempting to control threats to peace arising
from problems within States, not between them.

With the fundamental political changes that took
place at the end of the 1980s, the internal problems of
various countries have been attracting international
attention; this has led the Council to adopt measures in that
connection. The viewpoint from which these conflicts is
seen has changed, and the continuation or worsening of
such conflicts has given rise to concern about avoiding the
worldwide repercussions they could have.

The Security Council has thus found it necessary to
assess these situations and involve itself in the internal
affairs of States at the request of the authorities of the
States concerned. Operations have taken place that
constitute true exceptions to the principle of non-
intervention. The conflicts in Cambodia, El Salvador and
Georgia have characteristics that place them in a category
distinct from that of conventional international conflicts.
Similarly, various interventions in Africa lack the thousands
of years of history and diplomatic practice that apply to the
control of traditional threats to peace.

It was only to be expected that the new situation
facing the Security Council, despite the Council's wealth of
experience and long tradition in the handling of
international conflicts, poses new challenges to its
members; these must be met through the creation of the
tools needed to address these new needs. Hence, in-depth
discussion is required in the general context of the future
role of the Security Council and the United Nations in the
maintenance of comprehensive peace.

The case of Haiti is an example of a situation
demanding a subjective assessment of the country's internal
problems that require the support of the international
community. It is therefore legitimate that there should be
varying assessments of the new mandate's characteristics,
even though support per se has never been in question. This
was an evaluation that also covered various sensitive
aspects of the matter, such as a Government's capacity to
maintain political stability and civic peace, both areas
linked directly to the exercise of sovereignty.

I wish in conclusion to stress that we favour the
Council beginning a general discussion of this matter,
with a View to adapting its procedures to the new
challenges it faces.

