Mr. Trautwein (Germany): I would like to thank
the Pakistani presidency for this opportunity for the
Security Council to address this important topic:
important for the United Nations, but also important
for every single State Member of the Organization. The
participation of the President of the Economic and
Social Council and of the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator underline that importance.

Over the last few months, the Council has looked
at the various and complex facets of conflict resolution,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building. The
Council has discussed the issues of conflict prevention,
of justice and the rule of law, of national reconciliation,
of the role of the private sector in conflict and post-
conflict situations and, most recently, of peacekeeping.
The Council has also considered the role of women,
both as potential victims of conflict and as
indispensable actors in peace-building, and it has taken
action to address the plight of children associated with
armed conflict.

The Council's attention to those questions, which
are all essential to securing the sustainability of the
Council's peace-building efforts, is a welcome
development; it can, of course, be attributed to the fact
that a number of complex crisis situations have been,
and still are, on the Council's agenda. Currently, the
outstanding item on everybody's mind is the highly
complex situation in Iraq, where serious security
problems, the transition from occupation to
sovereignty, efforts to address the humanitarian
situation and to rebuild the economy and issues of
justice and reconciliation pose a formidable mix of
intertwined challenges. But other very difficult
situations, such as those in Darfur, Cote d'Ivoire and
Haiti, require no less attention.

Most crises share the fate of being complex.
However, the reasons for their complexity almost
always vary. Therefore, rather than discussing any one-
size-fits-all solution, I will attempt to lay out three
common denominators that can, in our View, be
extracted from the Council's previous debates and that
may deserve to be retained, particularly at a time when
the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change has embarked on a broad-scale effort to
suggest fundamental reforms that will, one hopes,
enable the United Nations to respond in the most
adequate manner to today's threats and challenges and
to those of tomorrow.

The first point in this regard is that our actions
must be guided by a close look at the underlying causes
of conflict. These may include a mix of poverty, socio-
economic inequalities, weak governance institutions
and practices, and deficits in - if not a total lack of
justice and the rule of law. Addressing root causes is
not only the key to conflict prevention, it is also the
key to securing the sustainability of peacekeeping and
peace-building efforts.

Germany, like many other Governments and the
United Nations, has moved to apply a broad concept of
peace and security which includes the political, socio-
economic, rule of law and ecological dimensions. We

are aware, as others are - and here, the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) is a
vivid expression of that awareness - that peace and

security, to be sustainable, must be rooted in societies
endowed with institutions that are inclusive and
participatory. Those institutions must guarantee
everybody's dignity, well-being and chance to live up
to his or her human potential. They must provide and
guarantee social justice, equal rights and procedures
that allow for a fair and inclusive resolution of
conflicts.

The European Security Strategy, adopted in
December 2003, seeks to promote a rules-based
international order, and we fully endorse that objective.
Our adherence to, and compliance with, international
treaties in the fields of human rights, disarmament,
trade and environmental protection, as well as our
support for the International Criminal Court translate
this philosophy into practical commitments.

The second point is that, while the United
Nations needs to apply a broad concept of security, the
Council should not be overburdened with tasks for
which it is ill-equipped. A far better way to address the
multidimensional aspects of conflict is to find
meaningful arrangements for the division of labour
among those who, in one way or another, have
comparative advantages in dealing with a given
complex situation.

The Secretariat has gone a long way to facilitate
cross-sectoral communication and cooperation within
the United Nations. In that context, I recall the
establishment of the Executive Committees, notably
the Executive Committee on Peace and Security.
Progress towards a coherent and coordinated United
Nations system response in transition situations has
been made under the leadership of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund,
through the joint work of the United Nations
Development Group (UNDG) and the Executive
Committee on Humanitarian Assistance (ECHA).
Important lessons can also be learned from the
Integrated Mission Task Force established in the
context of Afghanistan, following up on a
recommendation in the landmark Brahimi report on
peacekeeping (S/2000/809).

In the specific case of justice and the rule of law,
we realize that the United Nations, including various
parts of the Secretariat and specialized agencies, funds
and programmes, have by now accumulated
considerable know-how. We await with great
anticipation the Secretary-General's report on justice
and the rule of law and any suggestions as to how this
know-how can be translated into more coherent action.

Building on experiences with the Security
Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, and the Economic
and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on
African countries emerging from conflict, possible
arrangements for more intensive cooperation between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council could be explored.

Last but not least, meaningful cooperation
between the United Nations and regional arrangements
has proven, in very recent experiences gained in West
Africa, the Caribbean and the Balkans among others, to
be an effective way to respond to complex crises. In
that context, we welcome the fact that the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union had its inaugural
meeting only three days ago, and we encourage that
body to live up to the words of its Chair, Nigeria's
