Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
conveying the warmest greetings of the newly elected
Government of Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia and
the people of Bangladesh to you, Sir, your Government
and the friendly people of Jamaica. We are indeed
happy to see you presiding over our deliberations and
know that we shall benefit from your guidance and
wisdom.

I take this opportunity to add our voice to the
expressions of deep shock and anguish over the crash
of the American Airlines flight in New York and to
offer our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved
families.

The dastardly attacks of 11 September devastated
us all. The enormity of the human tragedy has been
simply overwhelming. These attacks have been deeply
imprinted on our consciousness. People from more than
80 countries, including many from my country,
Bangladesh, perished in the carnage. It was indeed an
attack on us all. We unequivocally condemn these acts
of Violence and express our total solidarity with the
Government and people of the United States. We stand
united with the international community and are part of
the international coalition in taking action against the
perpetrators of such crimes.

This meeting at the ministerial level is a
reflection of the common resolve and determination of
the Council to confront and combat terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomever
committed. Terrorism poses a threat to international
peace and security, as well as to global economic
stability. In the context of this ominous development,
an additional responsibility of a vital dimension has
accrued to the Council. The international community
has unambiguously recognized the role that this
Council, and indeed the United Nations as a whole,
must play at this critical time. What is more important
now is to understand the impact of the attacks on the
evolution of international relations in the long run, both
politically and economically.

Clearly, the global situation has undergone a
radical transformation in the wake of 11 September. In
this context, it has become all the more necessary for
the Council to play its role in a balanced, creative and
proactive manner, in line with its Charter obligations.
While the Council must authorize action against the
perpetrators, it should define the parameters of such
actions in such a way that innocent people do not have
to pay for the crimes of others. At the same time, the
Council must put in place a set of preventive measures
so that terrorism finds no climate in which to grow or
flourish.

These are daunting tasks before the Council.
Nonetheless, since this is a global problem, we need to
develop a global, multidimensional, inclusive and long-
term comprehensive approach that also takes into
account the wider connotations of the problem. It is
also critically important that we allow the Member
States to contribute to international efforts to combat
terrorism in accordance with their capacity.

Bangladesh's position on terrorism is clear and
consistent. We have always sought to fulfil our
international responsibilities in this regard. Apart from
expressing our political commitment, we have initiated
steps at our national level to fulfil our obligations, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) of 28 September 2001. In this connection, we
are happy to note that cognizance has been taken of the
need to provide international support, assistance and
expertise for implementing the relevant resolutions, as
emphasized by the counter-terrorism Committee.

It might be worthwhile to mention here that
Bangladesh is examining the United Nations anti-
terrorism conventions with a View to becoming a party
to some of them soon. We shall actively contribute in
the adoption of a comprehensive convention on
terrorism. In our own region, we have already adopted
the 1987 South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC) Regional Convention on
Suppression of Terrorism. This instrument provides a
framework for greater coordination and cooperation
among SAARC members in implementing resolution
1373 (2001). We hope that our effort to reinvigorate the
SAARC process will accelerate such a process.

In our common struggle against international
terrorism, it is extremely important that the Security
Council remain united and effective. In order to
achieve this objective, perhaps a mechanism could be
explored to coordinate the work of the Council with
that of the General Assembly in this important area. A
great degree of international solidarity has already
emerged to combat terrorism. We must try to retain and
strengthen this spirit of cooperation.

Bangladesh supports actions to bring the
perpetrators to justice. At the same time, we feel that it
is equally important to ensure that the interests and
well-being of innocent civilian populations are
protected in pursuing that objective, consistent with the
existing practice of protecting the interests of civilians
in conflict situations. We strongly urge the Council to
remain alert to this issue and to address it with care and
compassion.

In conclusion, let me state that we have full faith
in the ability of the international community to address
this new challenge and Bangladesh remains committed
to stand by the international efforts to combat
terrorism. In this context, Bangladesh supports the
adoption of the draft resolution before us today.

