Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would like
to join previous speakers in thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this public meeting,
which, although it goes without saying, is a clear
demonstration of the Security Council's interest in the
issue of Bougainville. Allow me also to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Danilo Turk, for the very useful briefing he has
just given us regarding recent developments in the
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement.

My delegation welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the weapons disposal programme
despite delays in the initial timetable, particularly with
regard to the destruction of collected weapons. My
delegation also welcomes the transfer of police
functions from the central authorities to the
Bougainville Interim Provincial Government. That
represents a first step towards autonomy for the
province. We are particularly pleased to note that that
progress has been made possible thanks both to the
good will demonstrated by the parties and to the
important role played by the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville.

However, we believe that it would be wise to
emphasize the crucial importance of completing the
weapons disposal plan through the implementation of
stage III, which entails the destruction of those
weapons. I need not recall that that is the sine qua non
condition for the holding of a referendum leading to
the ultimate autonomy of the island. In that regard, we
urge all parties to redouble their efforts to implement
the Bougainville Peace Agreement. In particular, we
have in mind former combatants, whose reintegration
must be a priority in reaching a final and lasting
settlement of the dispute.

In the same vein, we remain convinced that the
economic recovery of the island can play a crucial role
in building peace. We therefore reiterate our appeal to
the donor community to mobilize an increased effort
towards Bougainville's economic and social
development.

In conclusion, my delegation supports the idea of
extending the mandate of the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville, as requested by Papua New
Guinea. We hope that the commendable efforts made
by the parties will be translated into the speedy
finalization of the peace process under way. In that
regard, we agree with Mr. Danilo Tiirk's proposal. We
congratulate him and encourage him in his work.

