Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): At the outset, the
Indonesian delegation would like to express its
appreciation for the note by the Secretary-General
(S/1996/509) transmitting the report of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), entitled "Report of
the investigation regarding the shooting down of two
U.S.-registered private civil aircraft by Cuban military
aircraft on 24 February 1996". The report was produced
following the Security Council's request, in paragraph 3
of the presidential statement of 27 February 1996, to
investigate the incident in its entirety. That statement also
called on the Governments concerned to cooperate fully
with the investigation. My delegation would also like to
commend the Council of the ICAO, as the specialized
intergovernmental body of the United Nations system
responsible for civil aviation, for its resolution.

During the previous discussion on the presidential
statement requesting the report, Indonesia expressed its
position of deep concern, and strongly deplored the
shooting down by the Cuban Air Force of the two aircraft
because it was incompatible with article 3 bis of the
Chicago Convention. However, the tenets of article 3 bis
of the Chicago Convention should be viewed in a
comprehensive manner, as they also encompass other
cardinal principles. Hence, we would like to recall that
article 3 bis (d) of the Chicago Convention states that,
inter alia,

"each contracting State shall take appropriate
measures to prohibit the deliberate use of any civil
aircraft registered in that State for any purpose
inconsistent with the aims of this Convention."

 

This principle should be strictly adhered to, for it is
our opinion that the misuse or misrepresentation of civilian
aircraft for other purposes prejudices the safety of
legitimate civilian aircraft. Accordingly, it is important to
ascertain the true purpose of the flights of 24 February
1996. It is essential that the sanctity of civilian aircraft be
preserved. In this regard, we are pleased to learn from the
United States Secretary of Transportation, Mr. Federico
Pefia, that the United States will take appropriate steps to
discourage exile pilots from entering Cuban airspace
without prior authorization.

Our delegation believes that it is the responsibility of
all States to avoid any actions that hinder the development
of legitimate civil aviation and the promotion of air safety
worldwide. In this regard, my delegation believes that the
safety of international aviation should be approached in a
constructive manner by the Security Council: rather than
condemning the action of one State, the Council should
underline the principles providing safe civil aviation
conditions, while respecting and promoting the sovereignty
of States over their territory, including their airspace. It is
my delegation's firm belief that the territorial integrity of a
State's airspace must be respected by other States, and that
repeated violations of the territorial airspace of Cuba by
civilian aircraft would indeed be a cause of concern for
Cuba.

It should be noted that more than 340 civil aircraft
overfly Cuban airspace daily without incident, and that
more than half of these are United States aircraft. Therefore
my delegation has reservations with regard to paragraph 6
of the draft resolution because it lacks the most elementary
objectivity by urging Cuba to abide by principles it has
always held. It is, indeed, intolerable that civil-registered
aircraft are used for purposes inconsistent with the
Convention on International Civil Aviation and go so far as
to violate the sovereignty of States and their airspace. We
therefore call upon all States, without exception, strictly to
abide by the principles, norms, rules and regulations
regarding international air navigation as laid down in the
Chicago Convention and its annexes, and in other
international instruments.

It is the view of the Indonesian delegation that the
Council's reaction should be expressed in a comprehensive
and balanced manner. Hence, the Security Council must be
assertive in ensuring that all parties are in compliance with
the Chicago Convention and its annexes in their entirety. It
is our firm belief that international law should be equally
applicable to all sovereign nations and not serve the
interpretations of one party. If the Council were to endorse
such a selective approach, this would only undermine the
credibility of international law. In the words of the world
Court, as reflected in the works of Professor Georg
Schwarzenberger, the rules of international law exist

"in order to regulate the relations between these
coexisting independent communities or with a view
to the achievement of common aims."

The incident of 24 February was thoroughly
deliberated in the Council of ICAO from 26 to 27 June
1996. Even after three months of investigation, the ICAO
team was unable to obtain conclusive evidence which
would enable it to determine the precise location of the
incident. Significant differences exist in the data provided
by the parties involved. Certain aspects require further
clarification. Having considered the above circumstances,
the Council of ICAO therefore found it difficult to
endorse the report of the investigation team. In this
regard, we must express our reservations over paragraph 1
of the draft resolution, since the Council of ICAO itself
did not endorse the report. Therefore, we deem it
inappropriate for the Security Council to endorse the
report at this juncture. Similarly, with regard to paragraph
2, the resolution of the Council of ICAO does not qualify
the incident of 24 February 1996.

Moreover, our delegation is of the View that the draft
resolution could be improved in order to have a balanced
text. Among other elements which create difficulties for
my delegation is the request to only one party to comply
with the relevant resolutions and international civil
aviation law, contained in the second part of paragraph 6.
We feel that no one party should be singled out. Efforts
have been made by various delegations, including the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus, to improve the draft
resolution. However, my delegation cannot but express its
disappointment that a number of proposed amendments
aimed at achieving a fair and balanced text were not
adequately considered.

It is our firm belief that the responsibility of the
Security Council and ICAO is to prevent the recurrence
of such incidents in the future. In this regard, it is
imperative that all States honour their obligations under
the Chicago Convention and its annexes in their entirety.
In this context, operative paragraph 9 of the resolution
adopted by the Council of ICAO on 27 June 1996 is of
paramount importance because it

"requests all Contracting States to report at any time
to the Council any infraction of the above-mentioned

 

rules contained in the Convention on International
Civil Aviation".

We believe that ICAO, as the competent body, will in
turn immediately adopt appropriate measures that should
prevent further violations of the adopted principles, rules,
standards and recommended practices. The ICAO must do
so to achieve the orderly and safe development of
international aviation, thus preventing the occurrence of
further incidents.

We regret the excessive use of force, which resulted
in the loss of human life. In this regard, my delegation
extends its sympathy to the families of the victims for their
loss. It is our sincere hope that such an incident will not
recur in the future. Therefore, my delegation would like to
reiterate its position that there is no justification for any
State to resort to the use of weapons against civil aircraft
in flight; no State must endanger the lives of persons on
board and the safety of the aircraft. Furthermore, all
available measures to prevent such an incident from
occurring, as well as standard procedures that guide aircraft
away from danger, must be followed.
As a matter of principle, the Indonesian position
condemns the use of weapons against civil aircraft, as such
use is clearly in violation of the rules of customary
international law, as codified in article 3 bis of the Chicago
Convention and ICAO provisions concerning interception
of civil aircraft. These rules must be respected by all
parties, regardless of whether or not such an aircraft is
within the territorial airspace of that State. The principle of
non-recourse to weapons against civil aircraft is indeed
reflected in paragraph 6 of the present draft resolution.

Based on these considerations, the Indonesian
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us today.

