Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Mr.
President, at the outset, on behalf of the delegation of
Qatar, the Chairman of the Ninth Islamic Summit of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC),
allow me to extend our sincere thanks for your prompt
response to my Government's response to hold this
important meeting in order to consider the tragic and
serious developments in the Palestinian territories.

The Security Council is meeting today at one of
the most critical stages of the Middle East peace
process. Israeli military aggression against the
Palestinian people, the targeting of the Chairman of its
National Authority, violation of the sanctity of his
headquarters, its bombardment, destruction and
occupation, and violation ofthe sanctity of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem are all blatant violations of all
international norms and instruments that could lead to
serious repercussions for international peace and
security. In this regard, Mr. President, I would like to
hold your Council fully responsible for the present
situation in the region.

Since that ominous visit by Mr. Sharon to the Al-
Aqsa Mosque, we have sought by all peaceful means
through the Council to put an end to these violations in
order to preserve security in the region. We have
warned of the repercussions of such actions. This was
actually reaffirmed by the Ministerial Committee of the
Ninth Islamic Summit at the Security Council on 27
November 2000.

When double standards are applied in Israel's
case, it is tantamount to giving that Government the
green light to do what it wishes. We are not questioning
intentions, but the Council's unity should not be upheld
at the expense of the blood of the Palestinian people
and its Chairman, Mr. Arafat.

The Israeli Government is wrong if it believes
that State terror practised against the Palestinian people
will ensure its security. That kind of logic runs counter
to the willingness to establish security and a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace, as expressed by all
Arab countries in the final document of the Arab
Summit issued in Beirut two days ago in response to
the initiative by His Royal Highness Crown Prince
Abdullah ibn Abdul-Aziz Al Saud. This initiative
received a positive response and was supported by
different countries around the world. It was also
considered by the Secretary-General in his statement
before this Council as a historic step towards reaching
a peaceful settlement to the conflict in the Middle East.

This is how Israel responds to the good intentions
ofthe Arab Summit. This vicious attack runs counter to
international legitimacy - the legitimacy that was
asserted by this Council in resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). This legitimacy should bring security to
Israel - security that the generals in the Israeli
Government have failed to achieve for over 50 years.
In this regard, we would like to address the wise
amongst the Israeli people to use reason and good logic
in order to save the region from more bloodshed on
both sides. Violence can only generate counter-
violence.

The Security Council is called on to adopt
effective resolutions that will preserve international
security, since the region where we live is extremely
important to all States. This fact is known to all. Any
breach of security in the region would consequently
affect the security of the whole world. Therefore, on
behalf of the delegation of Qatar, Chairman of the
Ninth Islamic Conference of the OIC, I would like to
appeal to the Security Council to take the necessary
measures to secure the following: first, the immediate
withdrawal by all Israeli forces from the territories
under the Palestinian Authority; secondly, the
unconditional return to the negotiating table and
immediate implementation of all agreements reached
before, with a View to putting an end to Israeli
occupation of all occupied Arab territories; and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

