Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): My delegation
thanks Mr. Roed-Larsen for his comprehensive and
very thorough briefing. Unfortunately, the tone of
today's briefing was quite different from others in the
past, reflecting a deteriorating situation as compared to
that of July and August, in which he described the
situation as fragile but nonetheless offering a revival of
the peace process based on the Quartet's road map,
which opened a window of opportunity to peace after
more than 1,000 days of bloodshed.

Some important developments substantiated the
conscious optimism then expressed by Mr. Roed-
Larsen. First, the talks held at the end of July between
President Bush and the Palestinian and Israeli Prime
Ministers on the road map's implementation were seen
as reflecting the United States Government's
commitment to the process. Secondly, the support
expressed by the Quartet members for the policy of the
Palestinian Government, headed by then Prime
Minister Mahmoud Abbas, and the recognition of the
existence of external conditions for achieving a
breakthrough towards the settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict were assurances of the international
community's commitment to the process. Thirdly, the
declaration of the Israeli Prime Minister that Israel was
ready to make the necessary concessions in order to
advance the peace process were fundamental
reassurances that things could move forward in the
right direction. Fourthly, the far-reaching reforms
initiated by the Palestinian Authority, as demanded by
the international community and by the Israeli
authorities - especially the ceasefire that the
Palestinian Prime Minister was able to put into effect
as a prerequisite to start implementing the tasks of the
road map - were very important elements that gave
additional confidence to the process and its launching.

Finally, the meetings that were taking place
regularly between Israelis and Palestinians and the
discussions they were holding on outstanding issues
brought renewed hope for the creation of a climate
conducive to the building of confidence between the
parties for the improvement of relations between
Israelis and Palestinians and to a meaningful peace
process.
Angola regrets the fact that we are back in the
cycle of violence. What went wrong? Why, once again,
did things fail and the cycle of violence and revenge
take hold? How can the serious doubts about the
possibility of reviving the peace process be overcome?
How can bloodshed be ended so as to realize the vision
of the two peoples living in peace and security side by
side? Those are a few questions that the Palestinians,
the Israelis and the international community must
answer in order to devise new ways to put things back
on the right track and to renew efforts conducive to
solutions to the immense crisis that the region is again
facing.

At the present juncture, the Palestinians and the
Israelis are faced with dramatic choices and no choice
at all with respect to the road of peace. It seems to us
that, from the Israeli side, the choices are made and, if
implemented, could lead to even greater damage to the
whole peace process and to the road map. The avowed
intention of the Israeli authorities to kill or ban the
Palestinian President is inserted in the same logic as
the construction of the separation wall - to cause
immediate harm to Israeli-Palestinian relations.

In the view of the Angolan delegation, the will of
Palestinians and Israelis to strive for peace and
conviviality between the two peoples will need, more
than ever, the assistance of the international community
in order to overcome the very difficult times ahead.
Such assistance must also focus on helping the
Palestinian Government to curb destructive actions by
armed groups. The international community must
mobilize all its efforts to ensure that the Israeli plans
concerning President Yasir Arafat do not go ahead. The
Security Council must take a clear stand on this issue.
The United States and other members of the Quartet
must make Israel understand that its intentions are an
extremely dangerous step of incalculable
consequences.

Finally, it is our view that the Quartet should
deploy bold efforts in order to try to revive the peace
process. We look forward to the meeting to be held in
New York at the end of this month, as indicated by Mr.
Larsen.

We agree also with Mr. Larsen when he says that
the parties have no other alternative than to
recommit- and I would say convincingly - to the
road map. The international community cannot stand
idle before the great tragedy that is unfolding
dangerously in the Middle East.

