Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Given the lateness of
the hour, I will be very brief. I would like to take this
opportunity, on behalf of my delegation, to congratulate
the People's Republic of China on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July and to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
today's important open debate on the topic "Peace
and security in Africa: enhancing African capacities
in the areas of peace and security". I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for the very valuable
contribution he made this morning at the start of the
debate. We would also like to express our appreciation
for the briefing by the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union.

Botswana aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Botswana welcomes this open debate focused
on peace and security challenges in Africa, the most
conflict-prone continent in the world. It is our ardent
hope that today's discussion will enable us to find
solutions to the existing, new and emerging challenges
to peace and security in Africa. In that regard, we
urge the international community to assist African
Member States, the African Union and Africa's
regional economic communities in dealing with those
challenges, particularly the rise of terrorism and the
proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons.

Africa needs financial and technical assistance
and capacity-building if it is to enhance its capacities
in the areas of peace and security. This is crucial
to developing human capital and national legal
frameworks, policies and action plans for promoting
peace and security, particularly with regard to the
acquisition and management of weapons and small
arms. African capacities can also be strengthened
through institutional cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations, as well as strategic
partnerships with other actors actively involved in this
area, such as your own country, Mr. President.

Botswana welcomes the commitment by African
leaders to silencing the guns by 2020, in accordance
with the African Union's Agenda 2063 and the 2016
Lusaka road map. Until Africa addresses its peace
and security challenges, its sustainable development
will continue to be elusive. As the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development rightly notes, "There can
be no sustainable development without peace and no
peace without sustainable development." Conflict
prevention and resolution are therefore critical to
sustainable development and durable peace. Poverty
is identified as one of the root causes of conflict and
instability, reinforcing the importance of the nexus of
development and security. Promoting economic and
social development enhances national, regional and
global peace and security.

Botswana commends China for the capacity-
building and technical-training programmes that
it has provided to African countries over the years
through the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. We
also acknowledge with appreciation the contribution
that China makes to enhancing African capacities in
diplomacy, peacekeeping, civilian protection, logistical
support, joint military exercises and training, counter-
terrorism and counter-piracy. Lastly, China also
contributes troops, police, experts and funding in
support of peacekeeping missions in Africa, for which
we are deeply grateful.

