The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Michel Sidibe, Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, to participate in this meeting.

It is so decided.

I wish to welcome warmly the Secretary-General,
the President of Nigeria, the Deputy President of South
Africa and the other distinguished guests who are
participating in today's meeting. Their presence is an
indication of the importance of the issue to be
discussed.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20ll/34l, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Bosnia and Herzegovina,
France, Gabon, Germany, Nigeria, Portugal, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

I also draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2011/340, which contains a letter dated
6 June 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
Gabon addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.

The HIV/AIDS pandemic, which affects all
persons without discrimination, has deprived several
countries of the human resources crucial to their
development. The instability and armed conflicts that
are rife in Africa in particular have brought to light the
impact of HIV/AIDS on international security.

It will be recalled that on 17 July 2000, the
Security Council, at the initiative of the United States
of America, adopted resolution 1308 (2000). Gabon,
2

which had just ended a term on the Council, had
supported its preparation. Resolution 1308 (2000)
underscored the threat posed by the disease to the staff
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. Conflicts
expose the issue of sexual violence that some
combatants use as a weapon of war and that is a
compounding factor.

The debate that brings us together today is
intended to consider the progress made since the
adoption of resolution 1308 (2000). We must thus go
further by adopting measures to protect civilian
populations from such violence. The draft resolution
submitted by my delegation and co-sponsored by
Bosnia and Herzegovina, France, Germany, Nigeria,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America is
part of that approach, and I thank the Council and those
delegations for their support.

I will now make a statement in my national
capacity.

As we know, starting tomorrow, the General
Assembly will hold a high-level meeting
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS
(General Assembly resolution S-26/2). Also 10 years
ago, the Security Council took an historic step in
adopting resolution 1308 (2000), on the impact of
HIV/AIDS on international peace and security.

It seemed to us timely for the Council to
reconsider the issue in the light of the developing
dynamic of the current crises and conflicts and the
peacebuilding process. Here, we should commend the
commitment of the United States, which enabled the
Council to adopt resolution 1308 (2000).

Since then, thanks to the efforts made
individually or jointly by the troop-contributing
countries, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, progress has been made in training the
civilian and military staff of United Nations missions
prior to their deployment to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions.

That concern is now fully taken into account in
those missions. That positive development is reflected
in the implementation of prevention programmes; joint
actions between mission staff and the security forces
and local communities in the countries involved; a
11-3654]
greater awareness among mission personnel of their
individual and collective criminal accountability; and
the establishment of codes of good conduct for mission
staff and personnel on the ground.

Today's meeting offers us the opportunity to take
stock of future challenges as the HIV/AIDS pandemic
remains an obstacle to the development of our
countries and a threat to collective security. New
factors continue to influence the dynamics of crises,
conflicts and peacebuilding processes. That is
particularly true in sub-Saharan Africa.

Our first concern arises from the borderline and
regional nature of conflicts. In almost all cases, crises
unleash population movements and thereby increase
the risk of spreading HIV/AIDS among displaced
persons and refugees, who frequently have no access to
health services during their migrations. Such risks are
particularly apparent in the post-conflict phase.

For some years now, Gabon has hosted numerous
refugees from conflict countries and can testify to the
effects of such migratory movements on the stability
and security of the host country. Indeed, sexual
violence is frequently used as a weapon of war, with
disastrous consequences. Given the established link
between sexual violence and HIV/AIDS in conflict and

post-conflict situations, civil populations -
particularly women and girls - are the first to be
exposed.

I should like here to make certain
recommendations. In the light of the compounding
factors that I have enumerated, I invite the Council to
continue to consider the issue of the impact of
HIV/AIDS on international peace and security.

With respect to sexual violence, I stress the
importance of continuing to implement resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), given that
the need to counter such violence, particularly towards
women and children, is an important aspect of the
processes involved in resolving conflicts and building
peace. Such action allows their full involvement in
these processes. To that end, it is desirable to create
synergy between policies to combat HIV/AIDS and
strategies to prevent sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations. I take this opportunity to invite
the international financial institutions, in cooperation
with States, to mobilize further resources to build the
capacities of national health systems in order to ensure
11-36541
that persons who are infected with or affected by
HIV/AIDS enjoy adequate care and assistance.

On the ground, we must raise awareness of the
parties to conflict regarding conduct towards civilian
populations in armed conflicts that may exacerbate the
spread of HIV/AIDS. It is also important to ensure the
operationality of the HIV/AIDS prevention and
treatment component in security sector reform
activities and in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration mechanisms at the post-conflict stage.
Finally, we must also strengthen programmes to
combat HIV/AIDS in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions, and continue to ensure the effectiveness of
zero tolerance measures.

We hope that the draft resolution to be adopted
shortly will reflect the Council's commitment to
making a complementary and decisive contribution to
global efforts to combat HIV/AIDS. The human
security of present and future generations will depend
on our collective ability permanently to remove the
threat inherent in the pandemic.

I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Gabon, Germany, India,
Lebanon, Nigeria, Portugal, Russian Federation,
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and United States of
America.

The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1983 (2011).

I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.


