Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Director of The Liaison Office for their briefings.
Chile commends the President's initiative in organizing
today's meeting, which we consider particularly timely
since it coincides with the commemoration of World
Humanitarian Day.

The protection of humanitarian workers in areas
of conflict is a crucial matter that deserves the full
consideration of the Security Council. In fact, 15 years
after this body began to address the issue, while armed
intra-State conflicts have proliferated, there has also
been an increase in the number of deliberate attacks on
humanitarian workers, as well as their abduction and
even death in the danger zones where they are deployed.
That includes personnel of the United Nations and its
associated agencies and affiliates involved in providing
humanitarian assistance. According to the report
published today by the Aid Worker Security Database,
there has been a 66 per cent increase in the number of
victims with respect to the figures for last year.

States and non-State actors must comply with the
international humanitarian standards enshrined in the
Geneva Conventions of 1949, the Protocols additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 1977 and 2005 and
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 1994. It is imperative to ensure
the conditions for humanitarian agencies to carry out
their work in accordance with humanitarian principles.

We strongly condemn attacks on humanitarian
workers, who perform the task of providing assistance
to civilians in armed conflicts, including women and
children, in extremely difficult situations. In places such
as Afghanistan, the Syrian Arab Republic, South Sudan,
the Sudan, Somalia, Mali and, recently, Gaza, among
others, it would seem that attacks on humanitarian staff
are par for the course. Such acts may constitute war
crimes, and their perpetrators must be investigated
and punished in order to prevent impunity. The host
Government must assume the primary responsibility
for the security and protection of humanitarian
workers and ensure national accountability processes,
impartial investigations, fair trials and the effective
fulfilment of sentences. If that is not the case, where
appropriate, there should be recourse to complementary
international judicial bodies, such as the International
Criminal Court.

The development of mandates for peacekeeping
operations must be appropriate in order to deal
with threats to the security and stability of those
countries, including the due protection of the civilian
population and of those who carry out humanitarian
tasks. We believe the significant number of mandates
for peacekeeping operations that contain an explicit
reference to the protection of civilians to be progress.
It is crucially important that peacekeeping missions
have the necessary resources to ensure compliance with
their mandates in that regard. During our recent trip to
South Sudan, where we visited the area of Malakal, we
witnessed on the ground the vital work that the United
Nations undertakes in that regard.

In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to all
humanitarian workers of the United Nations and its
agencies, as well as its implementing partners, who
carry out their work in the toughest conditions, and to
those who have lost their lives in fulfilling their duties.
We recall with respect and admiration the work done by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Sergio Vieira de Mello, who, together with another
21 United Nations officials, fell victim to a terrorist
attack in Baghdad in 2003. Finally, in particular, we
remember the 11 officials of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East who lost their lives as a result ofmilitary operations
in the Gaza Strip, underscoring their courage and
commitment.

