Lieutenant General Nyamvumba: I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to address
2

the Security Council on the protection of civilians in a
non-permissive environment. Today, I will discuss
issues of the operational environment, experience and
strategic approach and efforts of the African Union-
United Nations Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) in
implementing its mandate vis-a-vis the protection of
civilians. I will first briefly talk about Darfur's
non-permissive environment and UNAMID's
protection of civilians strategy. I will then discuss the
efforts UNAMID has made to provide protection to
civilians. Finally, I will talk about the challenges of the
issue under discussion.

Let me begin with the operational environment of
Darfur. Suffice it to say that the environment across the
length and breadth of Darfur is indeed non-permissive.
It is a large area with harsh climatic conditions, a lack
of adequate roads and infrastructure, and limited local
resources. Darfur is huge and mostly without minimum
infrastructure facilities, which creates considerable
barriers to reaching populations at risk and in need.
The poor state of the roads often delays movement and
restricts operational activities, especially during the
rainy season, from June to October.

Besides this, the non-permissive environment for
the protection of civilians in Darfur is also a result of
localized armed clashes between the Government of
the Sudan and belligerent groups, as well as localized
tribal conflicts and clashes, usually over natural
resources. Other factors include organized banditry, the
widespread availability of small arms, sexual violence,
child recruitment, and arbitrary arrests and detention.

In some areas, we have seen that due to the
localized fighting between the Government of the
Sudan and armed groups, UNAMID's movements, both
on land and in the air, have sometimes been restricted
by warring factions that unquestionably impede our
efforts to protect civilians. Additionally, in the absence
of any definite peace agreement or ceasefire between
all the belligerents in Darfur, the conflict continues,
resulting in the Government of the Sudan and the
armed groups again restricting access to those areas; in
an insecure environment for humanitarian components;
and in the further suffering of the inhabitants. With
diverse interest groups and stakeholders involved, the
security situation remains volatile, and inter-factional
or tribal conflicts continue to occur between all these
warring parties.
11-43235

Ultimately, the protection of the people of Darfur
is dependent on the readiness and capacity of the
Government of the Sudan to carry out its sovereign
responsibility to protect its citizens. Accordingly,
UNAMID's protection strategy, inter alia, identifies
specific objectives and tasks to engage with and assist
the Government of the Sudan in fulfilling its protection
responsibilities in accordance with international human
rights law. Our protection strategy at UNAMID is
based on UNAMID's protection of civilians mandate,
as issued under resolutions 1769 (2007), 1828 (2008)
and 1935 (2010), and the communique of the seventy-
ninth meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council. The mandated tasks are to protect civilians
across Darfur and to ensure safe, timely and
unhindered humanitarian access, the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and the protection
of humanitarian convoys.

UNAMID's protection of civilians strategy was
prepared in full consultation with the United Nations
country team. It is both built on and helps to guide the
UNAMID/United Nations country team's integrated
strategic framework; the United Nations Sudan
humanitarian work plan; the UNAMID protection of
civilians mission directive; the UNAMID Force
Commander's directive; and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations/Department of Field Services
operational concept on the protection of civilians in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In keeping
with its strategic roles and responsibilities, UNAMID
has developed a situational awareness and early
warning system. It also monitors, reports and evaluates
incidents and conducts operational planning and
implementation, coordination, communications and
public information.

In the light of its mandate, and based on analysis
of the protection environment in Darfur, the UNAMID
strategy outlines four main objectives, which are, first,
to ensure the fulfilment by the Government, armed
groups and other non-State actors of their
responsibility to protect civilians, in accordance with
international human rights and humanitarian law;
secondly, to protect civilians from physical acts of
violence; thirdly, to ensure freedom of access to the
populations at risk; and lastly, to prevent violations of
human rights and ensure effective response,
particularly with regard to women and children.

I shall now turn more specifically to our activities
with regard to the protection of civilians. Despite the
11-43235

many obstacles in our operational environment,
UNAMID has been relentless in its efforts to launch
several initiatives aimed at improving its protection of
civilians. We have maintained a more robust presence
throughout Darfur, particularly in areas where fighting
has affected civilian communities. We have improved
the Mission's early warning and early response
mechanism by issuing weekly analytical protection of
civilian reports, in addition to conducting weekly civil-
military coordination meetings.

We have significantly increased our patrol
activities to include robust patrolling in various
villages by day and night; protecting internally
displaced person (IDP) camps; protecting
marketplaces; assisting disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes; and providing
humanitarian, logistics and administrative escorts.
UNAMID's military, along with other components of
the Mission, has already established a broader footprint
across Darfur. In 2010, UNAMID's military conducted
a total of 33,963 patrols; by contrast, in the first six
months of 2011, the number has already reached
23,554. This is clearly a marked improvement, which
signals our increased effort to protect innocent
civilians. UNAMID has been able to assist in
stabilizing team sites in Shangil Tobaya, Khor Abeche,
Hamidiya, Hassa Hissa and Kalma camps.

UNAMID has facilitated access for humanitarian
actors to deliver assistance, including in Jebel Marra
and Jebel Moon. In the case of Jebel Marra, we are
actively seeking to establish a temporary operating
base in Feina as a humanitarian hub for outreach to
other locations in the area. In all of these areas, there
has been a significant improvement in the security
situation, and as a result significant numbers of
IDPs- approximately 1,500 per month since
January- have started returning to their homes. We
have assisted in the movement of families within
Sector North and the resettlement of returnees from
Chad in Sector West. The Mission has been involved in
settling disputes over farms and water among nomads,
and tribal clashes.

In May and June, UNAMID, in collaboration
with the humanitarian country team, initiated efforts to
reach out and deliver relief assistance to areas that had
not been accessed before.

The quick-impact projects have also provided
dividends in terms of delivering on various needs of
3
the populations. The exercise code-named Operation
Spring Basket has been conceptualized within the
framework of the UNAMID strategy on the protection
of civilians as a means of improving the delivery of
humanitarian relief through the expansion of access to
hard-to-reach areas and to more people in need.

Following the negotiations held with the
Government of the Sudan and the armed movements,
Operation Spring Basket commenced on 1 May with a
total of nine assessment missions, completed during
the months of May and June 2011. The missions have
been able to deliver a limited supply of vaccinations
for women and children, as well as educational and
shelter materials for a girls' school in Northern Darfur.

Protection is indeed a joint effort by UNAMID
and the humanitarian community. However, that
community is culturally independent and has its own
schedule and priorities, and at times it is not
comfortable delivering aid with the military involved.
Organizationally, while the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is charged with coordination,
it has no authority, incentives or penalties to increase
participation by the United Nations family or non-
governmental organizations.

UNAMID has provided escorts as well as
corridors for the delivery of humanitarian services,
including those related to food, water, hygiene,
vaccination and shelter. Some of those activities have
succeeded in curtailing maternal deaths and reducing
the infant mortality rate. The HIV/AIDS Unit is also
working with the UNAMID military, police and
civilian components to build the capacity of mission
personnel on matters related to the integration of
HIV/AIDS into their various activities. Since January
2011, the UNAMID HIV/AIDS Unit has provided
valuable services to more than 1,000 ex-combatants
demobilized in different parts of Darfur. The third
phase, planned for July and August 2011, is expected to
continue with a stronger and larger focus on the actual
delivery of humanitarian relief.

Our efforts with regard to the protection of
civilians also face different challenges. The first and
foremost is that in the absence of a comprehensive,
inclusive and legitimate ceasefire by all armed
movements, the security of civilians remains a major
concern. It is to be noted that on many occasions
UNAMID has been prevented from having access to
certain areas because of fighting, which continues to
create challenges for the protection of civilians. Other
challenges include the fact that peacekeepers have also
been targeted, with seven of them killed in 2010 and
2011.

Finally, poor training and ill-equipped troop-
contributing countries have been identified as one of
the major setbacks affecting efficiency concerning the
protection of civilians in Darfur. It is indeed
unfortunate that, in spite of deliberate orders, some
troop-contributing countries have failed to act in
accordance with the training focus for the Mission
mandate.

I have provided here a flavour of the strategies on
the protection of civilians and the guidelines of
UNAMID and have outlined the realities on ground.
Against that backdrop, I have highlighted our efforts
and activities aimed at improving human lives.
Protection of civilians in Darfur is definitely a
demanding and arduous job. However, our
determination and efforts will be sustained. We shall
continuously strive to overcome the challenges by
whatever means are available to us, and we shall
continue to count on the support of the Security
Council.

