Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Permit me first to convey to you, Mr. President,
my respectful greetings and the most sincere
congratulations of my delegation on the manner in which
you are conducting the work of the Security Council
during November.

Once again the situation in Haiti requires us to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH). We agree with the
Secretary-General that ending the United Nations presence
in Haiti in the present circumstances could mean the loss,
or a threatened reduction, of the investment which the
international community has been making in Haiti's
political institutions throughout this decade.

We understand, however, the hesitation of some
members of the Council over renewing the mandate. For
various reasons, it has been extended for longer than was
originally foreseen. At the same time, we request those
delegations to understand the particular significance of
maintaining the rule of law and democratic institutions in
the Latin American and Caribbean region. The concepts
of international peace and security should be interpreted
with that understanding and in that context. The Security
Council has shown on a number of occasions that it is
sufficiently sensitive to accommodate the specific needs
of each region, and we hope that this will also be the case
now.

It is up to the Government of Haiti to understand
fully its responsibilities in the current difficult
circumstances. The Haitian leadership must show its
recognition of the international community's efforts by
taking concrete action aimed at resolving the political
crisis in that country.

Argentina, for its part, remains firmly committed to
the consolidation of Haitian political institutions through
its participation in MIPONUH, to which it contributes
civilian police in both the special police unit and the
civilian police element.

 

Lastly, I wish to thank the Secretary-General, and
particularly his Representative in Haiti, Mr. Julian Harston,
and the officials serving with him for the professional
competence they constantly demonstrate in carrying out
their functions.

