Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
We are grateful to the Republic of Korea and to you, Sir,
for having convened this timely debate, which is taking
place at a time when humanitarian concerns resulting from
recent crises are growing increasingly acute.

Mr. President, you have convened this meeting to
discuss the item entitled "Protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations".
As you defined the item, and as the Council agreed, the
purpose of our deliberations is very precise: it relates to
protection for humanitarian assistance, not to the far more
general problem of protection for the refugees or
displaced persons themselves, or the establishment and
protection of security zones, or, even more generally, the
question of the political settlement of conflict situations.

As I said, our purpose is precise: it is to discuss
protection for humanitarian assistance. I shall therefore
focus on this in my statement. I know that many other
speakers will speak more broadly and will address the
entire question of protection for refugees, but it seems to
me that this specific item is of sufficient seriousness to
justify our attention to it.

We are speaking of civilians, who, as other speakers
have noted, have become the primary victims of current
conflicts, whether they be between or within States. These
completely destitute people are forced to leave their
homes and seek refuge elsewhere, either within their
countries or elsewhere; they depend on humanitarian
assistance, which cannot reach the victims unless it is
protected. The international community has the capacity
and could have the will to provide assistance to these
populations in distress. The work of the United Nations,
the Security Council, the United Nations agencies, in
particular the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Food
Programme (WFP), the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), and non-governmental organizations
has usually made it possible to mobilize the resources
necessary to provide this humanitarian assistance.

The main problem, however, lies in the obstacles
impeding the work of these agencies and organizations:
denial of access; looting, or the threat of looting, by
armed elements; and direct attacks on personnel that often
prevent humanitarian aid from reaching the people in
distress. We know that UNICEF officials have recently
been victims of direct attacks.

What instruments are available to the Security
Council to deal with this type of situation? The first of
these instruments consists of the body of texts that
constitute international humanitarian law, a set of rules
established under existing conventions, to which the
representative of Egypt referred earlier, such as the
Geneva Convention of 1949 and that of 1941. Clearly, the
Security Council does resort to these instruments. It did

 

so recently with regard to displaced persons in eastern Zaire
in setting out the obligation of all interested parties to
comply strictly with the principles of international
humanitarian law.

Unfortunately, it is obvious, in particular with regard
to the most common cases - intra-State conflicts - that
merely appealing for compliance with international
humanitarian law carries little weight in encouraging
warring factions to guarantee free access for humanitarian
assistance to civilian populations. It is clearly necessary to
recall international humanitarian law, but reality forces us
to conclude that it is frequently flouted.

We must therefore draw the conclusions from this. We
must go much further than merely reminding people of
their contractual obligations, and we must remind the
leaders of the belligerent parties of their responsibilities -
though we should remind them in such a way that they will
feel the threat of sanctions. It must be known, and it must
be stated, that the leaders of belligerent parties may be held
accountable to international tribunals for any violation of
norms that they have committed or ordered. In this regard,
progress has been made in recent years - progress that
should be encouraged - since the Security Council
established the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia in 1992, and that for Rwanda in 1994.

We know that in the context of the work leading to
the establishment of a permanent international criminal
court, it is naturally envisaged that the Council may refer
matters to the court. We are seeing signs on the horizon
that the threat of sanctions may make belligerent parties
think again, and compel them to behave in a manner a little
more in conformity with the international norms that have
been agreed to but which, to date, have often been flouted.

Another course of action available to the Security
Council in trying to achieve compliance with conventional
norms, without recourse to force, is the imposition of
economic sanctions. The nature of current conflicts, in
particular those between militias - a term that refers to
forces not subject to governmental authorities - clearly
makes it difficult to use sanctions to compel the warring
parties to comply with international humanitarian law. On
the other hand, when States are parties to a conflict,
sanctions imposed by the Council may have a greater
effect. I believe that we saw a demonstration of this with
regard to the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, where the
sanctions established by the Security Council were such
that, without doubt, they compelled one of the parties to the
conflict to modify its position and to become more
receptive to humanitarian law. But in cases of intra-State
conflict - which are, unfortunately, more frequent -
more often than not economic sanctions take the form of
a threat that may be imposed, without an immediate effect
in such conflicts.

The seriousness of the humanitarian situations dealt
with by the Security Council demands urgent action and
prompts us to consider more drastic solutions. The means
to which I have referred, whether juridical or political,
jurisdictional or judicial, can only, in most cases, produce
results after a long period of time. For the immediate
term we should have recourse to a second type of
instrument - one of a military nature.

The urgent need to provide humanitarian assistance
may compel the Council to provide military protection. It
is for the Council to decide to deploy United Nations
forces or to authorize the dispatch of a multinational
force. This has been done. In the case of the crisis in the
former Yugoslavia, the Council expanded the mandate of
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) to
missions aimed at ensuring the safety of humanitarian aid
deliveries. More recently, in November 1996, it
authorized the dispatch of a multinational force designed
to facilitate and support the delivery of assistance to
refugees in the Kivu region. As we all know, this force
was not in the end deployed. France deplored that fact at
the time, and we warned of the consequences. Those
consequences are apparent today. They are overwhelming.
We are all aware of the direct testimony that the
representative of UNICEF gave to the Council a few
moments ago. Those revelations do not redound to the
honour of the United Nations or to the honour of the
Security Council, and I hope that they will be borne in
mind by everyone around this table. I repeat, we heard
the direct testimony of Mr. Lewis, the representative of
UNICEF.

More recently, the Council authorized the
establishment of a multinational protection force in
Albania, with a specific mandate and mission to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. This mandate is
precise because, when the question is one of resort to
force, which, I believe, the facts sometimes show to be
necessary, we have to be serious, rigorous and precise.
We must have a well-defined mandate, not envisage a
political solution that would mean a long-term operation.
We must be realistic. If we are thinking of seeking the
agreement of the parties, we must realize that those
parties may be tempted to refuse agreement, because, by
the very nature of their actions, they impede the delivery
of humanitarian aid. It must be borne in mind that the

 

parties may refuse. We must draw on the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and envisage recourse to
Chapter VII, as the representative of Egypt underlined
earlier.

We must also allow for the possibility of using force,
since we are talking about protecting, overcoming obstacles
and arriving at the goal: the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. That is the point of the debate that you,
Mr. President, have decided to hold. So, I repeat, and as the
representative of Egypt has just stated, we must define rules
of engagement based on legitimate self-defence, yes, but
which also permit the effective defence of those who
deliver humanitarian assistance.

The Security Council thus has at its disposal the
instruments by which to attain the goal we all have in
mind: the protection of humanitarian assistance in situations
where civilian populations are increasingly becoming both
pawns in and the principle victims of conflicts. These
instruments exist. What remains is simply to make them
more specific and to be very realistic in the way we use
them. But we need above all to have the will to make use
of them. In each case, the results depend on the human and
material resources made available to the United Nations by
its Member States. The results depend on the will of
Member States to attain the goals we establish in Security
Council resolutions.

From that standpoint, our experience in the former
Yugoslavia is very instructive. We know that in 1995 a
great upsurge of will on the part of the member States of
the Council was required in order to make the resolutions
we adopted fully effective, to ensure that the means we had
at our disposal were fully adequate to our needs, and,
finally, to attain the goal that was set.

The results depend on the resources made available to
the United Nations, on the will of States, and on the means
of influence each Member State disposes of to persuade the
parties - whom they sometimes know or with whom they
have established contact - directly and individually to
respect the principles laid down by the Security Council.

