Mr. Biaboroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation is grateful to you for
having taken this welcome initiative to organize a
debate on children and armed conflict in your dual
capacity as President of the Security Council for the
current month and as Chair of the Working Group of
the Council on children and armed conflict, established
by resolution 1612 (2005). I would also like to
congratulate Ms. Coomaraswamy for the work she has
done as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and thank her for her presentation on children
and armed conflict. I would like to assure her of my
delegation's cooperation in the exercise of her new
duties, and we realize how broad they are. Finally, we
thank Ms. Veneman, Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), for the
information she has made available to us. My
delegation would like to congratulate UNICEF as a
United Nations agency for the important role that it has
always played for children. My thanks also go to the
representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank.

Just one year after the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005), my delegation is happy to note the
progress that has been made in its implementation. We
were very interested to note the effective start of the
activities of the Working Group on children and armed
conflict, which has taken the form of producing
working documents. These include the terms of
reference, the work programme for 2006 and the
guidelines for the reports of the Secretary-General to
the Working Group. They also include the
establishment in a growing number of countries of
monitoring and reporting mechanisms relating to
children and armed conflict, the nomination of a new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the issuance of the
first report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict with reference to a specific country, in
this case the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Having been the theatre of successive civil wars
from 1993 to 2002, my country is aware of the heavy
debt paid by children who have been exposed to
insecurity and vulnerability, rape, pillaging, torture,
killings and consumption of drugs, among other things.
This is why my delegation welcomes all resolutions
adopted by the Security Council to protect children in
armed conflict, dating back to the 1949 Geneva
Conventions. The Council's commitment to this fight
since 1998 has been translated into various resolutions,
among them resolution 1612 (2005). Thanks to the
Council's action and the putting into place of various
forms of protection for children in armed conflict, this
is now an integral part of the United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

Many challenges remain, and today's debate
brings hope, because it bears witness to the universal
awareness of the urgency of implementing a
monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and
armed conflict through concerted action on the part of
the international community, with a view to attenuating
the consequences of war on children.

My delegation recognizes the overwhelming need
for the Council to move on to the application of its

decisions by adopting specific measures to protect
children in armed conflict. To this end, our efforts
could be based on the following areas. We could
examine information relating to the commitments made
and the progress accomplished to end the recruitment
and use of children and other Violations committed
against them in situations of armed conflict. We could
also strengthen United Nations humanitarian activities
and guarantee, in all circumstances, the safety of those
responsible for implementing the mechanism in the
field. Dialogue can be encouraged in the field between
parties to the conflict, in order to avoid possible
suspicion about the credibility of the mechanism and
the United Nations agencies in charge of its
implementation.

The mechanism should be gradually refined and
its reports should be part of a regular follow-up by the
Council. The fight against the impunity of those who
violate the rights of the child must be supported.
Stronger measures must be taken in the area of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Particularly with regard to children, it is essential to
ensure lasting integration by stressing education and
rehabilitation, especially psychosocial rehabilitation, of
former child soldiers. Cooperation between
international, regional and national organizations for
the protection of children affected by armed conflict
should be strengthened.

The direct role of the Security Council in the area
of the protection of children as part of its responsibility
to maintain international peace and security is now
well established. We must act in the better interests of
the child. From that point of View, the mechanism must
not simply be a system to produce documents but must
be a framework for the application of specific and
effective measures to help child soldiers who are
displaced, or refugees or victims of sexual violence or
any other form of Violence.

I would not want to conclude before expressing
some wishes of my delegation. The Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict should present, in a
reasonably short period, recommendations based on the
first report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2006/389). That country is preparing for its
first democratic elections after a long transitional
period and deserves sustained attention on the part of
the international community, in particular with regard
to the situation of children. My delegation would also
like affected States and Governments to continue to
benefit from international aid in their efforts to meet
their obligations in the area of the protection of
children in conflict or post-conflict situations. Also, the
international community should provide the necessary
resources to support the reintegration of children into
their original communities.

Finally, my delegation supports the draft
presidential statement on children and armed conflict
proposed by the French delegation.

