Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate,
and express our appreciation to the briefers for
their contributions.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, as well as with
the statement made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends on Children and Armed
Conflict, and would like to add the following remarks
in its national capacity.

Armed conflicts pose a wide range of challenges to
minors, increasing their vulnerability and putting them
at risk of recruitment, neglect, exploitation, trafficking,
sexual violence and abuse, as well as worsening the
risk of harmful practices such as early and forced
marriages. The issue is very high on the agenda of our
country, which attaches the greatest importance to the
protection of the rights of children in armed conflicts.
This was a top priority during our most recent term on
the Security Council, in 2017, and is currently at the
core of our mandate in the Human Rights Council.

Together with Belgium, we organized a seminar on
the protection of children in armed conflicts in Brussels
on 8 July to mark the seventieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions and the thirtieth anniversary of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. We endorsed
the Paris Principles on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers, being cognizant of the
crucial importance of mainstreaming these principles
into the wider peacekeeping agenda.

We were also among the first signatories to the
Oslo Safe Schools Declaration, as we value the key role
of education in promoting stable and peaceful societies
where children can feel safe to learn and become actors
of positive change. We have been devoting particular
efforts to the protection of schools ever since. In 2018,
we allocated more than 10 per cent of our humanitarian
budget to emergency interventions in the field of
education and school infrastructure.

We commend the relentless commitment of the
Secretariat and of Special Representative Gamba,
as well as the initiatives they promote in order to
protect children in conflict, such as the launch of
the Act to Protect campaign with the co-sponsorship
of the African Union and the European Union. We
are convinced that cooperation between regional and
subregional organizations is crucial in addressing this
problem, as recognized in resolution 2427 (2018).

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2019/509) and the
thorough analysis it provides. Huge efforts have been
carried out in mediation and peacebuilding, prevention
and protection, and for the release and reintegration of
children, including through dedicated child protection
advisers. There is now an important normative
framework in place and legal instruments to enforce
the law.

Yet, as the Secretary-General's report clearly
highlights, much work remains to be done. More
than 24,000 violations were verified by the United
Nations across 20 countries. Schools and hospitals
continue to be the unfortunate targets of indiscriminate
attacks, while children are arrested and detained upon
alleged association with armed and terrorist groups.
The changing nature of conflicts and their growing
complexity, their length and their urban nature are
disproportionally affecting children. The statistics on
those falling prey to traffickers, terrorist and armed
groups exemplify the need for cohesive and urgent
action by the international community.

Against that backdrop, we must ensure the full
implementation of our political commitments and
strengthen our efforts. We need to continue fostering
the widest adhesion by Member States to the relevant
international instruments, in particular the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflicts,
and promote their effective implementation and
enforcement. Our interventions should aim at providing
a child rights-based response to the problem, bearing
in mind the best interests of the children in all actions
concerning their lives and treating children separated
from armed groups as victims, consistent with
resolution 2427 (2018).

Prevention is key. We must engage in reintegration
programmes,includingpsychologicalsupportforvictims
and education and vocational training with special
regard to children with disabilities, as stressed by the
recently adopted resolution 2475 (2019). Accountability
at the national and international levels remains
fundamental. It is also important to continue promoting
educational and communicational programmes with a
view to raising public awareness on the centrality of
protecting children in armed conflicts, involving all
governmental and non-governmental actors.

Italy stands ready to face up to this challenge. We
are fully engaged and will continue to be committed,
in cooperation with the United Nations and the other
Member States, to increasing our common efforts
to curb this heinous phenomenon and help children
return to their childhoods within peaceful and
inclusive societies.

