The President: On behalf of the Council, I
should like to express gratitude and appreciation to all
the members of the Security Council mission, which
was very ably led by Ambassador Jones Parry, for the
manner in which they discharged their important
responsibility on behalf of the Council.

Let me say a few words before we finally end this
meeting, as the Philippines ends its presidency today
for the month of June. I would say that June has been a
hectic, albeit undoubtedly historic month for the
Security Council. June is historically a significant
month, with events taking place which shape nations
all over the world. We have, over the past month,
reached important milestones, for which the Security
Council can be proud.

Also, today we have reached the plateau of the
five thousandth meeting of the Security Council, on a
topic that deserves great attention from the
international community: West Africa. This milestone
proves that the Security Council has been an effective
instrument for the preservation of international peace
and security over more than five decades of work.

On behalf of my team, I would like to thank all
delegations for their cooperation and for their support
of the Philippine presidency. We have enjoyed their
camaraderie and friendship. Despite some difficulties
and some differences among us, we have recognized
and appreciated one common thread among all of us,
and that is that all delegations have the singular goal of
making the Security Council work. That predisposition
by everyone is refreshing and enriching and is the key
to making the Council effective.

I would also like to express my profoundest
gratitude to the members of the highly motivated and
energetic team of the Security Council Secretariat
Branch. We thank them for their boundless
understanding and patience. They are the oil that has
lubricated the smooth running of the Philippine
presidency. Our thanks also go to our interpreters for
their patience in navigating between the rhyme and the
reason of our interventions, and to our verbatim
reporters for their skill in separating what is chaff from
what is grain.

Finally, I cannot end without relating a tale,
taking up the theme of Sir Emyr's cockroaches. It may
be of some relevance in the Council. This is the story
of a precocious boy and his love of experiments. One
day the boy decided to perform an experiment. He got
the biggest and most robust frog, which he had
determined to be capable of leaping the farthest. First,
the boy cut off one front leg and then instructed the
frog to jump. It did. Next, he cut off the second front
leg. Again, he ordered the frog to leap, and it did. Then
he cut off one of the hind legs. He forthwith
commanded the frog to jump. The frog stumbled a bit,
but it was still able to make a short leap. Finally, the
boy severed the second hind leg. This time, when the
boy shouted at the frog to jump, it refused to leap in
any way. The boy even repeated the command several
times. Not even a feeble attempt to jump was elicited.
The young boy concluded that when you cut off the
four legs of a frog, it loses its sense of hearing. That
has threatened us in the Council.

I wish Ambassador Motoc and the Romanian
delegation all the best as they assume the presidency
tomorrow.

There are no further speakers. The Security
Council has thus concluded its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.15p.m.
