Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): First of all, I should like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We wish to thank you and the entire delegation
of Jordan for the excellent work done at the beginning
of the year. With your permission, Sir, I shall also take
this opportunity to convey the sincere congratulations
ofArmenia to the new members ofthe Security Council.

The theme of the debate is an issue that is at the
very heart of the Organization. It is enshrined in the
Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations and
should therefore be more systematically integrated
in the work of the Organization in order to prevent
conflicts and to create more stable societies around
the world. It is our strong conviction that solutions to
conflicts should impartially and fully address the root
causes of conflicts in order to prevent their resurgence
in future. While acknowledging that all conflicts differ
in their historical, legal and political background, we
should bear in mind the positive experiences of recent
examples of conflict resolution.

We completely agree with your review,
Mr. President, reflected in this debate's concept paper
(S/2014/30, annex), of the role of the United Nations
in forging deeper reconciliation among peoples based
on a shared narrative and memory of a troubled past.
That process often entails more than simply adopting
presidential statements and resolutions, visiting and
laying flowers at victims" memorials or signing
agreements or protocols and shaking hands. For it to
be lasting, reconciliation may require the settling
of the past and recognition and acceptance of the
responsibility for the crimes committed.

Among the many lessons learned from our
own tragedy - the Armenian genocide - we have
unfortunately learned that the reconciliation process
may be delayed for decades, or even generations.
As the first modern genocide perpetrated under the
cover of the First World War, it shows the extent to
which humankind can degrade itself in the absence
of an international system of security and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms. There is
nothing new in stating that ending impunity for heinous
mass atrocity crimes is vital for restoring justice and
normalcy. That is especially relevant to crimes and
conflicts driven by extreme nationalism or ideologies.
In 1939, just before the Nazi invasion of Poland, Adolf
Hitler told his generals,

"The aim of war is not to reach definite lines but to
annihilate the enemy physically. It is by that means
that we shall obtain the vital living space that we
need. Who today still speaks ofthe massacre ofthe
Armenians?"

We also learn from history that the scourge of war
and crimes of genocide repeat themselves cyclically with
frightening frequency in different parts of the world,
resulting in an enormous loss ofhuman lives and social,
political and regional unrest. It is up to every society
to address its past crimes, and my delegation believes
that international institutions, world parliaments,
human rights activists, political and religious leaders,
historians, teachers and students, as well as other
groups and individuals, also have a clear role to play in
establishing the true and common historical narrative.
As we noted when listening to members of the Council
and the other previous speakers, one question that could
be approached in this debate concerns the principles
and instruments for seeking the truth.

Still, experience has shown in different parts of the
world that for successful reconciled societies, nations
usually undergo an extensive process of restoring
justice, including reparations to victims and their heirs
so as to re-establish their national dignity and identity.

It is also imperative to speak with one voice against
the distortion of history, the denial of historical crimes
and negationism. The legacy of past violence and
human rights abuses must be addressed and a victim-
centred approach is required.

With respect to lessons learned, we are certain
that the prevention of conflicts and the development
of sufficient early-warning mechanisms are among
the most important tasks facing the international
community. It is also our duty to continually convey

a strong message of rejecting violence, de-escalating
crisis situations and honouring previous commitments.
In that respect, Armenia remains determined to
continue its incessant search for durable peace
exclusively through negotiations, the promotion of
confidence-building measures and the development of
good-neighbourly relations based on the recognition
of people's rights and their self-determination in the
volatile region of the South Caucasus.

For decades, the United Nations and regional
organizations have been involved in post-conflict
situations in which confidence-building has had to be
addressed in order to overcome enmity and mistrust
among those who must learn to live together again in
the same neighbourhood side by side. Today's debate is
an important step in that direction and we thank you,
Mr, President, for this timely initiative.

