Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June.

The delegation of Colombia expresses its
solidarity with the Afghan people, victims of the
endemic violence and religious extremism that have
undermined their basic rights. The Colombian people
too has endured violence generated by illegal armed
and violent groups that persist in sowing terror and
death in order to cause anarchy and prevent the
economic and social development to which all the
peoples of the world are entitled.

Colombia, which has been waging a relentless
war against illicit drugs and terrorism, notes with
particular concern that opium poppy cultivation in
Afghanistan reached such high levels in 2002. We
know first-hand the arduous task facing the Afghan
authorities in eradicating these illicit crops, since for
many years we have made major efforts and invested
hundreds of millions of dollars in eradicating these
crops from our country. In 2002, we succeeded in
reversing the upward trend in these crops, which for
the first time in history dropped by 30 per cent.

The international community recognizes the
global problem of drugs and related crime as one of the
most serious scourges on humanity today and as an
immense challenge. Along with the public health
problem that is caused by the consumption of illicit
drugs, with its tragic consequences for the family and
society, there is also the huge danger that this problem
poses to international security. Illicit drugs, money-
laundering and the illicit trafficking in arms are the
effective tripod of international crime. Actions to
confront this that have been taken by countries most
affected have proved inadequate when the entire
international community does not commit itself to
destroying every one of these elements through
international cooperation.

The global problems of drugs and terrorism are
increasingly inter-linked, since terrorist groups not
only avail themselves of the copious resources
generated by the growing demand for drugs, but also
participate directly in that perverse business. What has
happened in recent years in Afghanistan demonstrates
that. In fact, extremist groups have been strengthened
financially by the proceeds of the alarming expansion
of illicit cultivation in that country and the resulting
opium trafficking, mainly to Europe.

For that reason, we welcome the fact that today,
the Security Council will adopt a presidential statement
in which the links between these two problems are
acknowledged and the danger that these activities
represent for Afghanistan, its neighbours and the entire
world is highlighted. We also welcome the appeal made

to neighbouring countries and the international
community to intensify their cooperation with regard to
security and control of trafficking in drugs, their
precursors and related crimes such as money-
laundering. We acknowledge the work of the countries
that assisted Afghanistan in its struggle against drug
trafficking, and we stress the need to continue and
intensify that work. We join in the call to reduce the
world-wide consumption of these substances and to
offer Afghan farmers alternative development
programmes with markets open to their products.

The General Assembly and the Security Council
itself have repeatedly acknowledged the links between
international terrorism and drug trafficking. In the fight
against those serious phenomena, the international
community must resolutely shoulder its commitment,
in conformity with the principle of shared
responsibility. The global drug problem has
transcended the public health and police spheres,
having become a matter of national security owing to
its grave impact on the social, economic and political
stability of nations.

As a representative of a nation that has been a
victim of the perverse alliance between terrorism and
trafficking in illicit drugs, I should like to deliver to the
Council - which, I recognize, is much wiser than my
words - a warning derived from experience. Terrorists
do not share our values. For them, trafficking in illicit
drugs is only an effective means of financing their
actions. Therefore, we cannot yield in our commitment
to containing all possible sources of terrorist financing
through, inter alia, the strengthening of our legislative
systems, effective banking controls and adequate
exchange of information at the international level.

In Colombia, the deadly alliance between
terrorism and trafficking in illicit drugs has become
obvious. The Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia (FARC) - a guerrilla group that says it
fights, for political causes - initially confronted
illicit-drug trafficking organizations and soon
proceeded to coexist with them and to protect their
crops and laboratories in exchange for payment in cash
or in kind - generally weapons. Later, it became
involved in illicit cultivation, even going so far as to
process coca leaves in order to produce basic paste.
Currently, FARC is refining the paste and shipping
cocaine to consumer destinations.

So we must bear in mind that terrorists'
association with and participation in illicit drug
trafficking are virtually inevitable, will increase with
time and will make the task of strangling terrorism at
its economic sources even more difficult.

All of the forms and manifestations of terrorism
are equally dangerous to international peace and
security. All terrorists share related objectives and
means. They are opposed to democracy, human rights,
tolerance, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
freedom of thought and expression, among other
intangible values. That is why their objectives are very
similar throughout the world, and that is why their
enemies are all of us who agree on the absolute need to
defend those values.

As the United Nations tackled the terrorism of Al
Qaeda with swiftness and resolve, it now has the
obligation to take up the fight - for which humanity
will be grateful - against all of terrorism's forms and
manifestations, which constitute grave threats to
international peace and security. Therefore, my
delegation reaffirms Colombia's commitment to the
direct struggle against terrorism and welcomes any
initiative that will help to eradicate that scourge. In that
connection, we note with great interest the initiative
recently presented in this Chamber by the President of
the Government of Spain - a proposal that could bring
about the updating of resolution 1373 (2001) with a
View to broadening the scope of its provisions and thus
tightening even further the net that the international
community is stretching around all those who have
made violence and terror a way of life.

