Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Mr.
President, I should like first of all to convey my gratitude
to your delegation and to express to you our appreciation
for having convened this plenary meeting to discuss the
situation in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan will be dealing for a long time with the
consequences of the war and of the conflicts that continue
unceasingly to break out. Though the factions are still
resorting to war to resolve their differences, I believe that
there is hope on the horizon that this conflict will be settled
in a peaceful manner.

The continuation of the conflict in Afghanistan
compels us to consider the deeper reasons for the conflict,
for which the factions are in part responsible. The other
part of the responsibility must be shouldered by the
international community. The factions must be convinced
that there is no military solution and that the only solution
is the cessation of hostilities. A cessation of hostilities
must begin in order to achieve national reconciliation, and
a lasting solution must be found. States must redouble
their efforts to ensure a cessation of hostilities by the
factions. Thus, weapon supplies to military factions must
be halted. In that regard, we hail the efforts made by the
"six plus two" group to bring the factions in the Afghan
conflict together at the negotiating table. We hope that at
the next session of the General Assembly there will be an
opportunity for the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
members of that group to consider the Afghan conflict.

Among the direct consequences of the Afghan
conflict is the deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
as seen in the increased number of refugees and displaced
persons and the increased number of landmines and
unexploded ordnance, which are obstacles to rehabilitation
and development in Afghanistan and to the return of
refugees to their homes. All these consequences of the
Afghan problem underline the need for the United
Nations and the specialized agencies to continue their
presence and to provide humanitarian assistance to the
Afghan people. We commend the role being played by
the United Nations in this field. We also ask the donor
community to increase its assistance to the Afghan
people.

In conclusion, I would like to pay a tribute to Mr.
Brahimi, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan, for his efforts and to the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan.

Finally, we ask the Afghan factions to put an end to
their disputes and to find ways to achieve reconciliation
for the sake of economic and social well-being and
development of Afghanistan. Afghanistan has a long
history, and its religion and traditions require that poverty,
ignorance and illness be fought. For that reason we
demand that the Afghan factions come together in order
to lay down their weapons, stop confrontation and take up
the cause of economic and social development. This will
guarantee that Afghanistan can resume its place in the
international community, which is particularly necessary
given its strategic position.

 

