Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing. We express our appreciation for the work that his Office continues to provide to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in maintaining a safe and secure environment. The coronavirus disease pandemic continues to pose a challenge to the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the rest of the world. We acknowledge the efforts that were taken to help contain widespread outbreaks, however, we regret that the relevant political leaders were not able to establish a functional mechanism to address the health crisis. In this regard, we urge all political parties to cooperate and coordinate necessary measures to safeguard and support public health in ensuring an effective response to curb the pandemic. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines urges all leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to uphold the rule of law, including the fight against corruption and organized crime. We further underline our commitment to support the implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as relevant decisions of the Peace Implementation Council. We continue to encourage collaboration among the parties in accordance with international law and emphasize the need for diplomacy and the end of divisive rhetoric. In this respect, we urge all political actors to refrain from using ethnic slurs and stereotypes, and we call on the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance reconciliation and mutual understanding. We commend the agreements signed between the leaders of the Bosniak- majority Party for Democratic Action and the Federation-based Croat Democratic Union regarding the election law. We urge all parties to cooperate with the Central Election Commission in discharging its legal responsibilities and to pursue the reforms required to ensure that all citizens can exercise their political rights. In particular, we encourage the increased participation of women in the political sphere. In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for overall peace and stability in the region and for the extension for the mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea.
