Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the State
of Palestine, I extend our warm congratulations to the
friendly country of Sweden on its election to the Security
Council, and we thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important debate under Sweden's presidency. We
thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing at the outset of this debate. I also extend
our sincere congratulations to the other newly elected
members of the Council - Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and
Kazakhstan 4 and wish them all success, confident in
their commitment to upholding their responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations. We also renew
our deep appreciation to the countries and delegations of
Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela
upon the completion of their Council terms, during
which they served with exemplary dedication and skill,
contributing to the Council's efforts to address the many
critical issues on its agenda, including the question of
Palestine, as most recently reflected in the important
action taken by the Security Council, on 23 December
2016, with the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),
which, inter alia, reaffirms in unequivocal terms the
principles that are at the heart of Palestinian-Israeli
peace and are a matter of international consensus.

In the few weeks since its adoption, much has been
said about resolution 2334 (2016). Analysis has emerged
from all corners of the globe, both on the resolution's
content and the broader circumstances leading to its
adoption by the Council with near unanimity. While
widely viewed as long overdue, it has been deemed
extremely necessary.

The majority have stressed the resolution's
significance, politically and legally, and the chance
it provides for rectifying course to salvage the two-
State solution on the 1967 lines and to open a path
towards ending the Israeli occupation that began in
1967, justly resolving the question of Palestine in all
aspects and ultimately making Palestinian-Israeli
peace a reality. That is at the core of the unanimous
welcome for the resolution, with the exception of Israel
and a few of its supporters, to whom it must be again
clarified: resolution 2334 (2016) is not anti-Israel; it
is anti-settlements, anti-violence, anti-human rights
Violations. As such, resolution 2334 (2016) is clearly
pro-peace, pro-international law and pro-two-States,
and thus pro-Palestine and pro-Israel. Moreover,
resolution 2334 (2016) cannot by any sense of reason be
characterized as one- sided. The law - on which the
resolution is firmly based - is universal and fair and
can never be biased. That is a fact and the lifeline of our
international system.

In that way, the Council's adoption of the resolution
has not only revived hope in peace prospects but has,
more broadly, revived convictions in international
law and the Council's own credibility. That is no
small feat against a backdrop of crises undermining
belief in international law, especially among younger
generations. For them, ongoing injustice and the failure
to bring them peace, security and prosperity only
further deepen despair and anger and heighten their
vulnerability to radicalizing forces.

The opportunity to underscore the law's
applicability and strengthen its respect must therefore
not be lost in the commotion of noise by Israel, the
occupying Power, or its intimidation of those seeking to
uphold it, as heard so aggressively in this Chamber on
23 December (see S/PV.7852) and thereafter by Israeli
officials, who have reacted to resolution 2334 (2016)
with extreme hostility and rejection. The stakes are too
high - the possibility of peace in the present, but also
our collective future - and must be prioritized.

We believe it is precisely for that reason that the
grounding of resolution 2334 (2016) in the law and its
commitment to peace has been so widely and strongly
welcomed. Yet that is also the very same reason that the
Israeli Government, which has always sought to impose
might over right, has so fiercely opposed the resolution,
preferring instead to persist with its empty rhetoric
and legal acrobatics to justify its continuing illegal
colonization of the Palestinian land and oppression of
the Palestinian people, in flagrant contempt of the law
and the international community.

The will of the Council, and of the international
community as a whole, to stand by the resolution and
implement its provisions will be an indicator of whether
the two-State solution can be saved or not and whether
peace will be possible or not.

To the few appalled by the fact that the Security
Council dared to adopt resolution 2334 (2016), we
say: read the resolution and its clear call for peace.
Read the Charter of the United Nations, beginning
with the purposes and principles defined in Article 1,
including the maintenance of international peace and
security in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law and upholding the right of peoples
to self-determination, and Article 2, stipulating, inter
alia, that all Members shall abide in good faith with
the obligations assumed under the Charter and shall
give the United Nations every assistance in any action
it takes in accordance with the Charter. Recall also
Article 6, which states that a Member persistently
Violating Charter principles may be expelled from
the Organization. Compliance with Security Council
resolutions is thus clearly obligatory, regardless of
whether it is under Chapter VI or VII.

The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) represents
a turning point. It is a moment of truth. Israel, the
occupying Power, must choose between occupation
and peace. They are mutually exclusive and cannot
coexist. It is time for Israel to choose whether the two-
State solution will become reality or whether history
will be set on a different course. In that regard, the
international community has repeatedly affirmed
that settlement activities are illegal, are destroying
the two-State solution and call into question Israel's
commitment to achieving a just, negotiated peace.
Resolution 2334 (2016) has made clear once again that
the law cannot accommodate unlawful policies and
schemes; on the contrary, it is Israel that must change
and must comply with the law. The absurd notion being
entertained by some quarters in Israel, including by the
Prime Minister and his Cabinet, that instead of abiding
by the law, the law can be twisted and distorted to bless
Israel's illegal actions must be exposed and dismissed.

It must be firmly stated that halting settlement
activities should never be seen as a concession or
precondition; it is about fundamental respect for the
law. The law prohibits all activities aimed at altering
the demographic composition, character and status of
occupied territory, all of which resolution 2334 (2016)
unequivocally reaffirms. The demand on Israel to cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and abide by its
legal obligations is explicit. Settlement construction
and expansion, the construction of the wall, the
displacement of Palestinian civilians and all other such
illegal actions must stop and be reversed. That must take
effect immediately. Salvaging the two-State solution is
dependent upon it, as is the prospect for peace.

It is time for the full implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) and all of its provisions. Follow-up must
begin immediately and all must uphold their obligations,
including each and every member of the Security
Council. It is their resolution, and it is their duty to
ensure that it is fully implemented. The demands and
obligations upon Israel, the occupying Power, are clear
and it must be held accountable. The Security Council
must implement its resolutions, without exception.

States also have clear individual and collective
responsibilities. In that regard, we highlight the call
upon all States in paragraph 5 to distinguish between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967. In that regard, the Council rightly
reaffirmed that it will not recognize any changes
to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to
Jerusalem, other than those agreed to by the parties
through negotiations. We appeal to all States to uphold
their obligations not to assist in the perpetuation of
the illegal situation and to accord full respect to the
Council's decision. In that regard, neither the existence
nor the lack of bilateral negotiations can exempt
States and international bodies from assuming their
responsibilities.

The Secretary-General is also requested to report to
the Council every three months on the implementation
of the provisions of the resolution. We look forward to
the publication of his periodic reports and to serious
consideration by the Security Council as we seek to
continue moving towards a peaceful solution. In that
connection, we wish to laud Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for declaring the pursuit of peace the hallmark
of his administration and express our confidence in his
leadership and our full commitment and cooperation to
that most noble end.

Of course, the Palestinian Government pledges its
respect for resolution 2334 (2016) and its commitment
to peace, international law, the two-State solution,
non-violence and to combating terrorism. Furthermore,
we reaffirm the readiness to abide by our obligations to
the best of our ability, bearing in mind the very serious
obstacles we face under Israel's occupation. We also
reaffirm our readiness to continue cooperating with all
international and regional efforts to advance just peace
and appeal for the intensification of such efforts and
support to the parties, as called for by the resolution.

We understand the need for negotiations and have
repeatedly engaged in good faith in direct negotiations,
to no avail. Palestine has supported every single recent
peace effort, while Israel has rejected those efforts
and reprimanded countries initiating or supporting
them. We said yes to Paris, yes to Moscow and yes to
resolution 2334 (2016), just as we said yes to the 1967
borders as a historic compromise, and to the terms of
reference of the peace process as per international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and Quartet road
map, which were all opposed, ignored or violated
and undermined by Israel. That is why international
involvement is indispensable.

In that regard, we welcome the convening by France
of the Middle East Peace Conference on 15 January to
harness international support to preserve the two-State
solution and promote peace. The Paris Conference
underscored the urgency, inter alia, of restoring a
credible horizon for meaningful peace negotiations
and reaffirmed the role of multilateral diplomacy for
addressing challenges in the Middle East and beyond.
We hope it will serve as impetus for continued global
efforts for peace, including in terms of the efforts of
the League of Arab States, the Quartet, Egypt and the
Russian Federation, as well as the significant statement
made on 28 December 2016 by the United States
Secretary of State.

The 1967 borders are the delineating line between
conflict and peace. We are fast approaching a point
of no return. The implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) is the way back from the brink, providing the
means to ensure an end to the Israeli occupation, the
realization by the Palestinian people of their right
to self-determination in an independent, sovereign,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine, living side by
side with Israel on the basis of the 1967 borders and
in peace and security, and a just solution to the plight
of the Palestine refugees. The international community
must act now to revive the possibility of peace.

In this year marking 70 years since the partition, 50
years since the onset of Israel's occupation of the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip,
which remains under an inhumane Israeli blockade,
and 50 years since the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 242 (1967), we will either save the two-State
solution or we may have to bury it. Let us seize this
opportunity to usher in a new era for Palestinian-Israeli
peace, Arab-Israeli peace and global peace.

