Mr. A] Bayati (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting. We are sure that, thanks
to your experience and your wisdom, the outcome will
be successful. I should also like to thank Mr. Nicolas
Michel and Judge Rosalyn Higgins for their
contributions.

No one doubts that the subject for today's
discussion - which relates to strengthening
international law in conflict and post-conflict
situations, ending impunity and enhancing the
efficiency and credibility of United Nations sanctions
regimes - involves themes that are all interconnected.
In fact, it is difficult to address one without dealing
with the others. The rule of law requires the
prosecution and punishment of criminals, in particular
the perpetrators of crimes against humanity. It also
requires that we tighten measures against impunity as
well as sanctions regimes, particularly those targeting
entities and individuals, in order to guarantee justice
and to compensate victims. In that way we can end
impunity for individuals and entities, especially the
perpetrators of grave crimes against humanity.

When we talk about the rule of law, including the
observance of human rights, we also need to talk about
terrorist acts, from which people and Governments
have greatly suffered in recent years. Such acts
constitute one of the most serious challenges facing
humankind. My country is at the forefront in the
international struggle against terrorism. My

Government is making every effort, with the support of
the international community, to confront this
phenomenon which affects all segments of our society
and all aspects of our life, without any moral, legal or
human limit being observed. Despite the intensification
of terrorism and Violence against my people and the
kidnapping of diplomats, foreigners and Iraqi
nationals, our State continues to strengthen its
democratic institutions, consolidate the civil rights of
its citizens and fortify the rule of law, because we are
convinced that combating terrorism requires more
democratic institutions and more rights. Our
commitment to complete the political process and to
establish our constitution within the time limits set out
in Security Council resolution 1546 (2004) marks a
turning point in our struggle to fight and eradicate
terrorism.

Recently, the international community has been
discussing ways to combat terrorism in order to finally
eradicate it. Thus, it has drafted a number of
international conventions on that subject. We hope to
see the conclusion of a comprehensive convention
against international terrorism, the holding of a high-
level meeting to adopt a counter-terrorism plan of
action and the establishment of an international
counter-terrorism centre. All of these, once they
become realities, will strengthen international law in
the area of international peace and security.

The Security Council too has been discussing
ways to fight terrorism as a threat to international
peace and security. It has adopted a number of
resolutions leading to the creation of several
mechanisms requiring cooperation among Member
States, including the Security Council Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001), 1518 (2003) and 1540 (2004). The cooperation
of States and international organizations with those
Committees will undoubtedly assist international
counter-terrorism efforts.

If justice is to be complete and effective,
perpetrators of crimes against humanity and human
rights violations must be prosecuted and brought to
justice. Strengthening measures to end impunity will
help to reduce the number of human rights Violations
and crimes against humanity, because the prosecution
and punishment of those responsible for such crimes
will deter others from doing likewise.

06-4010]
We in Iraq have made every effort to establish a
criminal tribunal that respects the norms of
international law and guarantees fair and transparent
justice for the members of the former regime who have
committed crimes against humanity and human rights
violations. The United Nations, as an Organization that
seeks to maintain international peace and security, and
the Security Council in particular must support such
steps, taken internationally to ensure the rule of law
and to prosecute the perpetrators of crimes against
humanity. Such steps reflect the importance of the
Security Council's sanctions committees.

Here, my delegation would like to stress that the
purpose of sanctions is to right wrongs and to change
the behaviour of regimes that fail to comply with
Security Council resolutions, not to unravel the social
fabric of society. That is why sanctions target
individuals and entities, not peoples and countries;
hence the importance of the sanctions committees in
action against individuals and entities. Sanctions must
be jointly agreed, and they must be subjected to
periodic review to update them and maximize their
effectiveness and credibility.

We have a very good relationship with the
Committees, particularly the Counter-Terrorism
Committees established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), the 1267 Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003) to track
the financial assets of members of the former Iraqi
regime. We have expressed our views to that
Committee, particularly with regard to the listing and
delisting of individuals and entities.

Finally, I wish to reiterate the point I made at the
beginning of my statement: the three topics that we are
discussing today are interlinked. The events that the
world has witnessed recently have proved that fact, and
we in Iraq have also experienced and been affected by
it. The rule of law must put an end to impunity.
Enhancing the credibility of sanctions regimes would
assist greatly in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

