Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Namibia is pleased to see
you, Madam, presiding over this important discussion
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau. We also welcome
the participation this morning of the Secretary-General
and thank him for addressing the political, military and
humanitarian aspects of the situation prevailing in the
country and the subregion in general.
The presence here of the Vice-Prime Minister of
Guinea-Bissau speaks volumes. Among other things, it
is an indication of the trust and belief of the
Government and people of Guinea-Bissau in the United
Nations. It also demonstrates the commitment of the
Government to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and its rejection of chaos and
anarchy.

Since the reinstallation of democracy in Guinea-
Bissau, steady progress has been made in the
strengthening of democratic institutions, the
resettlement of displaced populations and the
consolidation of sustainable peace and economic
reconstruction. That process has been acknowledged by
the Security Council and the rest of the international
community. The contributions of the United Nations
system, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and the bilateral donors are highly appreciated. In
this connection, we welcome the participation of the
Vice-President of the World Bank in this meeting and
thank him for his very important statement.

The role played by the Economic Community of
West African States and the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries cannot be overemphasized. Further
assistance in these areas is sought, without
conditionalities attached that would undo the process
of overcoming the negative consequences of the civil
war and the culture of military intervention in politics.

Your personal participation in this meeting,
Madam, adds an important gender dimension to this
discussion and my delegation appreciates that highly.
Equally important, however, you hail from a country
which understands the value of development
assistance. Your colleague, the Foreign Minister of
your country, while addressing the Security Council
recently, pointed out that development assistance is an
important aspect of your foreign policy and my
delegation fully agrees, for we can confirm that
because we Namibians have benefited from assistance
which the Government and people of the Netherlands
gave us during the difficult years of our liberation
struggle. We continue to receive that assistance to this
day. Therefore, when we make the plea today, on
behalf of the Government and people of Guinea-
Bissau, for bilateral and multilateral assistance without
conditionalities, we are requesting your Government
and other donor countries to understand and act upon
it. Your country's voice and that of other donor
countries on this matter can make the difference.

The reappearance of General Mane and his
military junta on the political landscape disrupted the
political discourse in the country and the subregion at
large. It is good news that the residents of Bissau who
ran in all directions after renewed fighting have
returned. It is high time for General Mane's followers
to know that his leadership generates not hope, but
doom, and that he will lead them not to peace and
prosperity, but to chaos and perpetual destitution. All
this can be prevented only if the international
community continues and enhances its assistance to the
Government and people of Guinea-Bissau.

What is also disquieting is the whereabouts of
General Mane himself. Wherever he is and whatever he
is planning to do, the loyal forces that nipped the rising
tide of renewed instability in the bud must continue to
turn the tide of history against him. He must be made
to face the consequences of his miscalculations.

It is important to realize that the remedy for
political instability is for the State to make a conscious
and dedicated effort to provide for the economically
vulnerable groups, including the provision of land and
other support facilities to the internally displaced
persons and returnees. The system must provide free
expression of dissent; its suppression is a recipe for
disaster. To accept and value diversity and harness its
potential by unleashing peoples' creativity in the
pursuit of the common good will help maintain
universal tranquillity in a climate of pressures. This has
been proved in stable countries. It is our View that a
strong civil society in Guinea-Bissau will indeed
reinforce the foundation of democracy.

Finally, we call on the international community to
help the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and give every assistance to the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau and to the
Government of Guinea-Bissau to enable them to carry
out their mission successfully.

