Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeff Feltman for his briefing, and I note the
statements from our Palestinian and Israeli colleagues.

Australia remains very disappointed at the
failure of final-status negotiations earlier this year.
Efforts to achieve a durable peace based on a two-
State solution must resume in earnest immediately.
Australia unreservedly condemns sectarian acts of
violence against innocent civilians, which breed mutual
distrust at a time when trust is urgently needed. Such
cowardly acts do nothing to advance the interests of
the Palestinian people and serve only to strengthen
the narrative of those extremists wedded to a cycle of
killing and recrimination. Both sides have an obligation
to do everything within their power to reduce current
tensions. It is not in the interests of any party to return
to the mass violence that characterized the conflict in
Gaza. Instead, Israeli and Palestinian politicians must
show real leadership in seeking the difficult path of
peace and reconciliation.

In respect ofthe holy sites in Jerusalem, we welcome
Prime Minister Netanyahu's public commitment this
week, repeated by Israel's Permanent Representative
in the Council today, that access by all to the holy
sites will continue to be maintained. We are troubled
by Israel's reported decision to construct more than
1,000 new apartments in East Jerusalem. The decision
follows Israel's declaration in August of an intention
to expropriate 1,000 acres of West Bank land south of
Bethelehem as State land. Following that declaration,
Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Bishop,
called on Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs Liberman
to reconsider that declaration to expropriate land.

The building of new Israeli settlements on
territories subject to final-status negotiations and
Palestinian efforts to pursue unilaterally a Palestinian
State undermine efforts to return to peace negotiations.
Israelis and Palestinians deserve to live with dignity
side by side in peace and security. To that end, we
continue to encourage both sides to resume direct
negotiations towards a just and lasting two State
solution. We believe the Council can play a constructive
role in supporting that process, but can only do so with
the full commitment of both sides.

