Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all, Mr. President, to thank you for having
convened this open debate on the follow-up to the
report of the Security Council mission to West Africa.

I should like also to convey to the Secretary-
General our deepest appreciation for his report on the
implementation of the observations and
recommendations of the mission, which apply, in many
ways, to Central Africa, since there are so many
striking similarities between the two subregions. I
should like also to thank Mr. Kalomoh for his
outstanding introduction of the report and for his
comments.

I should like first to start by underlining that,
from the point of view of methodology, the Security
Council mission to West Africa introduced an
important innovation when it included two essential
elements in its field of inquiry: the assessment of
lessons learned in respect of the consolidation of peace,
particularly in Sierra Leone, and a regional approach to
conflict prevention and the restoration and
consolidation of peace.

This is unmistakably an important development in
our approach to peacekeeping issues, and it is likely to
open new avenues for the work of the Security Council
and of the United Nations system in general. We
welcome this invitation not only to reflect on issues but
also to build on experience acquired in the field of
peace-building, including in particular the regional
dimension.
I shall therefore not dwell on specific situations,
which are generally developing in a positive manner.
Indeed, we are pleased to note that the concerns
expressed by the mission and its recommendations are
already beginning to be addressed. As we read the
report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2003/ll47) and other, more recent reports, we can
gauge the significant progress achieved over six
months in stabilizing the conflicts that are afflicting the
Mano River subregion. Peace is taking root in Sierra
Leone, and the prospects are promising in C6te
d'Ivoire, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau.

With regard to Cote d'Ivoire, I should like to take
advantage of this opportunity to say how urgent it is for
the United Nations to strengthen its presence in that
country with a View to assisting and more effectively
supporting the peace process. My comments will
address the regional approach, which I believe to be
essential if we wish to effectively contain these hotbeds
of the cyclical and shifting wars, particularly
destructive and violent, that have afflicted the
subregion for more than a decade.

The observations in the Secretary-General's
report on cross-border issues confirm our conviction
regarding the need to position our future efforts within
the framework of subregional action strategies. In fact,
experience has shown how the viability of peace
processes conducted at the national level depends on the
regional environment. The report's recommendations
concerning those aspects reveal, paradoxically, that the
international community has lacked not only the
political will for a lasting settlement of what has been
designated the regional Mano River war, but also a
comprehensive, integrated and consistent action
framework.

However, it seems to me that if the necessary
political will exists, the international community
possesses all the elements to define an action
framework for prevention and to build peace in the
subregion. There is a broad consensus on the need to
support the peace processes under way in C6te d'Ivoire,
Liberia and Sierra Leone through action at the regional
level. The factors that feed the instability in the subregion
- the illicit trade in weapons, the use of mercenaries,
the recruitment of child soldiers, the illicit exploitation
of natural resources, the free movement of armed groups
from one country to another and the exacerbation of
ethnic or religious tensions - have been determined
and identified. The report to be submitted on those
issues by the Secretary-General in the coming days
will, I am convinced, help us to refine our analysis and
understanding of those phenomena and thus to
elaborate a suitable and effective action strategy.

The allocation of responsibility among the United
Nations and subregional organizations in the area of
peacekeeping is increasingly well-defined, and
cooperation - both at the conceptual level and with
regard to operational implementation - is articulated
and under control. The Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) has become a credible and
ready partner. Its proven capacities, not only in the
field of preventive diplomacy, but also in that of
restoring the peace - including in emergency
situations - represent an asset that the international
community must support and encourage. Yet we must
note that the aid provided to ECOWAS thus far is not
worthy of the sacrifices it is making on behalf of all.
The interaction with the African Union - particularly
through its Peace and Security Council - could create
the essential synergy for concerted action aimed at
peace and development throughout the continent. That
could also be accomplished by supporting the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, which is an
original form of partnership for peace and development
conceived by Africans and for Africans.

That is to say how important it is for the
international community - particularly the Security
Council - to conceive and set in motion a modus
operandi for a subregional approach, which - I must
again emphasize - is no longer an option, but a
necessity. The essence of such an approach must rest
on strengthening the cooperation and coordination
among the bodies of the United Nations system. The
joint missions of the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council and a closer association
with the Bretton Woods institutions are relevant,
because it is obvious that a lasting peace requires
lasting development.

The consolidation of a restored peace depends
fundamentally on successful economic and social
reintegration. The eradication of phenomena such as
mercenaries and child soldiers depends - as the
Secretary-General rightly said - on our tackling the
issue of youth unemployment. The international
community invests considerable resources to restore
and maintain the peace, but it balks at funding socio-
economic projects, which are less costly yet essential
in enabling peace and stability to take firm and lasting
root in countries emerging from conflicts.

It goes without saying that the responsibility of
the leaders of the subregion's countries in restoring
lasting peace and stability is just as important. The
international community must take advantage of its
strong presence in the subregion and of the new
political climate that is beginning to emerge in order to
spur the leaders of the region's countries to revive
political dialogue and to reactivate the Mano River
Union so as to make it an instrument for cooperation
and regional integration. Improvement of the relations
among the region's countries is more than ever
necessary.

I shall conclude by saying how important it is that
the Security Council create a clear and action-oriented
doctrine concerning the subregional approach. In this
statement I have described several elements that might
articulate such an approach. When the time comes, the
members of the Council could consider entrusting the
Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa with considering
that issue and making proposals.

