Mr. Kanda (Ghana): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate China on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and on its
distinguished leadership. I would also like to affirm the
appreciation and continued support of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
Ghana for the Council's work towards world peace and
security for sustainable development.

On 18 November, the tenth meeting of the
International Contact Group for Guinea-Bissau was
held at here at United Nations Headquarters, under the
leadership ofthe Foreign Ministers of Ghana and Timor-
Leste, in order to explore effective ways of coordinating
and harmonizing international interventions for the
best possible results in our efforts to ensure Guinea-
Bissau's political stability and economic recovery.
Our deliberations were not oblivious to the scarcity of
available resources for urgent and competing global
needs. Yet the need for us to strive hard to sustain and
make progress kept us resilient, in the belief that with
the Council's support we will be able to give the people
of Guinea-Bissau hope for the future.

Since then, some progress has been made by
the Government of Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the
United Nations towards sustaining the gains necessary
for Guinea-Bissau's political stability and economic
recovery. I would therefore like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report dated 19 January (8/2015/37)
on developments in the country and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau. We urge all partners to continue
to support Guinea-Bissau. ECOWAS supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation for the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau to be extended for a period of
12 months, until 29 February 2016.

For its part, ECOWAS will continue to support
efforts to consolidate peace, stability and security as
well as to promote sustainable development in Guinea-
Bissau. Consequently, we have extended the mandate
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB)
beyond 31 December 2014 for another six months,
retaining the existing force strength despite the impact
of the Ebola virus disease on West Africa's fragile
economies. United Nations support for ECOMIB's
work is indeed essential to maintaining the progress
that has so far been made in the country.

In View of the current political challenges facing
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, the Government has put
together a three-phase reform programme encompassing
emergency, contingency and development plans, and
has urged its development partners to help with the
process. At its 33rd meeting, the ECOWAS Mediation
and Security Council recommended, among other
things, that international partners participate actively
in the Guinea-Bissau international donor conference,
intended to help finance the country's proposed reform
programme. To that end, Ghana will host a preparatory
meeting in Accra on 9 February.

In conclusion, I wish to urge our international
partners to continue to support Guinea-Bissau in its
efforts to sustain the gains made in consolidating peace,
democracy and economic development by effectively
participating in the donor pledging conference
scheduled to take place on 25 March in Brussels.

