The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

I wish to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for presenting
the fifteenth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The conclusion of the report
highlights the need for States, non-State actors,
international organizations and other stakeholders to
work with the ICC and help it to exercise its mandate.
Poland appreciates all such efforts, including the ICC's
cooperation with the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) and Libya's Prosecutor-General,
which, among other things, has enabled the Office
of the Prosecutor to send its first mission to Libya in
five years. We want to express our deep appreciation
to the Office's staff, who took on this task despite its
inherent risks, and we hope that more such missions
will be possible and carried out successfully. Poland
also welcomes Prosecutor Bensouda's declaration
that the investigations being conducted by the Office
of the Prosecutor are making progress and could
potentially lead to new arrest warrants being issued.
We hope this will help deter further crimes. We
would also like to commend some of UNSMIL's other
actions, as described in the Secretary-General's report
of 12 February (S/2018/140). We consider them an
important contribution to improving the situation in
Libya. Special thanks are due to Special Representative
Ghassan Salame for his involvement on the ground.
We encourage all Libyan parties to support the United
Nations-backed political process and work for a more
peaceful situation in Libya.

It is also thanks to initiatives undertaken under the
auspices of the United Nations that more than 350,000
people have been able to return to Libya, with the vast
majority of them able to reclaim their homes. However,
more than 150,000 people are still internally displaced,
mainly due to the threats posed by armed conflict or the
presence ofmilitary groups. We are also very concerned
about the ordeals that detainees and migrants in Libya
have suffered. As of today, there are more than 700,000
migrants on Libyan territory, of whom 52,000 have
applied for asylum. It is estimated that more than 4,000
are being kept in detention centres, and the reports
on their condition are shocking. Migrants are victims
of violence, including sexual harassment; they are
tortured; they are exploited as a labour force and some
have even been killed. We join the appeal for an end to
all atrocities in Libya, particularly against migrants and
detainees, and for respect for human rights.

Poland welcomes all efforts aimed at improving
the situation in Libya and bringing about peace and the
rule of law, including the efforts of the Office of the
Prosecutor, as well as those of other international and
local actors. To that end, we remain fully committed
to cooperating with the Court on bringing to justice
the individuals suspected of committing international
crimes mentioned in the report, including the
necessity of transferring them to the Court, and we
appeal to other States to do the same. It is up to the
International Criminal Court, the entire international
community, including the Security Council, and
Libya's stakeholders to hold to account those suspected
of committing international crimes there. The success
of that endeavour will have a bearing on the country's
future. Let us do everything we can to contribute to it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
