The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Chad, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ahmat
Ibrahim (Chad) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the attacks conducted by Chadian
armed groups since 11 June 2008.

"The Security Council condemns all
attempts at destabilization by force, and reiterates
its commitment to the sovereignty, unity,
territorial integrity and political independence of
Chad. It demands that armed groups cease
violence immediately and urges all parties to
respect the Sirte agreement of 25 October 2007.
"The Security Council calls upon States in
the region to implement their commitments under
the Dakar Accord of 13 March 2008 and prior
agreements, and to cooperate with a view to
putting an end to the activities of armed groups in
the region and their attempts to seize power by
force.

"The Security Council conveys deep
concern at the direct threat the activities of armed
groups pose for the safety of the civilian
population and the conduct of humanitarian
operations, and urges all parties to comply fully
with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the United Nations Mission
(MINURCAT) and the European operation
(EUFOR Chad/CAR) deployed in Chad and the
Central African Republic to contribute to the
protection of vulnerable civilian populations and
to facilitate the provision of humanitarian
assistance, and calls on all parties to guarantee
the security and freedom of movement of their
personnel and associated personnel.

"The Security Council encourages the
Chadian authorities to persevere in promoting
political dialogue, with respect for the
constitutional framework, as initiated by the
agreement of 13 August 2007.

"The Security Councils stands ready to
consider appropriate measures against those
groups and individuals who constitute a threat to
the stability of the region or violate international
humanitarian law."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.55 p.rn.
08-38273

