Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, I would like to
welcome Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta once again to the Council. We are very
much impressed by all of the work they have
undertaken. It seems to us that, in spite of the
challenges, East Timor is on the right track.

We are very encouraged by the continued
progress made. The United Nations is getting closer to
fulfilling the goals set forth by the Council in its
resolution 1272 (1999), and the downsizing of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) is on schedule. There is, however,
still some way to go, and the continued support of the
international community in fostering long-term security
and stability is therefore required.

East Timor is in the process of transforming itself
into an independent country. This places significant
challenges Before its leadership. During the Oslo
donors conference of December 2001, we were
encouraged to see the Transitional Government taking
the lead in the discussions and clearly displaying
ownership of the process. We have confidence in its
plans and strategies for the management of an
independent East Timor.

The drafting of the constitution is well under way,
and we trust that the popular consultation will further
contribute to a document establishing a unitary
democratic State based on the rule of law and the
principle of separation of powers. As far as the April
presidential elections are concerned, we are convinced
that UNTAET and the East Timorese will ensure that
they take place in a transparent and peaceful manner.

As we have repeatedly stated, Norway attaches
great importance to the instigation of criminal
proceedings against persons responsible for serious
crimes. We therefore welcome the first conviction for
crimes against humanity delivered by the Special Panel
for Serious Crimes last December, which clearly
demonstrates that such crimes will not go unpunished.

Another fortunate development is the
inauguration of the truth and reconciliation commission
earlier this month. As we have witnessed in other post-
conflict societies, the search for truth and
reconciliation is not a soft option, but a huge challenge.
However, this is the only way to freely and genuinely
move forward into the future as a united nation. In the
light of the financial constraints experienced by both
the Special Panel for Serious Crimes and the truth
commission, my Government will consider the
possibility of providing additional funds for these
processes.

We also welcome the recent appointment by the
Indonesian Government of the 18 judges to serve on
the ad hoc tribunals for serious crimes committed in
East Timor during 1999. We expect the trials to
commence shortly so that justice for the East Timorese
is served in a complete and holistic manner. Allow me
to add that we are pleased to note that the bilateral
relations between East Timor and Indonesia are
improving. This is crucial for the prosperous
development and the long-term stability of the region.

In addition to the assistance provided by the
United Nations through a successor mission to
UNTAET, East Timor will be in need of bilateral
development assistance in the crucial years following
independence. We are prepared to contribute our share
in this regard, and we urge other donors to live up to
their commitments as stated during the Oslo donors
conference.

We are impressed by the work done by the United
Nations, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and the Transitional Government to develop
sustainable fiscal and development strategies for the
new nation. These are crucial steps in order to promote
a smooth United Nations exit and to foster long-term
stability. During the Oslo meeting, the Transitional
Government urged donors to provide budgetary support
for the years 2002 to 2005. Norway acknowledges the
need for such support, and we are confident that the
Government will establish the required modalities on
the recipient side.

As we have previously stated, Norway supports
the Secretary-General's recommendations as to a
successor mission with military, civilian and civilian
police components, funded by assessed contributions.
We look forward to engaging in a more in-depth
discussion on the exact mandate and size of the
successor mission this spring.

Let me end by once again thanking the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative for the
excellent work done so far in East Timor. We support
the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the
mandate of UNTAET until 20 May 2002. We also very
much look forward to being present at the first donors
meeting to be held in Dili, as well as to the celebration
of independence on 20 May this year.

