Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herve Ladsous, as well as the Force Commanders
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA), the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization for their briefings and, of course, for their
work. I shall very briefly touch upon the three topics
that were presented to us.

The first concerns the protection of civilians,
which is increasingly at the very heart of our mandates.
This trend was not a self-evident one, but following the
tragedies experienced by the international community,
notably in Africa and the Balkans, it has become a
necessity, in the name of the principle of humanity,
which lies at the heart of the Charter of the United
Nations. The High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operationsjust recognized this, while endeavouring not
to give rise to impossible expectations. We wish to pay
tribute to the Blue Helmets, who face this demanding
work on a daily basis.

We do not underestimate the difficulty of these
mandates in crisis situations across vast territories,
often devoid of infrastructure, where the population is
faced with the violence of ruthless armed groups. Such
implementation entails comprehensive action, which
involves political settlement of crisis, prevention,
support for the restoration of the State's authority
and, sometimes, when necessary, the use of force. Our
challenge today is to tailor peacekeeping operations
in all their aspects to the implementation of these
mandates for the good of the civilian population, who
are the first victims of armed conflicts.

In that respect, the human aspect is of the utmost
importance. Missions must be able to establish close
ties with the populations they are to protect. From this
point of view, the use of the French language must be
fully taken into account, and I would like to recall here
again that we need more French-speakers in current
peacekeeping operations - from privates right up to
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
including in New York. This is a precondition for
operational effectiveness.

Finally, the protection of civilians should not be
limited to ensuring their physical security. Respect for
human rights and the protection of women and children
are of course at the centre of our priorities. We will
have an opportunity to touch upon this issue tomorrow
during the open debate on children and armed conflict.
But it is absolutely clear in that regard that the
behaviour of Blue Helmets must be irreproachable, and
zero tolerance must be applied to any actions that could
sully the standing of the United Nations.

The second topic concerns action in an asymmetric
environment. Blue Helmets are confronted with
new threats that sometimes target them directly. In
that context, we must respond with trained troops,
appropriately equipped, including by providing
missions with the necessary multiplier effects: air
assets but also sanitary support and logistics and the
engineering, combat and work units they often lack.
We encourage Member States that have such capacity
to fill these gaps, and we encourage the exchanges
of training and education among Member States. The
Force Commander of MINUSMA could provide details
on the status of his force regarding these aspects, and
the lessons to be learned for other theatres, such as in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Lebanon,
where similar challenges exist.

We also have to open peacekeeping operations
to modern technology, as is proposed by the report
of the Expert Panel on Technology and Innovation
in United Nations Peacekeeping dated February
2015. By bolstering our capabilities in terms of
information-processing and the protection of Blue
Helmets, technology allows us to better understand the
environment we are active in, to anticipate and to act
upstream of peaks of violence to protect people in the
best possible security conditions.

Moreover, the new type of challenges we face
requires an optimal mobilization of operational and
logistical resources available. The operational margin of
manoeuvre ofa force cannot be impeded by a logistical
organization that is unadapted to the theatre. On the
other hand, it must be based on the rapid deployment
of support capacities, including emergency measures
needed for infrastructure work.

Therefore - with regard to the third topic, namely,
the issue of caveats -we have the responsibility to ensure
that our operations possess the necessary resources for
their success and that they are used efficiently, which
entails two basic requirements. One is to adapt the
modus operandi of the peacekeeping operations to their
mandates. Mobile, dynamic, reactive and responsive
forces close to the populations are needed in relation
to those who seek to derail peace processes and who
target civilians and peacekeepers. A proactive attitude
is the best way to respond to this dual objective, the
protection of civilians and force protection. It would be
useful to hear the three Force Commanders share their
experiences regarding constraints linked to caveats.

The second requirement is to avoid any ambiguity
during the force generation undertaken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Fraught as it
is with the risk to the force and the civilian population,
we cannot allow contingents, for national reasons,
to avoid carrying tasks ordered by commanders. An
effective upstream consultation process is essential to
dispel such ambiguities.

The report of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, submitted to the Secretary-General
yesterday, notes these problems facing peacekeeping
operations. France will remain engaged regarding
these issues and will carefully consider the numerous
recommendations set out in the report.

In conclusion, Iwould like to reiterate France's deep-
rooted commitment to United Nations peacekeeping,
to which we fully contribute with Blue Helmets - for
example, within the framework of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, as well as in our national
capacity and under the European Union - in support of
peacekeeping operations, including in Mali, the Central
African Republic and Cote d'Ivoire. Today, 7,800 French
soldiers are engaged in foreign operations, including
nearly 1,000 directly in the service of the United
Nations and 6,000 under a United Nations mandate.
Since January 2013, 13 of our countrymen have paid for
that commitment with their lives. The most recent was
Mr. Damien Dustrit in 2014 in Lebanon. I would like to
pay tribute here to their memory, as well as that of all
their Blue Helmet comrades fallen on the battlefield to
bring to life the ideals espoused by the United Nations.

