Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU). The acceding country
Croatia, the candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Iceland, the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Albania, the European Free
Trade Association country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Council and
express our support for him and his Office.

Some five weeks ago, Bosnia and Herzegovina held
local elections, which, it should be noted, took place
in an overall satisfactory manner, although they were
postponed in Mostar. In addition, there were important
signs of progress in the first half of 2012, with strong
support from the European Union. That proves that
moving forward is possible.

Yet the political and economic situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues to be difficult. The lack
of progress in implementing the necessary political
and economic reforms, the continued use of divisive
rhetoric, and deeply rooted divisions among political
parties continue to cause a considerable headwind
for the efforts of those who want to see Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a stable, Viable, multi-ethnic,
prosperous and united State, cooperating peacefully
with its neighbours and irreversibly on track towards
EU membership. We therefore encourage the Security
Council, as well as the European Union and others
that are working towards that end, both on the ground
and within the wider international community, to send
a message of support for the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political leadership.

The recent political instability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, both at the State and Federation levels,
has weakened the earlier positive momentum in the
implementation of the reform agenda. Following the
municipal elections on 7 October, the European Union
has stepped up its engagement with the country's
authorities in order to underline the responsibility of
political leaders to constructively address today's
pressing challenges. Those include in particular the
rule of law, the economy, jobs and social welfare. To
make credible progress on meeting those challenges
requires that Bosnia and Herzegovina move forward on
the European path. During their joint visit to Sarajevo
on 30 October, High Representative and European
Commission Vice-President Ashton and United States
Secretary of State Clinton jointly highlighted those
priorities and reaffirmed their commitment to Bosnia
and Herzegovina's future.

The European Union believes that it is critical that
Bosnia and Herzegovina's obligations under the interim
Stabilization and Association Agreement are fulfilled
as a matter of priority. Failing that, the country would
not be in a position to make the progress on its path
towards European integration that its citizens expect
and to which they are entitled. In particular, Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to urgently bring its Constitution into
compliance with the European Convention on Human
Rights and to implement the ruling of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdie-Finci case. That
will allow the European Union to take a decision on the
entering into force of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina, paving the
way for further steps forward, including a credible EU
membership application.

The European Union also strongly encourages
Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward in the
implementation of the road map agreed among its
political leaders in the high-level dialogue on the
EU accession process. The role of the road map is to
facilitate the implementation of the key requirements
in Bosnia and Herzegovina's path towards Europe. The
European Union also welcomes the decision to suspend
international supervision in the Brcko District, taken at
the last meeting of the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board meeting in May, and the accompanying
closure of the High Representative's Office in Brcko on
31 August.

Since September 2011, the European Union
has strengthened its political presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in order to facilitate its progress
towards European integration. The European Union
is now represented by a single EU presence on the
ground - the EU Special Representative and Head
of Delegation - which is fully engaged in supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina in all EU-related matters. It
further increased its presence in 2012, including in the
field, by opening regional offices in Mostar and Brcko
and increasing the size of the regional office in Banja
Luka. The EU Special Representative and Head of
Delegation is also offering the EU Force Commander
political guidance on military issues with a local
political dimension, in particular concerning sensitive
operations and relations with local authorities and the
local media.

The European Union also continues to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress in the security field.
While the overall security situation has remained calm
and stable and Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have
proven capable of dealing with threats to the security
environment so far, Ministers last month confirmed that
the European Union is ready to keep the multinational
stabilization European Union Force-Operation Althea
focused on capacity-building and training, while also
retaining the capability to contribute to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities' deterrence capacity, if
the situation so requires, by continuing an executive
military role in support of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
efforts to maintain a safe and secure environment under
a renewed United Nations mandate.

Separately, as a sign of progress, the European
Union concluded the operations of its civilian police
monitoring mission on 30 June. We nevertheless
remain committed in the area of the rule of law and
have established a Law Enforcement Section in the
EU office. We also continue to provide considerable
pre-accession assistance.

In the context of the overall strategy of the EU
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, we look forward to
continuing in the appropriate forum the discussion with
the international community on the reconfiguration of
the international presence and call on the authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the outstanding
objectives and conditions for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative.

The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country. We
remain ready to provide the necessary assistance to
support progress towards Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European perspective. It is that approach and that
European perspective that will take the country
forward on its reform agenda, towards stability and
development, on its path to the European Union.

