Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in
welcoming the First Deputy Prime Minister of
Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, and
in thanking him for his important statement. I further
wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ould Abdallah,
for his extremely useful briefing. Our thanks also go to
Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
European Union to the United Nations later today.

We would like to reiterate our full support to the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
Djibouti peace process, and call upon all relevant
actors to fully implement the commitments undertaken.
Having said this, we would like to emphasize that the
cooperation and assistance of the international
community to the TFG are crucial, and that every
resource should be used to generate the necessary
political and security conditions for the successful
completion of the transition by 2011.

We note with satisfaction the progress in some
key areas identified in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/234), particularly in the field of national
reconciliation, the drafting of the constitution,
capacity-building, the building of national security
forces and expanding political space in the country.

In that context, we further welcome the signing of
the cooperation agreement between the TF G and Ahlu
Sunna Wal Jama'a, and we hope that this change will
contribute to the Government's capacity to consolidate
its authority and restore order in the country. We urge
all groups outside the Djibouti peace process to join in
as soon as possible.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is concerned about the
security situation in Somalia, especially in the southern
and central parts of the country. We strongly condemn
the continuing indiscriminate attacks against the
civilian population, the TFG and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

We are deeply concerned by the fact that the
recruitment and use of children in the conflict have
increased in the past year. We therefore urge all parties
to the conflict to fully comply with international
humanitarian law and human rights law in order to
protect the civilian population.

Bosnia and Herzegovina further expresses its
concern regarding the alarming humanitarian crisis in
Somalia, which is exacerbated by the severe
difficulties in the delivery of humanitarian assistance
caused by increased violence against humanitarian
workers, ongoing fighting and drought. We hope that
adequate funding of the consolidated appeals process
and the United Nations transition plan for Somalia will
allow for the continuation of critical humanitarian
activities.

Once more, Bosnia and Herzegovina would like
to commend the African Union and AMISOM. troops
for their tireless efforts in stabilizing the situation in
Somalia, despite the extremely difficult environment in
which they are operating. We would like to pay a
special tribute to Uganda and Burundi for the vitally
important contribution they are making to AMISOM.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the important
efforts made by the TFG in preparing its own security
sector assessment report and the national security and
stabilization plan, which are intended to ensure
coherence in developing the security and justice
sectors. In that regard, we encourage the fulfilment of
pledges made at the international conference in support
of Somalia's security institutions and AMISOM, held
in Brussels on 23 April 2009.

In order to achieve lasting peace and stability, we
urge the TFG to build on this positive momentum and
intensify its efforts, especially in the areas of political
reconciliation and outreach, the constitution-making
process, security, stability and the delivery of services.
Moreover, it is of crucial importance for the
international community to use this window of
opportunity to strengthen the effectiveness of its
presence in the country by further coordinating its
actions.

Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the three-phase
incremental approach, as set out by the Secretary-
General. We welcome the completion and approval of
the first accommodation facilities in a Bancroft
compound with regard to establishing the second "light
footprint" phase.
We also welcome the Istanbul Conference on
Somalia to be held on 22 May 2010, and hope that it
will foster political stability, security and reconstruction
in the country.

On the fight against piracy, Bosnia and
Herzegovina shares the position expressed by other
Council members that long-term solutions will come
only through the rule of law and the establishment of
security on the ground.

In conclusion, please allow me to highlight an
issue we deem exceptionally important. Bosnia and
Herzegovina welcomes important efforts of the United
Nations Mine Action Service to reduce the dangers of
mines to the civilian population, including mapping
mine contamination throughout southern and central
Somalia and mine risk education sessions in
communities affected by mines and unexploded
ordnance.

