Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): I wish to
note that Ambassador Holbrooke wanted and expected to be
here in the Council this morning, because East Timor is an
issue of very high priority for the United States. He is not
here because he has been unexpectedly called away to
address the United States arrears issue, which is currently
before our Congress. I trust colleagues will understand that,
and the Secretary-General as well.

The United States supports the draft resolution to
establish the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET). We applaud the decision of the
Indonesian People's Consultative Assembly to accept the
results of the popular consultation. As President Clinton
said, this historic act "shows respect for the will of the
people of East Timor". This draft resolution, like the
Indonesian Assembly's vote, is the right course of action.
The international community must help the people of East
Timor, first to rebuild their shattered lives and then to
construct the institutions that they will need to become an
independent State.

In this regard, we stress the need for continued
attention to the plight of those East Timorese who fled
violence in East Timor only to face continuing
intimidation in refugee camps in West Timor. They must
have security in the camps, access to international
assistance and the right to return home.

At the same time, we emphasize the need for the
United Nations to work in close consultation with the
East Timorese and note with great pleasure the safe return
to East Timor of Xanana Gusmao.

We commend the members of the Security Council
for their perseverance on East Timor. Over recent months
we have worked together to support the United Nations.
The United Nations response to the crisis in East Timor
is an example of the potential and great promise of this
institution.

I should like to comment on a few elements of the
draft resolution before us.

The Council has made appropriate arrangements for
the transition from the multinational force to a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. The transition will occur,
as advised by the Secretary-General, taking into account
the views of the Commander of the International Force,
East Timor (INTERFET), and conditions on the ground.
This will not prolong INTERFET's deployment, but it
will ensure a safe and effective handover.

The Secretary-General wisely decided to establish a
trust fund for East Timor. It is a long-standing practice
that peacekeeping assessments are used to support United
Nations staff, peacekeeping forces and civilian police.
Civil society projects sustaining a transition to
independence should be supported by contributions from
those who have shown such a strong interest in helping
East Timor become a viable independent State.

We welcome the call for all parties to cooperate with
investigations into reports of violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.

 

The attack on civilians, United Nations staff, personnel
of non-governmental organizations and journalists, as well
as the forced displacement of East Timorese, were
repugnant. It is imperative that credible bodies fully
investigate these violations, identify those responsible and
help bring them to justice.

We applaud the courage and dedication of the
personnel of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET). We know those assigned to the new mission
will work hard to fill their shoes. We also commend all
those who contributed to the United Nations authorized
multinational force, particularly Australia for assuming such
a daunting leadership task.

INTERFET's efforts have laid the foundation for the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET).

We look forward to working with the United
Nations, the people of East Timor, President Wahid and
the Government of Indonesia and our other partners to
help ensure that East Timor's transition to independence
is as smooth and successful as possible.

