Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation has been following
with deep concern the acute conflict between the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples that has now lasted for
almost a year without let-up. Almost every day the
international community has witnessed scenes of
horrible terrorist acts, which are then followed by very
emotionally charged acts of retaliation. As a result the
Palestinian territories and the Middle East as a whole
are becoming increasingly destabilized. Unfortunately,
we must recognize that the peace dialogue between the
Palestinians and Israelis has been greatly set back, and
all the progress achieved through incredibly intense
efforts has been obliterated.

Since the outbreak ofthe conflict, Russia, as a co-
sponsor of the Middle East peace process, has been
making most vigorous efforts to put an end to the
violence, to stabilize the situation as soon as possible
and to return to seeking a comprehensive settlement for
the region. This issue has continued to be a focus of
attention for the President of Russia and for the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is maintaining
contact with the Israeli and Palestinian leadership, with
the Secretary-General and with his colleagues in the
United States, in European Union States and in Arab
countries. The special representative of the Russian
Minister for Foreign Affairs is almost always in the
Middle East, where together with other international
mediators he works daily with the Palestinians and the
Israelis.

In this connection we believe that current efforts
must be focused above all on promptly launching the
implementation of the agreements that have already
been entered into by the two sides. The
recommendations contained in the report of the
Mitchell Committee must be used as a platform for a
settlement. The report has the advantage of having
been approved by both the Palestinians and the Israelis,
and the Mitchell plan is also particularly relevant,
insofar as it covers all the key components of a future
normalization process and as it outlines a road map of
how to get from a ceasefire and an end to the violence
to confidence-building measures and the resumption of
political dialogue.

We fully realize the complexity of achieving this
goal. Time is becoming increasingly of the essence
since the daily bloodshed is strengthening rising
mutual distrust. We cannot allow the logic of inevitable
confrontation to take hold in the region. We see the top
priority today as being the urgent end to confrontations
between Palestinians and Israelis. Special
responsibility for this lies with the leaders of both
sides, who must begin a direct dialogue so as to
undertake concrete steps to de-escalate the tensions,
put an end to all types of violence and provocation,
adopt measures to normalize the situation and resume
the negotiation process. The Palestinian and Israeli
leadership must demonstrate political will, must step
back from the harsh legacy of the past and must take
courageous decisions in favour of peace. We hope that
such an understanding exists on both sides of the
conflict. This brings to mind the words that history
rewards political courage.

The Palestinian Authority leadership must
undertake decisive steps to put an end to extremist
activities and to prevent terrorist acts and violence. The
Israelis must refrain from methods of repression such
as shelling Palestinian targets, sending troops into
areas that are under full control of the Palestinian
administration, carrying out extrajudiciary reprisals and
seizing official Palestinian institutions. A redressing of
the situation would be helped by the urgent resumption
of cooperation in the area of security, with the
consequent resumption of political dialogue based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principles of the Madrid Conference.

For its part, the Russian co-sponsor will continue
to maintain intensive contacts with the Palestinian and
Israeli leadership and other interested parties, with a
View to halting the dangerous escalation in the Middle
East.

