Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
extending my appreciation to you, Madam President, for
having convened this open debate and for the excellent
concept note (S/2014/75, annex). It is also a privilege
for me to welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Linas Linkevieius, Foreign Minsiter of Lithuania.
My delegation would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive briefing.

Indonesia fully subscribes to the importance of
promoting and strengthening the rule of law in countries
emerging from conflict. Not only does the rule of law
help to restore order, but also, very importantly, it serves
as an undisputed sign of a functioning authority. With
that in mind, I would like to highlight two principal
ideas for the development of the rule of law.

First, the development of the rule of law must
support sustainable peace in post-conflict countries.
In that respect, I wish to reiterate the importance of
security sector reform taking place at the earliest
possible time so as to create an environment conducive
to a well developed rule of law. The development
of the rule of law must also take place within the
comprehensive framework of the national development
of the respective countries, along with other important
tasks, such as promoting reconciliation, revitalizing the
economy, building critical infrastructure, promoting
and protecting human rights, providing basic services
and strengthening the national capacity.

Secondly, national ownership must continue to be
the critical guide for the formulation and execution
of the mandates of United Nations peace missions.
Indonesia reiterates its strong conviction that the
development or the restoration of the rule of law is the
national Government's responsibility and that a genuine
and inclusive partnership with the host Government
must be forged by the United Nations at all times.

Those two principal ideas underline why United
Nations peace missions must remain adaptive to local
cultures and practices. In that regard, my delegation
takes note of the Secretary-General's 2004 report
on transitional justice (S/2004/6l6), which strongly
encourages Member States to avoid one-size-fits-
all formulas and the unilateral imposition of foreign
models.

My delegation is in full agreement with the concept
note that the meticulous planning of United Nations
peace mission rule-of-law mandates is essential in order
to achieve a high degree of clarity and achievability. I
wish therefore to reiterate Indonesia's support for robust
yet realistic mandates on the rule of law, keeping in
mind the need for a solid knowledge of each country's
unique situation.

Accordingly, strengthening consultation with
the host Government, as well as the troop- or
police-contributing countries, will help to create a
comprehensive projection of what is expected of the
United Nations and how to fulfil such expectations.
Such an approach also provides the best opportunity
for an integrated approach to the rule of law, most
importantly in the timing or sequencing of the relevant
support.

On the issue of internal coordination, my
delegation appreciates the recent efforts towards
ensuring that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme work in a more coherent and efficient
manner on the rule of law through the establishment
of a global focal point. My delegation, however, would
like to underscore the importance of regular and
institutionalized intergovernmental consultation to
ensure the transparency and accountability of those two
institutions in the implementation of their respective
mandates.

Restoring the rule of law in a post-conflict
situation from the outset must be targeted both at
helping a society to cope with the legacy of conflict
and at enhancing the capacity of the host Government
to be more accountable to its people. In that regard,
building the human and institutional capacity for law
enforcement must be a core component of rule-of-law
mandates. With that in mind, Indonesia underscores the
very important role of the Peacebuilding Commission.

I also wish to reiterate Indonesia's strong
commitment to the United Nations Civilian Capacities
Initiative. It remains our view that that Initiative
provides a valuable learning process for identifying
best practices in institution-building in a post-conflict
situation. That conviction has guided Indonesian police
officials in various United Nations peace missions
in applying their valuable experience of community
policing to their local duties.

Capacity-building must go hand in hand with
strengthening a culture of law and peaceful coexistence.
To that end, local history and customs can provide
relevant norms and values that support universally
recognized principles, such as the promotion and
protection of human rights, transparency and equality.
Such a culture-sensitive approach will better withstand
resistance and strengthen local confidence in the rule
of law development.

Furthermore, Indonesia is firmly convinced
that the inclusion of women and children in the rule
of law agenda, as part of community empowerment,
strengthens local resilience and forms a significant
platform for development. That conviction manifests
itself in our sending female peacekeepers and police
personnel to the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. While modest in number, our
female officers have played an instrumental role in the
mainstreaming of gender perspectives in the activities
of those missions.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on
measuring the effectiveness of United Nations rule of
law assistance in conflict and post-conflict situations
(S/2013/34l) provides a substantial and in-depth
analysis for our future work. While appreciative of the
work of the Secretary-General, Indonesia reiterates the
need for further deliberation on the subject as set out in
the report.

Indonesia concurs that national data collection
and measurement are necessary for the evaluation of
United Nations peace mission mandates. Nonetheless,
our initial view is that those activities should be carried
out under the umbrella of strengthening the national
capacity of the Governments concerned.

Against that background, such national data
collection and measurements are best carried out under
the authority of host Governments. That will encourage
them to fully understand standards and parameters
for fair, transparent and accountable rule of law. Such
capacity is indispensable in the formulation of the
country's own national legal development.

To conclude, promoting and strengthening the
rule of law is indeed a complex and daunting task. It
calls for a high degree of understanding and empathy
towards the local situation and a willingness to engage
in a sustainable manner. To that end, the United Nations
must prepare itself for missions of such character in
future. Among other things, funding, management,
human resources and expertise can and must be made
available in a timely and sustainable fashion.

