Mr. Annabi: Since the last report of the
Secretary-General, which was submitted to the Council
on 26 July, and since our last briefing on 28 July, there
have been a number of developments in East Timor on
which I would like to report.

I will cover successively the security situation,
the situation of refugees in West Timor, issues related
to governance and public administration, as well as
recent political activity in East Timor.

During the last month, the security situation in
East Timor has deteriorated. It has been marked by a
series of militia-related incidents since the killing on
24 July of a soldier from the New Zealand contingent
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET). There has been an increase in
confirmed reports of militia activity and movements in
the Central and Western sectors of East Timor. The
Council has been informed of the incident of 2 August
north of Maliana in the Bobonaro District in which a
small group of well-armed men exchanged fire with the
UNTAET troops. Two suspected militia were killed in
that incident and both were dressed in the uniform of
the Indonesian Armed Forces (TNI) and were equipped
with SKS rifles. A similar incident occurred on 6
August, near Batugade in the Bobonaro District, which
resulted in the wounding of at least one militia. On 10
August, in the most serious incident to date,
approximately 20 militia attacked a Nepalese platoon
of UNTAET, which is serving as part of the New
Zealand battalion. The attack took place in Cova Lima,
and resulted in the death of a Nepalese soldier and the
wounding of three others. On 17 August, a patrol of
Fiji troops also exchanged fire with a group of
suspected militia, in the area between Suai and the
West Timor border and in fact another incident took
place last night in the course of which Australian
members of UNTAET exchanged fire with suspected
militia north-east of Maliana but initial reports seem to
indicate that there were no casualties.

Since the peacekeeping force assumed
responsibility from the International Force in East
Timor (INTERFET) on 23 February, militia activity
had been restricted to the districts of Ermera,
Bobonaro, Cova Lima and the Oecussi enclave.
However, it has become evident over the past month
that militia elements are now also operating in the
districts of Ainaro, Manufahi, and, possibly, in Aileu,
Dili and Liquica. UNTAET reports there may now be
60 to 120 militia in at least eight groups operating in
East Timor. These groups have recently shown a degree
of operational effectiveness and a greater willingness
to engage UNTAET peacekeeping troops. Their level
of activity within East Timor is reflective of a degree
of coordination and preparation that had not been seen
thus far.

The militia's objectives remain difficult to assess
at this time. However, overall, it is felt that it is their
intent to continue a pattern of violence against the
civilian population and UNTAET in order to try to
undermine the transition process. In the worst case,
which we hope will not occur but for which we need to
prepare, they may be attempting to destabilize East
Timor through offensive guerrilla-style operations, to
discredit UNTAET and create doubts among the East
Timorese about its effectiveness and they may also be
attempting to undermine the ability of the
peacekeeping force to maintain security by inflicting
casualties at every opportunity.

The militia pose a demonstrable threat to peace
and security in East Timor and UNTAET has taken
action to respond to this threat and, as a first step, has
redeployed a company from Manatuto in Sector East to
Dili in Sector Central. This has relieved other
UNTAET troops in Sector Central from static
protection tasks and enhanced UNTAET's ability to
quickly respond to additional security incidents in Dili
or elsewhere in the Sector Central, should the need
arise. At the same time, another company from Sector
East has been placed on six hours' notice to move and
provide support in Sector West as well as in the Central
Sector and Oecussi if needed.

After a review of the security situation, the Force
Commander of UNTAET and the Special
Representative, Mr. Vieira de Mello, have concluded
that it is essential to maintain the current force level to
counter the threat posed by militia activities.
Accordingly, implementation of the previously
announced plan to downsize the number of troops in
the eastern Sector of East Timor to a battalion size
force of 500 - in other words, a downsizing from
1850 to a battalion size of 500 troops by the end of
January 2001 - will be delayed. The current strength
in East Timor, up to the initial downsizing, stands at
1,636. We will keep the situation under review and
inform the Council of any further adjustments that may
be required to the level of the force and to its modas
operandi.

Official contacts and cooperation between
UNTAET and the TNI continue to be good, and
information on militia personnel and activities is
exchanged via the Tactical Coordination Working
Group. However, the events of the past month again
raise serious concerns regarding the capacity or
willingness of the TNI - or least some elements
within the TNI - to prevent militia activity in West
Timor and across the border into East Timor, and to
take the measures which are urgently required to ensure
the security of refugees in West Timor.

The current security situation has served to
reinforce the determination of the East Timorese
leadership to establish a national security force.
UNTAET and the East Timorese leadership are closely
studying the report on security force options, which has
been prepared by the London King's College team.
Three options were presented in the report, all of which
foresee the former Armed Forces for the National
Liberation of East Timor (FALINTIL) as the nucleus of
the future defence force. Under the first option, a force
of up to 5,000 troops, based on former FALINTIL and
recruitment of additional personnel through
conscription, would be established. It would include a
small body of specialized troops to deal with civil
disturbances and a modest air-and-sea component.
Under the second option, a force of 3,000 would
comprise 1,500 regular forces and 1,500 conscripts
who would serve for one year. Finally, the third option
would lead to the establishment of a force of about
3,000, half of which would be former FALINTIL
soldiers, and the remaining 1,500 would be volunteer
reservists. All troops would be trained to deal with
civil disturbances. For economic reasons the study
favoured the third option. We will, of course, keep the
Council informed, as the process of discussion of these
options with the East Timorese and other interested
parties unfolds.

Turning now to the refugee situation in West
Timor, I would like to say that, concurrent with the rise
in militia activity, which I have just described, the
situation of the refugees in West Timor has steadily
deteriorated. Militias are openly active in the camps
and large parts of the border areas. They have erected
roadblocks in the area, including on the main road
between Atambua and Batugade. Since the first week
of August, there have been almost no land returns to
East Timor, and family reunion meetings at the border
have been suspended. There has also been an escalation
in violence and attacks on humanitarian workers. In
Atambua, the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) compound was targeted during a 12 August
demonstration by the Aitarak militia, without
intercession by the TNI or police. Subsequently, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the IOM. and a non-governmental
organization relocated most of their staff to Kupang.
On 22 August, militia attacked and seriously injured
three UNHCR staff delivering humanitarian assistance
to a refugee camp in Naen, in the vicinity of Oecussi,
which had not so far suffered from security problems.
It is worth noting in this connection that it took over
two hours for the security forces to arrive at the scene.
Humanitarian agencies are seriously concerned about
these developments and feel that the militias may be
looking to force a suspension of international
humanitarian assistance to the refugees. Indeed,
following the 22 August incident, UNHCR initially
suspended its operations in West Timor, but I
understand that it has now decided to resume
operations, since it is satisfied with the way the
Indonesian authorities have dealt with this very
regrettable incident. Two suspects have been arrested
by the Indonesian authorities and will be charged in
court. The Government of Indonesia has also issued a
strong condemnation of these acts of violence against
humanitarian workers and taken practical steps on the
ground to increase the presence of security forces in
and around the camps.

Earlier this month, Indonesian Foreign Minister
Shihab announced that the Government of Indonesia
planned to find a solution to the present impasse on the
refugee situation. An important delegation from the
Indonesian Department of Foreign Affairs, headed by
Mr. Hassan Wirajuda, the Director General for Political
Affairs in the Foreign Ministry, visited Dili on 23
August. During the extensive discussions that were
held on that occasion, Mr. Vieira de Mello urged the
Indonesian Government to take the necessary steps in
cooperation with the United Nations to address the
deteriorating security situation in West Timor and to
create conditions under which voluntary repatriation of
the refugees in West Timor can take place hopefully
within a period of three to six months. UNHCR will
continue to work with refugee leaders to better inform
refugees as to the situation in East Timor and to
encourage returns.

Turning now to governance and public
administration, I would like to say that the new East
Timor Transitional Administration is now well under
way. The Cabinet has now met five times and has taken
decisions on a wide range of policies, including the
reconstruction of public buildings and the preparation
of an administrative and legal framework for future
taxes in East Timor. This framework will serve as an
important foundation for the establishment of
sustainable financial administration in East Timor.
Since 1 July, the East Timor Consolidated Budget
has been administered and executed separately from
that of UNTAET. The customs and duties collected to
date by the Border Service represent a total of over $3
million. On 15 August, the East Timor Revenue
Service also began to collect tax revenues.

There has also been progress in the building up of
the civil service, with the recruitment of East Timorese
increasing rapidly following the approval of the East
Timor Consolidated Budget for the fiscal year
2000/2001. So far, the civil service has appointed 111
East Timorese candidates for positions in the
departments and offices of the East Timor Transitional
Administration. Of these, 80 were selected for the
Central Fiscal Authority and 22 for the Central
Payments Office.

While economic and social conditions remain of
great concern throughout East Timor, and will continue
to do so for some time to come, there has been a
noticeable easing of employment pressures and an
encouraging rise in economic activity, especially in
Dili. The number of registered private businesses has
risen by 418 to 3,114, the great majority of these being
Timorese. Over the last two months, an additional 83
quick impact Projects have created 3,450 jobs for a six-
month period. The Temporary Employment Projects
are now in their final stages, having provided a total of
over 33,780 jobs for the Timorese. There are also
positive reports that the Temporary Employment
Projects schemes have lead to the development of
economic ventures, for example in the Liquica district
where funds have been reinvested to start handicraft
and other small businesses. There has also been a
gradual increase in foreign investment proposals in the
areas of tourism, hotel construction, banking, fisheries
and animal farming.

Following the successful deployment of the first
group of 50 East Timorese police officers, a second
group of 50 is undergoing training at the academy
through mid-October. At this rate, however, it will take
about five years before we can reach the target of 3,000
East Timorese police. UNTAET has developed a
proposal to increase academy output to 130 graduates
per month. However, this would require additional
voluntary contributions to the budget of the
Transitional Administration.

In general, civil law and order remain stable,
although civilian police continue to report an upward
trend in low-level crime and petty theft. On 3 August,
the internationally recruited General Prosecutor for
East Timor assumed his post. The Special Crimes Unit
has prioritized cases related to crimes committed in
1999. Currently, 75 detainees are in custody for crimes
committed last year, including arson, rape and murder.
UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia are closely
cooperating on investigations into the events of last
year. A team of 23 Indonesian investigators visited
East Timor last month to interview witnesses and visit
crime scenes.

In the health sector, the transition from the
emergency phase to a more systematic approach to
long-term health delivery has begun. Public health
services have also been available locally in the Liquica
district since the beginning of this month.

In the field of education, so far a total of 3,000
primary teachers have been selected and appointed to
district schools, and 1,750 secondary school teachers
are in the process of being appointed. A national
teachers' congress, attended by over 800 teachers, was
held from 10 to 12 August and addressed issues
including the national curriculum and the school
calendar.

In the agricultural field, district agriculture
officers are working with East Timorese farmers in 10
of the 13 districts on an important soil enrichment
programme to enable farmers to grow a second crop,
given sufficient rainfall. This month, the World Bank
also launched an agriculture rehabilitation project.

The rehabilitation and maintenance of East
Timor's infrastructure - in particular of its damaged
roads - is continuing, with Timorese engineers
supervising most of the projects. However, security
concerns have resulted in a delay in road repairs in the
western sector.

Efforts at human resource capacity-building are
also continuing. A group of 50 East Timorese are
completing the final phase of a diplomatic training
course. The Civil Service Academy has also been
conducting English language courses for Timorese civil
servants. In addition, 75 senior East Timorese
managers underwent a one-week course in management
organized by the National Institute of Public
Administration of Portugal.

Timorese district advisory councils were formally
appointed by the Transitional Administrator on 1
August and are now operational in all districts.

Finally, preparations for the establishment of the
National Council, which will be the successor of the
National Consultative Council, are well advanced. An
open nomination process for the representatives of the
districts and of civic organizations is underway.
Representatives will be nominated from parties within
the National Council of Timorese Resistance (CNRT)
and from non-CNRT parties and the three main
religions in East Timor. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General will be making the final
selections. In the meantime, the National Consultative
Council has continued to meet. It endorsed three
regulations in August, including one prohibiting land
transactions by Indonesian corporations and citizens
who are not habitually resident in East Timor, pending
the completion of negotiations with Indonesia on assets
and claims.

Turning briefly to political activity over the last
month, I would like to mention that the CNRT
congress, which is evidently a very important event,
began on 21 August and will conclude its deliberations
today. The CNRT leadership, including its President,
Xanana Gusmao, stood down at the opening of the
congress, pending the decisions to be taken by the
congress regarding the CNRT's future. We will revert
to the Council with additional information once
UNTAET has been able to assess the results of the
congress, which as I said will complete its work today.

In conclusion, it can be said that UNTAET has
continued over the past month to make steady progress
in a number of areas. However, UNTAET has become
seriously concerned - as I have tried to show in this
briefing - with the security situation in East Timor and
with the continuing plight of the refugees in the camps
in West Timor. We would welcome the Council's
continued strong support as UNTAET continues its
efforts to address and resolve these issues.

Finally, tomorrow will mark the first anniversary
of the popular consultation in East Timor. A lot of
positive developments have taken place since the
frenzy of violence and destruction that visited East
Timor following the announcement of the result of the
popular consultation, on 4 September last year. The
deployment of the International Force in East Timor
(INTERFET) and UNTAET, and the work done by
UNTAET since its establishment last October, have
made it possible for the East Timorese to look forward
to a better future and to the realization of their
aspirations to independence. UNTAET will continue,
with the support of the Council, to work with the East
Timorese to prepare them for that challenge.

