Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
Kingdom of Morocco for taking the initiative to
organize this important debate at a time when the
Sahel is facing such formidable challenges, and I thank
Minister El Othmani for presiding over it. I also thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Romano Prodi, Mr. Antonio
Guterres and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cote
d'Ivoire for their statements. The presence here today of
representatives from several organizations involved in
the region further underlines the relevance of the topic
for the maintenance of international peace and security

in the Sahel and beyond.

Recent events in Mali have underlined the need for
the international community to pay greater attention
and give new priority to dealing with long-standing
fragilities in the Sahel and with their consequences. We
hope that the Council can soon adopt a resolution that
will specifically address the situation in that country in
line with what has been requested by the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

The current crisis in the Sahel is historically deep-
rooted, has complex and multifaceted causes, be they
economic, social, political or ethnic, and therefore
requires a comprehensive strategy that addresses
the transnational nature of the challenges at hand,
including, naturally, those of organized crime and
terrorism, which also represent today a serious threat
to neighbouring regions.

Indeed, we should also be aware of the fact that
security issues are not restricted to the Sahel. In fact,
instability in West African coastal countries might
significantly contribute to the mounting insecurity in
the Sahel. The increase in activities of drug traffickers
and organized crime networks on the coast and their
illicit financial resources do in fact fuel criminal
activities and terrorism in the whole region. The effect
from the neighbouring regions of the Maghreb and
Europe are also evident.

Portugal has for a long time defended the regional
approach to the Sahel, not just because we find the
same fragilities in most countries in the region but
because the challenges faced by those countries are
of a transnational nature. Efforts made by individual
countries are important and can be more effective if
their emphasis is placed on the development of regional
capacities. There are already regional action plans
approved by regional organizations such as ECOWAS
that should be put into practice to deal with the problems
affecting the Sahel. We should also encourage viable
multilateral ad hoc arrangements within Sahel countries
themselves for pooling resources for border control and
in combating terrorism and organized crime.

Support from outside the region is also a reality.
I would mention, among others, the European Union,
which is already implementing its own strategy for the
Sahel.
Therefore, we believe that the United Nations
regional offices - the United Nations Office to the
African Union and the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa - and the relevant United Nations
missions in the region can have a key role to play in
bringing together all the relevant actors and promoting
concrete initiatives. Much is already under way, but it is
important that those different initiatives be framed by
a coherent strategy.

In that respect, we welcome the appointment of
Mr. Romano Prodi as Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel and look forward to the
finalization of an integrated strategy for the region.
We hope that Mr. Prodi will develop a strong working
relationship with ECOWAS and with the African Union
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, and we
reiterate our full support to his endeavours.

As a coordinator of international efforts, the United
Nations should take into account the perspective and
potential contribution of the wider region, including
that of North African countries, and thus overcome the
difficulty posed by the fact that the countries affected
do not belong to one single regional organization.

Some of those problems faced by Sahel countries
require quick responses, as they may potentially
expand beyond the region or aggravate an already
very serious humanitarian and security situation, but
others require long-term strategies and instruments.
We think, therefore, that the United Nations strategy
should clearly identify which measures may have
an immediate effect - for instance on humanitarian
assistance, arms proliferation, criminal networks or
border control - and which ones work essentially in the
long run, especially those aimed at economic recovery,
youth employment, climate change and capacity-
building. That will help us in understanding how the
different types of measures can best be employed and
combined to promote sustainable development and
security in the region.

Looking at long-term measures, we believe that
particular attention should be given to the issue of
institution-building. As the example of Mali clearly
shows, it is obvious that, without strong institutions,
countries will remain vulnerable to both internal and
external threats. We therefore expect the United Nations
integrated strategy to provide concrete indications on
how to address the issue of institution-building and what
kind of measures may improve countries' resilience.

I conclude by stressing again that the international
involvement in the Sahel requires coherence and
complementarity of the various efforts. A coordinated
and integrated approach is therefore of the essence, while
building on experience, solutions and lessons learned
in similar situations in other regions of the world. Such
an approach will help prevent any duplication of efforts
and ensure that international responses effectively
address the multiple dimensions of a complex situation
such as that of the Sahel.

For our part, Portugal will continue to contribute
to the collective effort to find new and bold responses
to a situation that extends beyond the Sahel region and
affects us all.

