Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): I would like to thank all three chairmen for
their briefings and for their leadership in the efforts of
the Security Council to counter the dual threats of
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The recently adopted United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288) highlights the crucial role of the
Council in the fight against terrorism, as well as the
need for Member States to cooperate with the
Council's counter-terrorism subsidiary bodies in
implementing all of the Council's resolutions relating
to international terrorism.

We hope the Strategy will foster concrete
improvements and enhanced cooperation and
coordination to maximize synergies and avoid
duplication of work, both within the Council and
throughout the United Nations system. The United
States remains committed to working with the United
Nations and like-minded States to build counter-
terrorism capacity and to ensure that States comply
with their obligations under Security Council
resolutions. We strongly support the efforts of the
Council's counter-terrorism subsidiary bodies to
achieve those objectives.

I would now like to comment briefly on each
presentation. The United States is grateful to Chairman
Loj, for her strong leadership and welcomes the
progress the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CT C) has
achieved during the past quarter. We also appreciate
the dedication and commitment of Ambassador
Ruperez and the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
Executive Directorate (CTED). We are pleased that the
Committee has adopted a set of best practices, relevant
to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which
we hope States will rely on for guidance. That
directory refers to standards established by
international technical organizations and we are
particularly glad that it refers to the Financial Action
Task Force's Forty Recommendations on Money-
Laundering and Nine Special Recommendations on
Terrorist Financing.

We also welcome the Committee's recent report
to the Council on the implementation of resolution
1624 (2005). As the Committee continues its dialogue
with States and considers what might be done in
spreading best legal practices consistent with its
mandate, the Committee will need to continue to
reflect appropriately two aspects of resolution 1624
(2005). Significantly, that resolution was constructed
carefully to reflect first, the international community's
sense that incitement to terrorism is an important issue
to be addressed, and secondly, the importance of
respecting free expression as protected by diverse
constitutional systems.

Finally, we are pleased that the Committee and
the CTED are continuing their State visits and their
important capacity-building work. The 10 visits CTED
has completed since 2005 mark an achievement, but
their success will be measured by the results they
achieve. Follow-up to those visits is essential to ensure
that States carry out the CTED's recommendations and
receive the technical assistance they need to do so.

We thank Ambassador Mayoral for his dedicated
leadership in the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), and in
the fight against Al-Qaida and the Taliban. Over the
last 120 days, the Committee has taken important
concrete actions to sanction Al-Qaida associates and
entities in Europe, Africa, the Middle East and Asia.
The geographic diversity highlights Al-Qaida's global
reach and underlines the importance of the truly
international efforts to combat it.

We welcome all Member States of the United

Nations to become active participants in the 1267

process, by submitting names for the Committee's

sanctions list, and we are pleased that the Committee

approved a new cover sheet that will make it easier for
States to prepare requests for listing.

The 1267 Committee is fortunate to have a highly
professional and capable Monitoring Team. In the past
120 days, the Monitoring Team has held productive
meetings with the heads of intelligence and security
services from various regions. We applaud that
initiative and believe that the networks formed and the
intelligence gleaned from such meetings contribute
significantly to the fight against Al-Qaida. In
particular, we encourage the Committee to focus on the
dangers posed by the increased activity of Al-Qaida
networks and associated groups in the Sahel and
Sahara region and in South-East Asia.

The United States also supports the Monitoring
Team's recommendation to begin regional meetings
with heads of financial institutions in order to make
financial sanctions more effective.

Looking ahead, we urge the Committee to
continue to focus attention on the issue of compliance
by Member States with the 1267 sanctions regime, and
we look forward to the Monitoring Team's upcoming
paper on the issue. We also want to highlight progress
made on fair and clear procedures for listing and de-
listing individuals for sanctions. The United States has
been working hard with other Member States, both on
and off the Security Council, to revise listing and de-
listing guidelines. We are optimistic that Council
members will reach agreement soon as we all approach
this matter with the seriousness it deserves.

I thank Ambassador Burian for his commitment
and dedication. His Committee plays an important role
in promoting States' implementation of their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). The threat of
a terrorist attack using weapons of mass destruction or
related materials cannot be discounted, and resolution
1540 (2004), if fully implemented, will help eliminate
that menace.

We urge the Committee to adopt a programme of
work without further delay so that it can more fully
carry out its responsibilities under resolution 1673
(2006). To fulfil its responsibilities, the Committee
must review and examine States' reports and then draw
conclusions. Such consideration is essential to enable

the Committee to work with individual States or groups
of States to facilitate delivery of technical assistance.
Its purpose is not to make judgements about whether
States are "good" or "bad" in relation to implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). In particular, on the basis of its
review of States' reports, the Committee can provide
useful information and recommendations to States that
might be seeking assistance or to donors that might be
able to provide it.

We welcome the Committee's successful outreach
initiatives during the past 120 days. In support of those
efforts, we are pleased to be sponsoring, along with
Slovakia, Denmark and Greece, a workshop of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
on 8 November. It will focus on how to develop a
national action plan for implementing resolution 1540
(2004). We also are proposing that the Organization of
American States devote a special meeting in December
to the issue of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

