Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency of the Security Council this month
and on organizing today's important meeting.

In centuries past, humankind has continued to
suffer the scourge of wars and bloody conflicts that have
wrought death, destruction, poverty and displacement,
truly the cruellest experience that any human being
can undergo. The survivors spend the rest of their lives
recalling those unfading, tragic and vivid memories.

We are here in the Council today to discuss an
extremely important issue, the settlement of conflicts,
and how to use logic and common sense in order to
silence the guns. There are essentially two types of
conflicts. The first is conflict between States, the topic
of our discussion today, and the second is the internal
conflict that results from political differences and leads
to fighting and destruction in the State concerned. That
is the case in my country, Libya. In that regard, we
have to acknowledge that disputes today are different.
They are not simply international disputes; rather they
are internal disputes with regional and international
dimensions. Recent civil wars have been characterized
by unjustified, inhumane violence perpetrated by
militias and warlords to advance their personal
interests. The bloody civil wars that have emerged in
recent years are the result of the collapse of totalitarian
regimes, leaving States facing numerous challenges
and therefore incapable of maintaining control over
their situation. In that regard, the Secretary-General's
report of 27 June 2017 notes that

"State fragility, the blurring of lines among
political, criminal and ideological interests,
as exemplified by the emergence of complex
economies of conflict, and the unclear objectives
of increasingly fragmented armed groups create
multiple challenges for mediation engagement".
(A/72/II5, para. 7)

Internal conflicts today are highly complex, quite
different from the conflicts of the past. Civil wars are
affected by various factors both internal and external,
which is why we need a comprehensive view and clear
plan to address those conflicts that are considered the
main obstacles to achieving security and sustainable
and comprehensive development.

There are a number of challenges to mediation
efforts aimed at resolving conflicts peacefully in line
with the Charter of the United Nations. We acknowledge
the noble objective of impartial mediation efforts that
aim to stop bloodshed, whether in conflicts between
countries or internally. We welcome all the mediation
efforts employed by the United Nations, and would
like to highlight the elements designed to enhance
mediation efforts that are mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report - that is, an enabling environment,
practical mediation strategies, effective operations,
implementation and capacity-building. In that regard,
we believe that any successful mediation effort,
especially where internal conflicts are concerned, must
address the following factors.

The parties to a conflict must be aware of their
humanitarian, historical and legal responsibility
regarding the disputed issue, and mediation efforts
must focus on strengthening the political will of all the
parties concerned. Mediation mechanisms must make
it clear to the parties that interlocutors should separate
themselves from the issue under dispute and keep the
mediation process amicable, refraining from attacking
one another. The importance of the notion of the nation
State as a basis for cooperation should be underscored.
Mediation should also be confined to a single initiative
under the auspices of the United Nations and in
cooperation with the relevant regional organizations.
No mediation effort should rely on time factors as a
way to achieve de-escalation. Mediators must resist the
belief that parties to the conflict will become fatigued
and make concessions as a result.

We believe that the Security Council can play a vital
role in promoting mediation efforts that can achieve the
peaceful settlement of disputes without interference
or orders from outside. The Council must be united
in promoting independent and impartial mediation
efforts, with a view to sending a message to the parties
to conflicts that the only way to settle disputes is by
peaceful means.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
mediation is at the core of the Libyan crisis. The
Security Council resolutions stressing that a political
settlement in Libya must be Libyan-owned have
not been reflected on the ground. Flagrant foreign
interference in Libyan affairs continues to contribute
to the deterioration of the situation, creating fertile
ground for clashes and mistrust between the parties
to the conflict. In that regard, we would like to note
that the Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya addressed that issue in a television interview
on 20 August, expressing his dissatisfaction with that
interference and noting that it obstructs mediation
between the parties to the conflict. With regard to the
situation in Libya, we stress that mediation must bring
together the parties to the conflict and all influential
actors on the ground. Mediators should not have hidden
agendas but should rather bring pressure to bear on
the parties to the conflict and convince them that the
aim is not only to achieve de-escalation but to reach a
comprehensive and durable settlement.

