I am pleased to extend Malta's appreciation to Germany for organizing this high-level open debate to accentuate the correlation between pandemics and the maintenance of security, the more so during these challenging times. Malta aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European Union (see annex 30) and the Group of Friends of Solidarity for Global Health Security (see annex 54) and would like to add a few remarks in its national capacity. At a time when we have to rethink what constitutes major threats, the world has had to contend with a threat that went beyond the conservative awareness of what we understand by threats to security. We have been rudely awakened by the fact that pandemics can give rise to grave security and economic concerns that are equally widespread and devastating as any other commonly perceived major threat. The only difference is that in this case we are fighting one common enemy, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), for pandemics know no creed, ethnicity, gender or social standing. We are all equally susceptible and potential victims. However, pandemics tend to have much longer-lasting effects and create more collateral issues than any other threat, be it localized or global. For one, we are witnessing COVID-19, which is wreaking havoc in fragile States, triggering widespread unrest and severely testing international crisis management systems. Its implications are especially serious for those caught in the midst of conflict, especially women and children, since the disease has disrupted humanitarian aid flows, is limiting peace operations and is delaying, or distracting, conflict parties from nascent, as well as ongoing, efforts at diplomacy. The negative economic impact resulting from the pandemic makes a bad situation much worse. The efforts of one country to curb the spread of a pandemic may also have secondary effects on the security landscape of another. Restricting travel and closing borders, for instance, impacts the movement of peacekeepers and the transfer of aid to conflict-ridden nations, further intensifying the effects of conflict. Pandemics also further exacerbate the deterioration of already existing humanitarian crises, particularly in terms of food insecurity. In curbing the potential evolution into a hunger pandemic, humanitarian workers must be allowed unrestricted access to fragile areas for vital food provisions. In that regard, we cannot fail to take this opportunity to commend all the vital work being undertaken by several humanitarian actors on the ground that have continued to work towards their mission notwithstanding the severe challenges brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic. These turbulent times call on us to explore creative ways and opportunities in ensuring the timely attainment of our development goals, while addressing urgent needs. Undeniably, every single person on the planet has been affected to some extent by this pandemic. For that reason, reaching out to the hardest hit and most fragile countries, as well as those in vulnerable situations, is crucial to ensuring that no country or person is left behind. Perhaps more than any other known pandemic, COVID-19 has put a strong spotlight on how interconnected and interdependent our world truly is. For one country to be safe, all countries must be safe. It has undeniably provided us with yet another opportunity to continue to strengthen collaboration and to explore potential avenues for cooperation. It has highlighted the importance of strengthening and upholding multilateralism. On this front, we cannot fail to mention the tireless efforts of France and Tunisia that yesterday resulted in the adoption of the historic resolution 2532 (2020), endorsing the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. The adoption of that resolution will not only send an important signal to parties to conflict, and may help change calculations on the ground, but also provides a vivid example of what unwavering efforts to strengthen multilateralism can achieve. COVID-19 has reinvigorated us with strength and resilience, empowering us with the will to transform challenges into opportunities. Let us not miss this opportunity to try and work together to defeat this common enemy. We have been given yet another chance to come together. Shall we take this opportunity and rise to the occasion?
