Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): I wish to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Alan Doss for his
briefing. My delegation is also very grateful for the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and for his
statement. We welcome the presence of His Excellency
the Foreign Minister of Belgium, as well as of the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, at our meeting
today.

Viet Nam is deeply concerned at the alarming
deterioration of the security and humanitarian situation
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is a serious setback in the Nairobi and Goma
processes, and the conflict has assumed regional
dimensions. We are particularly concerned about the
grave atrocities and human rights violations targeting
civilians, especially women and children, in the
conflict areas. We commend the Belgian delegation for
their initiative in holding the Arria meeting on the

Democratic Republic of the Congo yesterday, during
which deep concerns were expressed at the gravity of
the humanitarian situation, especially sexual and
gender-based violence and child recruitment.

The Goma and Nairobi processes are the sole
framework for lasting peace and stability in the
subregion. It is our view that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda should undertake joint
confidence-building measures to defuse the current
crisis and facilitate the search for a comprehensive
political solution to the conflict.

We hold that all stakeholders in the Democratic
Republic must renounce violence and military options,
seriously revive the Goma process and respond
actively to the United Nations security, stabilization
and support strategy for the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We commend the
good offices efforts by the Secretary-General and
leaders of the European Union and the African Union
in facilitating the search for a lasting and
comprehensive solution. We welcome the outcome of
the Nairobi summit, the joint statement of 7 November
and the appointment by the Secretary-General of his
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region. We hope
that it will help revive the Goma and Nairobi
processes.

Viet Nam wishes to reiterate its support for the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and for
its discharge of its mandated duties. We also take note
of MONUC's efforts in helping to control the recent
fighting, in protecting civilians and in improving the
capacity of the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (FARDC).

However, we believe there is still room for
improvement in MONUC's performance. MONUC
should better implement its principal responsibility of
civilian protection, especially after its reinforcement in
accordance with resolution 1843 (2008). We believe
that within its current resource constraints, MONUC
should make the most of its deployment and
reconfiguration and should better cooperate and
coordinate with FARDC to ensure the successful
implementation of its mandate, especially in the area of
protection of civilians in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

