The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Portugal.

Portugal fully subscribes to the statement made by the
presidency of the European Union.

The successful conclusion of the Hebron Protocol had
led us to believe that Israel and the Palestinians would, at
this moment, be focusing on the timely implementation of
all the agreements they had already reached and would by
now be starting talks on the final status.

However, since then, the peace process has remained
at a stalemate. That is why both the Council and the
General Assembly, each according to its own
responsibilities, are being called from time to time to deal
with elements of disturbance that could jeopardize the peace
process and disrupt international peace and security.

We would have expected to see the parties seated
around the table, negotiating directly in a good atmosphere,
enabling them to tackle the crucial issues which remain to
be addressed.
But unhelpful unilateral actions are creating serious
obstacles to the peace process. I am referring in particular
to the recent endorsement by the Government of Israel of
plans to extend the municipal authority of Jerusalem in a
way that will alter the status quo of the city and prejudge
the outcome of the final status negotiations.

We believe that this decision constitutes a violation of
the numerous resolutions of the Security Council and
General Assembly. We also believe that such a measure
contravenes the terms of reference of the peace process and
the spirit of the Oslo accords. Furthermore, this decision
follows a succession of unacceptable actions by the Israeli
authorities against the Palestinian population in Jerusalem.
Those actions violate the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
applies de facto and de jure to the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem.

Unfortunately, these measures not only increase the
frustration felt by all those who have been supporting the
peace process, but they also encourage those forces on both
sides which have been directly or indirectly opposing peace.
This will also further complicate the task of those engaged
in mediating or assisting the parties in the peace process in
order to bring them together and help them overcome their
differences.

 

Such measures can only undermine the indispensable
trust and confidence that the parties must build up in
order to achieve a just, comprehensive and longstanding
political settlement based on Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and to establish a new
relationship based on cooperation from which all
countries and peoples of the region will benefit.

In this regard, we appeal to the Israeli authorities to
reconsider these decisions on the municipality of
Jerusalem and to refrain from translating them into any
concrete action, since this would only further derail the
peace talks. We also appeal to the Israeli Government to
accept, as quickly as possible, the current United States
initiative, so that the peace process can resume.

Portugal firmly believes that there is no alternative
to the peace process in the Middle East. The Council
must urge the parties to live up to their commitments and
to comply with their obligations under international law
and the agreements they have reached.

In this context, my delegation is ready to consider,
at an appropriate time, further action by the Council on
this issue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

