Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland): Ireland welcomes this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
subject of children and armed conflict. We fully
associate ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of France on behalf of the European
Union.

At the outset let me thank you, Mr. President, and
the Government of Viet Nam for organizing this open
debate on so important a topic.

Since the issue of children and armed conflict
was formally placed on the agenda of the Security
Council in 1998, the progressive engagement of the
Council has yielded significant gains for children.

Ireland supports the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanisms on children and
armed conflict established by resolution 1612 (2005).
In that regard, we welcome the annual reporting of the
Working Group of the Security Council on Children
and Armed Conflict. The creation of the Working
Group gives firm evidence of the international
community's commitment to addressing that issue at
the highest level.

Ireland welcomes the adoption by the Working
Group, under the chairmanship of the Permanent
Representative of France, of concrete conclusions,
which contain increasingly specific requirements and
recommendations. These remind States of their
obligations and encourage them to take measures to
strengthen child protection. We note that, in many
cases, the conclusions have already had a positive
impact, including with regard to drops in child
recruitment and enhanced dialogue between parties to
conflicts and the United Nations. Ireland calls upon all
parties to implement the conclusions of the Working
Group. We also call for the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to look into the need to give the
Working Group the means required to enable it
effectively and transparently to continue its work for
the benefit of children.

Ireland is the current Chair of the Human
Security Network, a position that we will hold until
May 2009. The harmful and widespread impact of
armed conflict on children has been one of the priority
issues for the Network since its establishment almost
10 years ago.

We continue to be a strong supporter of the
valuable work of Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. We would like to take this
opportunity to commend Ms. Coomaraswamy and her
Office for their committed efforts in raising awareness,
engaging with parties to conflict through her field
visits and keeping this issue high on the international
agenda.

Ireland also recognizes the need to promote a
broad-based approach to the problem and, in that
regard, fully supports - in addition to the work of the
Office of the Special Representative - the endeavours
of UNICEF and other United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, along with non-governmental
organizations, regional organizations and national
authorities.

We would also like to underline the importance of
the role that the International Criminal Court can play
in the fight against the impunity of perpetrators of war
crimes and crimes against humanity carried out against
children, including perpetrators who enlist and
conscript child soldiers.

Ireland draws attention to the establishment of
the European Union's Guidelines on Children and
Armed Conflict, which could be drawn upon by other
actors, and to the integration of that issue into the
Union's development and humanitarian policies. In the
context of the European Security and Defence Policy,
the issue is also integrated into external crisis
management operations of the Union, such as the
European Union-led peacekeeping force, which is
currently in place in Chad and the Central African
Republic under a mandate conferred by the Security
Council.

Children affected by armed conflict are among
the most frequent victims of serious human rights
violations and abuses. During an armed conflict, girls
in particular are subject to widespread - and at times
systematic - gender-based human rights violations
that have far-reaching repercussions. As Chair of the
Human Security Network, we have chosen to focus on
the theme of gender-based violence. In that regard, we
note in particular that the Secretary-General's report
issued in December 2007 (S/2007/757) recommends, in
its paragraph 160,

"that the Security Council give equal weight to
all categories of grave violations, including not
only the recruitment and use of children, but also
the killing and maiming of children, rape and
other grave sexual violence, abductions, attacks
against schools or hospitals and denial of
humanitarian access to children".

Successive resolutions of the Security Council
have also recognized such grave abuses. Resolution
1325 (2000) recognizes the human rights of girls and
their right to protection, including protection from
gender-based violence, particularly rape and other
forms of sexual abuse. Resolution 1325 (2000) also
recognizes the special needs of girls in post-conflict
situations and the necessity of taking girls' rights and
needs into account in designing peace programmes,
peace agreements, camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons, and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. Most recently, Security
Council resolution 1820 (2008) highlights the targeting
of girls through the use of sexual violence and
demands that all parties to armed conflict take
appropriate measures to protect women and girls from
sexual violence.

In closing, let me reaffirm that Ireland is
committed to working closely with the United Nations
system, as well as with other relevant international and
regional organizations, to relieve the suffering of
children in armed conflict and to bring an end to
serious violations and abuses of children's rights.

