Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement to be made by the delegation of the European Union. I thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and his and his office's valuable work and welcome Ms. Irena Hasi¢'s briefing. The recent coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak has shown us how interdependent we are. We encourage political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue cooperating and coordinating their actions in the fight against the pandemic. We also call for full respect at all levels of the constitutional and legal framework, as well as adherence to international human rights law. It is essential that all political leaders practice good governance at a time when it is most needed, including by making the prevention of corruption a part of their response to the pandemic. Bosnia and Herzegovina does not stand alone. The European Union (EU) has announced over €3.3 billion in financial support to its partners in the Western Balkans. The Union's commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina is a display of its firm belief that the country's future lies within the EU. The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina decided on 28 April to start a reform process on key priorities identified in the EU Commission's opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina's EU membership application. That is a welcome step forward. It is crucial, however, for that intention to translate into policy soon. We underline the need for progress in matters of rule of law and the fight against corruption. The independence of the judiciary has to be guaranteed and strengthened, one of the aims being to reform the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council. We welcome the appointment of Ms. Angelika Nussberger as international judge at the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In order to ensure the full exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms, it is important that rulings of the European Court of Human Rights are complied with fully and in a timely manner. We regret that, so far, the Bosnian authorities have failed to comply with the ruling in the Sejdic and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina case. Ms. Hasi¢e's briefing underlines the need for Bosnia and Herzegovina's population, and particularly its political elite, to deal with its past in order to come to a durable peace. We all know that no reconciliation is possible in Bosnia and Herzegovina without sincere recognition of the crimes committed during the war, including the Srebrenica genocide almost 25 years ago. Revision or denial of war crimes and the glorification of war criminals all undermine that process. War criminals must be held accountable. Impunity is not acceptable. Last week, Belgian young people pleaded in favour of having a voice in matters of peace and security. The inclusion of youth in transitional justice processes enhances the effectiveness of those processes. Ms. Hasi¢ stressed the need to invest in education to avoid a repetition of the past. A system created in 2002 to overcome differences in an interim phase has now become symbolic of how Bosnia and Herzegovina's transition has not materialized. The "two schools under one roof policy" is an impediment to reconciliation. It prevents the development of a shared vision and understanding of the past, instils ethnic prejudice and reinforces mistrust. We can only add our voice to the calls of various international bodies and urge the relevant authorities to end discrimination and segregation in education. Schools are supposed to promote tolerance and mutual understanding as a basis for well- functioning democratic societies.
