Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first and foremost, to express my sincere thanks
to the Secretary General of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, for her
thorough briefing. I am pleased to see her again at the
Security Council table, one year after the adoption of
substantive resolution 2309 (2016). I would also like to
thank my colleague Ambassador Aboulatta, Permanent
Representative of Egypt, for his briefing on behalf of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

International civil aviation continues to be a prime
target for terrorist groups because of both the potential
for human and economic damage and its impact on the
media. Without going back over the striking examples of
the past, several events this year once again illustrated
the seriousness of the threat. One recent such example
occurred at the end of July, when the Australian
Government thwarted a terrorist attack that was likely
targeting a plane.

In the face of such a serious threat, France has
continued to work over the past year to strengthen
systems in place and its response. At the national
level, the measures we have taken to enhance air
transport security include enhanced capacity to detect
new explosives; enhanced and more rapid response
capabilities to airport attacks; the setting up of
intelligence cells dedicated to airports; the development
of a new management system for background checks;
and the adoption of a risk assessment programme for
flights passing through third countries. Within the
European Union, France recently strengthened its
cooperation with the European Aviation Safety Agency
through a cooperation agreement reached a few days
ago. One of the stipulated areas of cooperation is the
security of air transport.

Internationally, France is particularly active
in ICAO, where it works on a daily basis under the
leadership of my colleague, Philippe Bertoux, who
is here today, in order to improve the Standards and
Recommended Practices, strengthen international
audits and to provide requesting States with targeted
technical assistance. France has also assumed the
chairmanship of the ICAO Council's Committee on
Unlawful Interference, where it will actively contribute
to the work of strengthening aviation security. My
country is also committed to supporting the work of
ICAO and has shown its commitment by providing
two experts from the French administration to the
ICAO - one in Montreal to support the team in
charge of audits and the other at the regional office in
Dakar to support the African Aviation Security and
Facilitation Plan.
Against that backdrop, the Security Council has
an important role to play in calling on all States to
meet their obligations in this arena and to promote the
implementation of the standards set out in the Chicago
Convention. The adoption of resolution 2309 (2016) last
year was an important moment to give new impetus to
the efforts of the international community to evaluate
the risk that terrorism poses for international civil
aviation. We welcome the progress that has been made,
but we must, and can, still do better.

I would therefore like to take this opportunity
to highlight the importance of close and effective
cooperation between ICAO and the United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies, particularly the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. The special meeting organized
jointly by the CTC and ICAO in July was an excellent
opportunity for enhancing dialogue between Member
States and the relevant international and regional
organizations and for identifying ways to promote the
implementation of international standards in the field of
aviation security. France hopes that this cooperation will
continue and hopes to see the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
participate in the work of ICAO in Montreal, once she
takes office.

Let me conclude by reiterating the importance
that France attaches to this issue and by highlight the
breadth of France's engagement on what it considers to
be a top priority. It is imperative that the international
community as a whole continue to mobilize to ensure
the safety of air transport. Today's meeting marks a
new milestone in that regard.

