Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): Indonesia congratulates
Nigeria on its presidency for the month of August and
expresses its appreciation to you, Madam President, for
having convened this open debate.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statements made earlier
by the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Viet Nam on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
respectively.

There is no denying that the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security currently reflects
significant progress. Their growing contribution and
particularly their cooperation with the United Nations,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter, is
commendable. As a consistent and robust supporter
of regional organizations, Indonesia is pleased that
today's theme has been discussed on a regular basis by
the Council.

My delegation has always underlined the value
of the capacities of regional and subregional entities
to foster peace and security through strong and
regionally owned frameworks for conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Indonesia, during its presidency of the Council in
November 2007, organized a debate with a similar topic
to focus on existing and potential capacities of regional
organizations and to identify and develop modalities
by which to enhance cooperation between these
organizations and the United Nations, including the
Security Council. The presidential statement adopted on
that occasion (S/PRST/2007/42) stressed, among other
things, developing an effective partnership between the
Council and regional and subregional organizations, so
as to enable an early response to disputes and emerging
crises.

The more complex, multidimensional and
interlinked threats posed by contemporary challenges to
global security, as also rightly mentioned in the concept
note (S/2015/599, annex), demand a creative approach
from regional and subregional actors, an approach that
puts greater primacy on cooperation and synergy and
that can incorporate the holistic nature of threats while
dealing with the unique factors present in each situation.
Such an approach is undoubtedly a challenge for the
United Nations, which needs to sharpen its response in
dynamic situations and must actualize it in such a way
that regional and subregional views are appropriately
reflected and the intergovernmental system can fully
own those United Nations responses.

Regional organizations are uniquely positioned
to advise and contribute to peacemaking and
peacebuilding, because they often share bonds of
history and fraternity that give them insights into how
to resolve local conflicts. In that regard, Indonesia
emphasizes the significance of enhanced consultation,
trust, cooperation and collaboration for optimizing
the comparative advantages of the United Nations and
regional actors. Within South-East Asia, it has been
our policy to maintain peace and stability together
with other ASEAN member States by strengthening
our capacities and upholding shared norms aimed at
consolidating peace and at actively preventing and
resolving conflicts. The dividends have been many.
Today South-East Asia is one of the most dynamic
regions in the world. Peace and stability in South-East
Asia have been critical not only for global trade but
also for larger global peace and security. It is important
for Indonesia that ASEAN continues to become a net
contributor to peace, development and prosperity. To
that end, in 2011, under Indonesia's chairpersonship,
ASEAN adopted the Bali Declaration on ASEAN
Community in a Global Community of Nations, which
serves as a common ASEAN platform for addressing
key global issues of shared interest in multilateral
forums, including the United Nations.

Outside South-East Asia, we have also worked
hard to promote a new regional architecture in the
Asia-Pacific region, one capable of yielding greater
and more durable peace and in which the relations
among the major Powers can remain peaceful and
cooperative. We hope that it will help emerging Powers
to find their proper place without triggering mistrust.
Furthermore, Indonesia is one of the countries that has
been actively supporting and developing a framework
of cross-regional consultations and cooperation linking
and coordinating various regional and subregional
organizations, such as the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation, the Asia-Europe Meeting and the
Forum for East Asia-Latin America Cooperation, so
that they can confront common global challenges. In
April we initiated and hosted the 2015 summit of the
Asian-African Conference, aimed at strengthening
partnerships among Asian and African nations, while
also emphasizing synergies among various regional
and subregional organizations on the two continents.

Our shared global challenges will be best tackled
when we all act responsibly and in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law, and
when we enable and support regional and subregional
organizations in their efforts to fully perform their
roles. While the various regional and subregional
actors are certainly at different levels of development,
each possesses particular strengths and has great
potential to contribute to the work of the Council. We
are positive that, through discussions such as today's
and by ensuring that tangible follow-up steps are
taken, the strengths of the various regional actors can
be harnessed more effectively for the common good.
Indonesia, for its part, is fully committed to continuing
to contribute to that end.

