Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would
like to thank the Russian Federation for convening
this meeting and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his illustrative
and detailed description of the humanitarian situation
in the city of Raqqa and the Rukban refugee camp.

Four months ago, in December last year, when
Security Council members adopted resolution 2393
(2017), they noted the high numbers ofdisplaced persons
and refugees who had fled Syria to neighbouring
countries as a result of the escalation of violence and
the serious humanitarian crisis (see S/PV.8141). Since
2015, clashes in Raqqa have led many Syrian families to
move to the Rukban camp on Jordan's northern borders,
while Syrian opposition forces and Shia militias have
been fighting at the Al-Tanf border crossing and
the triangular border territory between Jordan, Iraq
and Syria.

It should be recalled that Raqqa was the main
Syrian stronghold of the Islamic State. The situation
in Raqqa is particularly difficult, given that military
offensives have led to the destruction of large swaths of
civilian infrastructure and housing.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates its
deep concern about the devastating humanitarian
situation in Syria, and in the case before us, in Raqqa
and in the Rukban camp. We commend the efforts and
work of the World Health Organization, which has been
providing thousands of people in Raqqa with medicine
and supplies. However, Raqqqa residents remain
deprived of humanitarian assistance since there are no
international humanitarian organizations in the region
and local authorities cannot improve the situation.

Moreover, the situation of civilians returning to
Raqqa, where they face ongoing danger owing to the
high number of landmines and improvised explosive
devices, as well as to the epidemiological situation
in the city, with thousands of bodies still under the
rubble of destroyed buildings, demands the utmost
attention of the international community and the
Security Council so that urgent action can be taken.
In that regard, my delegation continues to encourage
those countries with the capacity to influence the
parties to the conflict to seek a way to achieve
significant progress in implementing the provisions
of resolution 2401 (2018) and in providing regular and
sustained access to the people of Raqqa and the Rukban
camp to international humanitarian organizations and
United Nations convoys in order to care for the sick and
wounded and to meet the urgent needs that cannot be
met by sporadic deliveries.

We conclude our statement by recalling the desire
and will of the peoples of Africa, as expressed in the
communique of the African Union Commission of
15 April, which stresses that:

"The Syrian people have suffered far too long. In the
face of this dire situation, the only sensible course of
action is the intensification of international efforts
to find a lasting political solution based solely on
the interests of the Syrian people and respecting
the territorial integrity of Syria."

