Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to join my colleagues in expressing my country's condolences to the Governments of France and the Niger following yesterday's heinous attack in the Niger. I would also like to thank the briefers for their statements. Belgium notes that the political dispute following the presidential election is still not fully resolved, despite the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) recognizing the election of President Umaro Sissoco Embale, on 22 April, and Prime Minister Nuno Gomes Nabiam's Government programme on 29 June. Tensions and a climate of mistrust continue to characterize the political sphere. In that context, the efforts made by ECOWAS and the group of five international partners must be recognized and supported. However, like the Secretary-General, we call on all political actors in Guinea-Bissau to engage in an inclusive and sincere dialogue, including with civil society, to reach consensus on contentious issues. That spirit of cooperation is also necessary in order to embark upon a much-needed reform programme for the country and a revision of the Constitution, all in accordance with the Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS six-point road map. Political stability is essential for socioeconomic recovery; the pandemic adds an additional level of complexity to that challenge. In that regard, it is important that the measures taken by the authorities to combat this threat and its consequences take sufficient account of the situation of the poorest, who are threatened by food insecurity, malnutrition and inaccessible health care. The fight against the scourges of drug trafficking and organized crime will also be crucial to prevent drug traffickers from exploiting the current situation in the country. Despite the challenges of the political context and the fight against the pandemic, it remains crucial that the Government and all State institutions ensure respect for the rule of law, freedom of expression and the protection of human rights. Those are indispensable ingredients for the country to return to the path of stability. Belgium calls on the Government to investigate recent events, including threats against members of Parliament and the violent attack on the media. We commend the efforts made by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea- Bissau, in cooperation with the country team and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, in the context of its closure. We reiterate that the transition must be as smooth and painless as possible for the country. The success of the transition will also depend on the authorities of Guinea-Bissau taking ownership of the Integrated Office's tasks. The departure of the Integrated Office does not in the least imply the abandonment of Guinea-Bissau by the international community. The monitoring of the situation by the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and the support of the Peacebuilding Fund are positive. The work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the region will continue to be of crucial importance. It will be important to continue that support in the new phase in Guinea-Bissau. Let me conclude by expressing Belgium's full support for the work and efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sori- Coulibaly, and the entire Integrated Office to promote dialogue and national reconciliation in the country.
