Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubis; the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Mr. Yury Fedotov; and Ambassador Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for their statements.

My delegation endorses the statement made by
the Head of the Delegation of the European Union.
I wish to add, in my national capacity, a number of
considerations for this debate.

Spain reiterates its congratulations to the people of
Afghanistan on holding the first round of the process to
elect a new President of the Republic and new members
of the provincial councils. We also commend them for
the way in which they conducted the campaign and the
voting in the second round, whose counting and legal
processes have not yet been completed. These historic
elections are critical to the ongoing transition process,
and therefore to the future of Afghanistan. They were
called to ensure the first democratic transfer of power
in the presidency of the Republic, thereby completing
the political transformation started 12 years ago by
the Afghans, with the support of the international
community.

It is important to highlight the exemplary
behaviour of the Afghan people, who flocked to the
polls with courage and resolve, defying the threats
of those who sought to derail the ongoing transition.
The statistics - which reflect a participation rate
of approximately 60 per cent in the first round, with
a 38 per cent share of female participation - make
clear the strong commitment of the majority to the
democratic process in the country. We also welcome the
commitment to maintaining public order shown by the
Afghan National Security Forces during the balloting.

It is vital that this process be completed successfully.
All political actors and State institutions, particularly
the electoral institutions, must show themselves worthy
of the brave citizens who, with their overwhelming
participation in the elections, bravely and resolutely
outlined the future they want for the country - a future
of democracy, peace and economic and social progress.
It is therefore imperative that, with respect to the
Constitution and laws of Afghanistan, all existing legal
mechanisms be in place to ensure that the will of the
people expressed at the polls is respected, and that the
entire process be conducted in a peaceful, responsible
and transparent manner.
For all these reasons, I wish to join Spain's voice
to those who have spoke before me in reiterating the
call on all actors - the candidates, the voters and the
institutions - to maintain to the end the exemplary
behaviour they showed in the early phases of the
electoral process.

For more than a decade, Spain has been strongly
committed to Afghanistan and the Afghans. Through
our development cooperation, which made Afghanistan
a priority target; the activities of our provincial
reconstruction team in Qala-e-Naw; and our support
for the country's security and the training of its security
forces, Spain has responded to requests from Afghans
and assisted them in their process of nation-building.
Many significant challenges remain. Afghans can count
on Spain to remain at its side, as always, and support
them in their efforts to build a stable, prosperous,
democratic Afghanistan that cooperates with its
neighbours and remains fully sovereign.

I cannot conclude without reiterating Spain's
gratitude and support for the role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to date and
that it is still expected to play in support ofthe decisions
and goals of the people of Afghanistan.

