Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): 1
would like to thank India for convening this important
open debate. I also wish to convey my country's
appreciation to Portugal for its work to improve the
transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency of the
Security Council's work during its chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

Historically, Argentina has promoted a more
transparent and democratic Security Council whenever
it has had the opportunity, including in the course of
the intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform in the General Assembly. It is worth recalling
that it was Argentina who, in February 2000, during its
presidency of the Security Council, urged the adoption
of a presidential note in which newly elected members
were invited to participate as observers in informal
consultations during the month preceding their term
of membership as elected members of that organ
(S/2000/155). Also, during its most recent term in the
Council, in 2005 and 2006, my country promoted and
supported a number of initiatives aimed at achieving
greater transparency and access to the Council for the
wider United Nations membership.

It would be unfair not to acknowledge the positive
developments that have taken place in the last few
years, including the holding of these debates, which
offer an opportunity for non-Council members to put
forward proposals aimed at further improving the
Council's working methods and democratizing its
decision-making process. The interaction ofthe Security
Council with troop - and police-contributing countries,
with regional organizations and with the relevant
United Nations bodies, as well as the increase in Arria
Formula meetings, inter alia, are developments also
worth mentioning. However, we believe that, although
necessary, these achievements are not sufficient, as
became clear last May when the proposals of the group
of five small nations were discussed. Those proposals
are in line with Argentina's position on the matter. At
that time, Argentina did not deem it advisable to force
a decision through a resolution adopted by a vote in
the General Assembly. However, there is no reason
why the Security Council should not benefit from the
contributions that an in-depth debate in the General
Assembly can generate. We believe that such a debate
on methodological improvements is both appropriate
and timely, and in no way impedes progress towards a
deeper, comprehensive reform of the Security Council.

The new measures being considered by the
Council with regard to the process of appointing the
chairs of subsidiary bodies and the exercise and role
of penholders seem to be going in a good direction,
despite the fact that, once again, the discussion of the
topic has been limited to Council members, without a
participatory process involving the wider membership.

The goal of achieving a more democratic, effective
and transparent Security Council requires that the means
for its transformation involve an open and inclusive
debate with the participation of the full membership.
Paragraph 1, Article 2, Chapter I of the Charter, which
governs and inspires us, reads: "The Organization is
based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all its
Members". It is therefore clear that the most legitimate,
representative and efficient way to make sure that the
process moves forward is to work in consultation with
the entirety of the wider membership, while respecting
and taking into consideration its expectations.

Lastly, Argentina believes that updating the
working methods of the Security Council in response to
the demands of the international community for a more
democratic and transparent Security Council continues
to be an important goal, which Argentina endorses.

In that regard, Argentina reaffirms its promise to
contribute its best efforts to the process in 2013-2014 as
a non-permanent member of the Council.

