Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Madam
President, it gives me pleasure to participate in this
important meeting dedicated to the discussion of one of
the most important current topics on the United
Nations agenda, namely the relationship between
energy, security and the climate, which will no doubt
be extensively debated during the high-level segment
of the fifteenth session of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, scheduled to be held in New
York from 9 to 11 May 2007. The State of Qatar will
have the honour of chairing that session, and it is my
pleasure to share with the Security Council our views
on the subject being discussed in the Council today, as
outlined in the United Kingdom concept paper on
energy, security and climate change.

We wish to recall here that climate change has
become an urgent and pressing reality, which leaves us
with a sole option: international collective action
aimed at alleviating its repercussions and dire
consequences for our planet.

We believe that failure to adequately address the
question of climate change could be attributed to the
de-linking of the question of development from that of
climate change. We believe that an optimal and
effective solution to the problem of climate change can
be found only through an integrated approach
addressing climate change in the context of sustainable
development. The issue of climate change is part and
parcel of that of development, and the development
process must begin in the developing countries on the
basis of a firm understanding of the manner in which
development takes place.

In that connection, we would like to recall two
significant elements that were reiterated at the 1992
Rio Conference on climate change: first, those that are
primarily responsible for climate change should bear
the financial burden of repairing the damage; secondly,
the development process must be neither sacrificed nor
compromised because of climate change.

It is noteworthy, however, that, during
negotiations on the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, the topic of
development was completely overlooked, which in turn
led to the failure to effectively address the issue, in the
light of the complete de-linkage of the question of
climate change from that of development. A case in
point is the inability so far to produce a single
comprehensive report on the twin questions of climate
change and sustainable development.

Like the majority of developing countries, we
believe that the literature on the linkage between
climate change and sustainable development reflects a
fragmented, patchy and diffuse philosophy that has
effectively relegated development to a lower rank on
the list of the international community's priorities. We
firmly believe that any successful solution to the
climate problem must emerge as part of an integrated
approach to sustainable development.

We must ask ourselves about the theoretical and
practical lessons that can be drawn from integrating
climate-change-mitigation efforts into the development
process. What policies can we put in place with respect
to sources of greenhouse gas emissions? In other
words, what is the impact of population density,
income level, energy and carbon concentrations? The
answer to these and other questions may not be
adequately given in this forum as they require in-depth,
detailed study, which must precede the formulation of
specific policies or recommendations.

We have carefully studied the discussion paper
submitted by the delegation of the United Kingdom.
Given the differences in perspective, we would like to
make the following comments.

We believe that the paper addresses the symptoms
and the repercussions of the problem but not its causes.
All the points raised in the paper involve issues
affected by climate change, but the response of the
international community has been piecemeal and ad
hoc. We are convinced that the discussion of the
subject of climate change must be extensive,
integrated, comprehensive and all-inclusive, and that it
must encompass all the dimensions of this problem,
including those mentioned in the United Kingdom
paper. Threats brought about by climate change do not
loom over vulnerable States exclusively but are
primarily threats to sustainable development. Drought,
desertification, the drying out of river basins,
migration, water resources and energy supplies are
issues of concern to all and pose a threat to the entire
world.

We note that the paper singled out fossil fuels as
the principal cause of climate change and the
concentration of greenhouse gases, while scientists
attribute carbon dioxide emissions into the atmosphere

to destructive deforestation and desertification.
Furthermore, the situation is compounded by the
unsustainable exploitation and use of land, creeping
urbanization, the impact of nuclear energy, natural
disasters, conflicts, the lava and gases produced by
volcanic eruptions, sandstorms and industrial pollution.
We must not forget that fossil fuels were the single
most important factor in the astounding industrial
progress achieved in the developed countries. Those
were the same States that pursued destructive policies
of deforestation, urbanization and land use. Combating
disease, unemployment and poverty require ambitious
and adequately financed development programmes and
must benefit from modern technologies.

In order to arrive at a common understanding so
as to resolve the problem of climate change, we must
not overlook the principle, agreed on at all United
Nations summits and conferences, of the common and
differentiated responsibilities of all States.
Accordingly, rich, developed and industrialized
countries are assigned responsibilities different from
those of poor and developing countries.

Since we all run the risk of being submerged, we
must work collectively to save ourselves from
drowning. In this context, we recall Security Council
resolution 1625 (2005), from which we draw the
conclusion that the desired solutions to issues of
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and post-conflict
development must be comprehensive and integrated.
Now that we have identified the problem and are
becoming increasingly aware of its repercussions, we
must mobilize the political will necessary to address
vulnerability in countries liable to suffer from
instability, through promoting knowledge, facilitating
the transfer of technology, putting in place adaptation
and impact mitigation mechanisms and providing
sufficient resources to rise to the challenges of climate
change.

With regard to the responsibility of the Secretary-
General to bring this matter to the attention of the
Security Council, we note that in Article 99 the Charter
limits that prerogative to matters which in the opinion
of Secretary-General may threaten the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Much has been spoken and written about threats
emanating from climate change. The picture has
become clearer now. The question cannot be addressed
by debates limited exclusively to the Security Council.

We need mechanisms capable of enforcing their own
resolutions, provided that those mechanisms are of
wider representation. In our view, the Security Council,
because of imbalances in its power hierarchy, is not the
optimal mechanism to address the question of climate
change. The threats posed by climate change must be
addressed by the Commission on Sustainable
Development, the Economic and Social Council and
above all, the General Assembly. We believe that a
more serious and comprehensive approach to all
aspects of climate change could be initiated through a
joint meeting of the Economic and Social Council and
the Security Council, the outcome of which should
then be submitted to the General Assembly.

