Mr. Assaf (Lebanon): I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing, as
well as the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, for her perceptive remarks
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Mr. Holmes, for his insightful comments. We wish him
all the best in his next endeavour. Lebanon also
expresses its support for the informal group of experts
on the protection of civilians. Its diligent work,
coupled with that of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), has been instrumental
in reporting the realities on the ground.

Civilians continue to account for the majority of
casualties in armed conflicts, even after more than a
decade since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999).
Thus the prospects for building safe, peaceful and
prosperous societies are eroded, as children's hope for
the future is shattered, women and girls continue to be
subject to endemic sexual and gender-based violence,
and able men are killed or injured.

Tolerating impunity for the armed targeting of
civilians only encourages perpetrators in their heinous
practices. Lebanon supports the establishment of
standing mechanisms for the timely creation of
independent fact-finding commissions in the immediate
aftermath of hostilities. That would improve the
Council's ability to fairly assess the realities on the
ground and to take appropriate action against those
parties undermining international law and international
humanitarian law.

The use of cluster munitions as a means of
indiscriminate attacks against civilians is particularly
lethal, since its risks to civilians endure long after the
conflict has ended. The Lebanese armed forces,
assisted by the international community, are still
working on clearing vast areas from the 4 million
cluster bombs Israel dropped in the last 48 hours of the
war it waged in 2006. Hundreds of civilians - a large
proportion of whom are children - are still dying or
losing limbs, four years on, as a result of unexploded
munitions. Lebanon reiterates its demand that Israel
pay due compensation for the Lebanese children and
farmers harmed by cluster munitions, in addition to the
fishermen and others affected by the oil spill caused by
the Israeli bombing of the Jiyeh power plant in 2006.

Standing idle as human rights and international
humanitarian law are violated and civilian access to aid
is consistently impeded means abandoning the victims
twice. The people of Gaza, whose hospitals and
schools have been repeatedly bombed by the Israeli
army, should be allowed to access, without waiting
endless hours at checkpoints, the humanitarian aid that
would cater to their basic human needs. Moreover, the
blockade of Gaza should be lifted immediately and
without conditions.

The efforts to protect civilians should also tackle
the root causes hampering enduring peace and security,
in addition to dealing with imminent physical threats.
While Lebanon commends the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) and
OCHA in Gaza, the fact remains that unless the siege is
lifted and the people of Gaza allowed to experience
sustainable and sustained economic development, their
basic human right to freedom from want and need will
continue to be threatened. Lebanon also expresses its
appreciation for the quick-impact projects carried out
by the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which
have made an important difference in the lives of our
citizens.
While there is no doubt that civilians in armed
conflict are forced into vulnerable situations, it must be
acknowledged that refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) are generally in even more precarious
conditions. It is imperative that the international
community exert a concerted effort to ensure the return
of refugees and IDPs to safe and secure homes.

The Security Council has both a political
responsibility and a moral duty towards defenceless
civilians in situations of armed conflict, as well as
towards humanitarian aid workers and journalists who
risk their lives to help those vulnerable populations and
to report on their plight. We owe it to them all to
endow our peacekeeping operations with the necessary
resources to carry out their mandates, as well as to
embolden them with the necessary political will.

