Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today the Security Council is concluding an
important stage in its work. The Council has carefully
considered recommendations that fall within its
purview, recommendations contained in the report of
the United Nations Panel on Peace Operations, that is
the Brahimi Report. And so, one of the instructions
given us from the Security Council meeting at the level
of heads of State and Government at the recent
Millennium Summit, has now been followed.

We would like to extend our special thanks to the
Chairman of the Working Group of the Security
Council established for this purpose, namely the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Jamaica,
Ambassador Curtis Ward, for his able and effective
guidance of the work. We would also like to note the
rather constructive approach shown by members of the
Group in seeking generally accepted wordings. It is our
expectation that the tone now set will prevail in further
work in this area.

We think that the document will not only be a
good guide for the Council's peacekeeping work, but
will also be duly considered by Member States. It is
significant that the Security Council has assumed the
task of formulating clear and precise mandates and in-
depth yet quick work on all issues related to preparing
to deploy peacekeeping operations. The important role
played by special Security Council missions to hot
spots has been reaffirmed.

We believe that the provisions on the need for
consultations with troop-contributing countries are
clear evidence that the Council is ready to consider the
views of States that make a real contribution to United
Nations peace operations.

Now that the resolution on the Brahimi Report
has been adopted, we enter an equally important stage
of implementing the agreed decisions. This relates,
inter alia, to the paragraph proposed by the Russian
Federation, whereby the Security Council undertakes to
consider using the Military Staff Committee as one of
the means of enhancing the United Nations
peacemaking capacity. We believe that this approach
would maintain balance in the distribution of
responsibilities between Member States and the United
Nations Secretariat.

We believe that the relevant provisions of the
Charter provide for a clear system for using the
military and analytical potential of States that are
members of the Security Council in various stages of
peacekeeping activities. In this way, States will be able
to exercise their right not only to take political
decisions, but also to deal with military components,
and countries that provide contingents, represented on
the Security Council, will then be able to fully meet
their concerns. The Russian delegation will submit its
views on this matter, and we expect that there will be
further constructive discussion of them.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that we are prepared to
participate fully in discussing and implementing the
recommendations of the Brahimi Report.

