Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2017/508), and Special
Representative Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing this morning. These reports and the Secretary-
General's own conclusions following his visit to Kabul
last week confirm the growing concern, if not alarm,
at the deteriorating political, economic and security
situation in Afghanistan.

Pakistan strongly condemns the repeated,
large-scale and orchestrated terrorist attacks in
Kabul and elsewhere in Afghanistan. There can be
no justification for the murder and mayhem aimed at
innocent civilians. Pakistan is also a principal victim
of terrorism. We share the pain and the agony of the
Afghan people and wish to work with them to defeat
and eliminate the scourge of terrorism and violence
from Afghanistan and our region.

We hope that the political differences that have
become more pronounced recently within the Afghan
Government will be reconciled by President Ghani
Ahmadzai, Chief Executive Abdullah and other
political leaders and groups. The continued economic
and political support to the Afghan Government from
the international community remains essential for the
preservation of political amity and the implementation
of much-needed governance reforms.

Besides internal differences, Afghanistan's
security faces a twin challenge: the insurgency led by
the Tehrik-e-Taliban Afghanistan, on the one hand, and
the campaign of terrorism promoted by the so-called
Islamic State, or Da'esh, on the other. Several terrorist
groups are now associated with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, including Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan,
Jamaat-ul-Ahrar, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan
and Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement, among other
terrorist groups. Those violent groups not only threaten
Afghanistan and its neighbours, but also pose a global
terrorist threat.

It has been my country's consistent View that
peace can be restored in Afghanistan only - and this I
emphasize - through a negotiated settlement between
Kabul and the Afghan Taliban. That has also long been
the consensus of the international community - one
that we saw expressed this morning. A negotiated peace
was also the conclusion reached by the Secretary-
General following his visit to Afghanistan last week.

Over the years, Pakistan has done what it could, when
asked, to help facilitate such a negotiated settlement.
Pakistan initiated the Murree talks in July 2015, which
were scuttled by a series of well-known developments.
Thereafter, we sought to resuscitate the talks under the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group (QCG).

Pakistan has continued to engage in all other
processes designed to promote a political solution: the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, the 6+1 peace formula,
the International Contact Group for Afghanistan, the
QCG, the Moscow format of regional consultations
on Afghanistan and, most recently, the Kabul process.
We believe that the promotion of a political settlement
and the pursuit of a military solution in Afghanistan
are mutually incompatible. Continued reliance on a
military option or an enhancement in troop numbers
without an accompanying political strategy will not
produce a result different from the one witnessed in the
past 15 or 16 years. It will instead lead to more violence
and bloodshed for the Afghan people; it will not yield a
political solution.

Nor can, in our opinion, the resilience of the
insurgency be explained away by convenient references
to external safe havens or support centres. Given that
large areas of Afghanistan are now under the control
of the Afghan Taliban, their safe havens are inside, not
outside, Afghanistan. As a country that continues to host
over 2 million Afghan refugees, and many more who
are undocumented, Pakistan expects the gratitude, not
the hostility, of the Afghan Government. On our part,
Pakistan's successive military operations have managed
to crush or expel all terrorist and militant groups from
our tribal territory, which borders Afghanistan.

Despite the provocative remarks made by my
colleague from Afghanistan, my country remains
committed to not allowing its territory to be used
for terrorism against any other country. We are
implementing border controls, including the fencing
and monitoring of vulnerable sections of the Pakistan-
Afghanistan border. Any issue relating to cross-border
terrorism and cross-border violations can be raised and
discussed in the coordination mechanisms, including
the bilateral mechanism for intelligence-sharing
and cooperation in border management, established
in March.

In Astana earlier this month, Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif and President Ashraf Ghani agreed to
re-energize Pakistan-Afghanistan cooperation so as to
eliminate the menace ofterrorism from our region. They
also agreed to revitalize the QCG to promote peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan. We urge all parties - in
particular the Tehrik-e-Taliban Afghanistan and all its
constituent groups - to return to the path of negotiations
in response to the call made by the Secretary-General.
Pakistan and Afghanistan's other friends can assist in
promoting a negotiated settlement. But peace can be
negotiated only - only - when the Afghan parties
desire it and they agree to eschew a military solution.

Today there is every reason for the Afghan parties
and their friends to pursue the path ofa negotiated peace.
All of them face a common threat from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and the terrorist groups affiliated
with it. Among them, the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan and
the Jamaat ul-Ahrar target Pakistan from their bases
in Afghanistan. Those groups must be rooted out from
their bases as part of an effective counter-terrorism
campaign in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, apart from Afghanistan itself,
Pakistan has suffered more from the wars and violence
that have engulfed Afghanistan for over 35 years than
any other country. No country other than mine would
gain more from peace in Afghanistan. We are confident
that, whatever our differences in the past, in the end the
deep bonds of religion, culture, history and geography
between Pakistan and Afghanistan will assert
themselves and produce an era of peaceful and mutually
beneficial cooperation between our fraternal nations.

