Mr. Voronkov: Let me begin by expressing my sincere condolences to Afghanistan, Burkina Faso, Egypt, Nigeria, Somalia and all other Member States that recently suffered terrorist attacks. My heartfelt thoughts and sympathy go to the survivors and the families of the victims. I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the tenth report (S/2020/95) of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh) to international peace and _ security and the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering the threat, as mandated by resolution 2368 (2017).As members of the Security Council are aware, the report was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), led by Ms. Coninsx, and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, led by Mr. Edmund Fitton-Brown, in close collaboration with my Office, with contributions from other United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities. ISIL lost its last stronghold in the Syrian Arab Republic in March last year and saw a change in leadership after the death of Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi in October; but this report shows that the group remains at the centre of the transnational terrorism threat. We must stay vigilant and united in confronting this scourge. ISIL has continued to seek resurgence and global relevance online and offline, aspiring to re-establish its capacity for complex international operations. ISIL's regional affiliates continue to pursue a strategy of entrenchment in conflict zones by exploiting local grievances. Due to their high number, foreign terrorist fighters who travelled to Iraq and Syria are expected to continue to pose an acute short-, medium- and long- term threat, with estimates of those alive ranging from 20,000 to almost 27,000. The situation of ISIL fighters and associated family members in detention and displacement facilities in Iraq and Syria has worsened since I presented to the Council the ninth report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/612) on the threat posed by the group (see S/PV.8605). Their fate remains a major challenge to the international community. ISIL has become increasingly focused on freeing them. Meanwhile, most Member States have not yet assumed responsibility for the repatriation of their nationals. The report of the Secretary-General also highlights relevant activities of United Nations entities in support of Member States over the past six months, especially in the light of the requirements under resolutions 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019), 2467 (2019), and 2482 (2019). In the Middle East, ISIL's reconstitution as a covert network in Syria follows a similar pattern to that followed in Iraq since 2017. The north-east of Syria has seen a spike in attacks targeting the international coalition against Da'esh and local non-State armed groups. Along the Syrian-Iraqi border, the crossing of fighters in both directions presents a challenge. The most pressing challenge, however, is the untenable situation of the more than 100,000 people who remain stranded in detention and displacement facilities in the north-east of Syria, of whom more than 70,000 are women and children in the Al-Hol camp. Their situation has short-to-long-term implications that require the urgent attention and action of all Member States concerned. The humanitarian crisis on the ground, together with issues related to physical security, the risk of escapees and the potential radicalization to violent extremism in the facilities, must be addressed. Reports of children deprived of their liberty and interned in pre- and post-trial detention camps for their actual oralleged association with ISILremain ofconcern. Children, including those with links to United Nations- listed terrorist groups, should be treated primarily as victims, and any prosecution should be conducted in accordance with internationally recognized standards. The best solution is to get those children out of harm's way and back to their home countries with the rest of their families as soon as possible. I urge Member States to shoulder their primary responsibility for their nationals in terms of protection, repatriation, gender-sensitive and age-appropriate prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies, consistent with all their obligations under international law, including international human rights law, international humanitarian law and _ international refugee law. I commend Member States that have repatriated, or are in the process of repatriating, their nationals suspected of having links with United Nations-listed terrorist groups from Iraq and Syria. With regard to Africa, in my previous briefing (see S/PV.8605) I reported a striking increase in ISIL- and Al-Qaida-linked recruitment and violence in the west of the continent. Unfortunately, the situation has further deteriorated and the trend is of even greater concern today as the Islamic State's West Africa Province in the Lake Chad basin reinforces its links to the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. In Europe, there are concerns about the anticipated release this year of approximately 1,000 terrorism- related convicts, including frustrated travellers and returned foreign terrorist fighters, which is compounded by persisting concerns about the effectiveness of rehabilitation programmes. The continued threat of online terrorist radicalization and ISIL-inspired attacks by lone actors are also of concern.In Asia, ISIL's affiliate in Afghanistan suffered a major setback in November 2019, with its virtual expulsion from what had been its Afghan headquarters in Nangarhar province. Nonetheless, ISIL remains active, ambitious and threatening in the country and has established informal contacts with other terrorist groups. In South-East Asia, securing porous maritime borders to prevent the movement of foreign terrorist fighters is a challenge. Another persistent concern is the role of women in the operational planning, financing and execution of terrorist attacks in the region. I would like to highlight a few of the important activities of my Office that are mentioned in the report. Those efforts are possible only thanks to the generous financial support of all our donors, including our three largest donors - the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the State of Qatar and the European Union. Council members will recall that, at our previous briefing, I reported on the development by the United Nations system of the key principles to support Member States in the protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of women and children with links to United Nations-listed terrorist groups. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre of my Office is now finalizing a project with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and CTED to support requesting Member States in that area, based on those principles and the addendum to the Madrid Guiding Principles. The report also points out that countering the financing of terrorism should remain a key focus area. ISIL may still have as much as $300 million in financial reserves. The need to cut access to funds for terrorists was reiterated by the Council in resolution 2462 (2019). In response to that resolution and in consultation with CTED, the Counter-Terrorism Centre has expanded its capacity-building efforts by developing a comprehensive global counter-terrorism financing programme. In the area of law enforcement and border security, the implementation of the multi-agency United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, led by my Office to support Member States in implementing resolutions 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017) and 2482 (2019), has gained momentum. We currently count 33 confirmed beneficiaries in different regions and are at different stages of implementation in several pilot countries, including Azerbaijan, Ghana, the Sudan and Togo. The Secretary-General's report also emphasizes that the diversion of small arms and light weapons, improvised explosive device components and their precursors continues to aggravate the situation in conflict zones. In that regard, the Counter-Terrorism Centre is launching a pilot project in Central Asia in collaboration with CTED, as well as UNODC and the Office for Disarmament Affairs, on the nexus between organized crime and terrorism, with a focus on the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons and their supply to terrorists, in line with resolutions 2370 (2017) and 2482 (2019). During the reporting period, my Office has also continued to collaborate with partners to further the implementation of other relevant Security Council resolutions. Just a couple of days ago, Executive Director Coninsx and I briefed the Counter-Terrorism Committee on the increasing cooperation between the Office of Counter-Terrorism and CTED and our efforts to ensure that our capacity-building activities respond to CTED recommendations. Last week, the Counter-Terrorism Centre presented its work on strategic communications during an open briefing of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on countering terrorist narratives in line with resolution 2354 (2017). CTED, INTERPOL and the Counter- Terrorism Centre have organized regional expert workshops to enhance the implementation of resolution 2341 (2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure, and resolution 2396 (2017), on soft targets. My Office has also developed a global programme on the protection of vulnerable targets, in close coordination with CTED and the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations. On Monday, we launched a new global programme on the security of major sporting events and the promotion of sports and its values to prevent and counter violent extremism conducive to terrorism, in partnership with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and the International Centre for Sport Security, which is based in Qatar. As both the Council and the General Assembly have repeatedly emphasized, international counter- terrorism cooperation at all levels and with all relevant stakeholders is indispensable. I therefore welcome the initiative to invite a civil society briefer, Ms. Freij, to this meeting. Civil society has an active role to play insupport of efforts to prevent and counter terrorism, as indicated in resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017). The Madrid Guiding Principles and the addendum thereto also emphasize the importance of community engagement and civil society participation, particularly that of women, in addressing the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon. The views of civil society are crucial to effective, context-specific rehabilitation and reintegration of returning foreign terrorist fighters and their families. My Office continues to sustain the momentum from the first United Nations High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States, held in 2018, through the organization of regional high-level conferences addressing priority issues under the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Security Council resolutions. Since my previous briefing we have held successful regional conferences, in partnership with the Governments of Belarus, Hungary and the United Arab Emirates, with strong participation from Member States, civil society and regional and international organizations. Next week we will convene a joint conference in Vienna with the Government of Switzerland and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, on the theme "Foreign terrorist fighters: addressing current challenges". In mid-March we will organize a regional conference with Trinidad and Tobago and the Caribbean Community on the implementation of regional counter-terrorist strategies. At the same time, preparations are gaining speed for the second United Nations counter-terrorism week, which will be held from 29 June to 2 July, including the seventh biennial review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The counter-terrorism week will contribute to the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of our Organization and will focus on building social and institutional resilience to terrorism. During that week, we will also hold the first-ever United Nations Global Congress of Victims of Terrorism and the second United Nations High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States. At a time of heightened divisions among Member States, we cannot afford to jeopardize the global fight against terrorism. I am encouraged by today's reports about the death of the leader of Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula - one of its deadliest regional affiliates. I urge the Council and Member States to maintain and reaffirm their unity in the face of the persisting threat posed by ISIL and Al-Qaida and their affiliates, as well as terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. I urge the international community to maintain the sense of urgency and solidarity needed to save lives and support the victims and survivors of terrorism. The United Nations system will continue to play its role with determination in support of Member States.
