Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (Spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov for his briefing, and the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2018/80) on the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da'esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering that threat.

There have been terrorist attacks recently in
Afghanistan, Iraq and Egypt, among other places, that
have resulted in enormous casualties. As humankind's
shared enemy, terrorism has ramifications that extend
beyond national borders and that countries cannot deal
with single-handedly. The international community
should work to effectively implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
2253 (2015) and 2368 (2017) and join in combating the
evolving threat of terrorism in line with its new trends
and features.

First, we must forge an international consensus
against terrorism, which poses a threat to the whole
of humankind. The international community should
support a unified standard and take a zero-tolerance
and non-discriminatory approach in implementing a
firm crackdown. The world's counter-terrorism efforts
should respect the sovereignty of the countries affected
and their ownership in the fight against terrorism,
adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and make full use of the leading
role of the United Nations and its Security Council.

Secondly, we should eliminate terrorism's breeding
grounds. Terrorism grows out of wars, conflict, ethnic
hatred, poverty and backwardness. The international
community should be committed to helping Member
States to reduce and eradicate poverty, increase efforts
to reach political solutions to regional issues, promote
the concept of inclusive, equitable and balanced
development, foster dialogue and equal and peaceful
relations between different civilizations and regions,
and resist linking terrorism to specific ethnicities
or religions.

Thirdly, we should work to break up terrorists'
transboundary networks. Terrorist organizations have
recently sustained major defeats in Iraq, Syria and the
southern Philippines, but the international movements
and return of terrorist fighters still pose a serious threat
to countries of origin, transit and destination and their
security and stability. The countries concerned should
strengthen their border controls and cooperation in law
enforcement, share intelligence, improve their capacity-
building and curb terrorist fighters' movements.

Fourthly, we should crack down on terrorist
organizations' use of the Internet in order to engage in
terrorist activities. The Internet and social media are
increasingly becoming the means by which terrorist
organizations incite and recruit fighters and plot
attacks. The international community should work
to create synergies aimed at eliminating the channels
used to propagate extremist ideas though social media,
strengthen the regulation of cyberspace and prevent
terrorist organizations from using the Internet for
propaganda and financing activities.

In the past few years, China has engaged
intensively with multilateral cooperation mechanisms
that include the United Nations, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, and has made significant
contributions to the international fight against
terrorism. China supports the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, among others, in their efforts
to strengthen their cooperation with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism. We will continue to join
and promote multilateral and bilateral cooperation
against terrorism and provide assistance to developing
countries, including materials for countering terrorism
and building capacity, to the best of our ability. China
is ready to join all countries of the world in a concerted
response to terrorism and violent extremism in order to
maintain world peace and tranquility.

