The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
would like to commend members of the Security
Council for adopting this resolution in support of the
peace process in C6te d'Ivoire.

Cote d'Ivoire has come a long way from the crisis
that erupted in September 2002. The conclusion of the
Linas-Marcoussis peace Agreement in January 2003
was an important achievement. Most of last year,
progress in the peace process was mixed, with many
delays in implementing the Agreement. Just recently,
however, the Ivorian parties have taken some further
significant steps in the right direction.

(spoke in English)

I am particularly encouraged that last December
the parties completed the quartering of heavy weapons,
as verified by the international community, including
the United Nations Mission in C6te d'Ivoire. The
lifting of checkpoints established by the Forces armees
nationales de C6te d'Ivoire and the Forces nouvelles is
also close to completion.

In addition, the parties have recently agreed on
arrangements to implement the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation (DDR)
programme. Prime Minister Diarra has announced that
the programme would start on 8 March.

Another positive development since the return of
the Forces nouvelles to the Government of National
Reconciliation on 6 January is that the Council of
Ministers has begun considering the draft legislation
and other reforms envisaged in the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement.

I would like to commend President Gbagbo and
Prime Minister Diarra for taking, together with the
Forces nouvelles, important political initiatives which

S/PVADIS

 

have opened the way out of the impasse in the peace
process. I urge them to continue working together.

However, there are some hard-line elements
among the various Ivorian parties that remain
determined to undermine the peace process. They must
not be allowed to succeed.

The international community must therefore
provide support to those who are working to promote
peace in Cote d'Ivoire. In that context, I would like to
commend in particular the Economic Community of
West African States and France, which have
contributed significantly to the normalization of the
situation in the country. Their forces continue to play a
crucial role in monitoring the ceasefire and preventing
the resumption of conflict.

In my report of 6 January to the Security Council
(S/2004/3), I recommended the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in cote d'Ivoire. The
establishment of such an operation, which has been
requested by all Ivorian parties, will send a clear
message that the international community supports the
Ivorian peace process and is determined to play its role
in the maintenance of peace and security in Africa.

A strengthened United Nations presence in Cote
d'Ivoire will make it easier for the Government of
National Reconciliation to implement the DDR
programme. It will also facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance and the restoration of State
authority throughout the country, contribute to the
promotion of human rights and the re-establishment of
the rule of law and help the country prepare for the
holding of fair and transparent general elections in
2005.

I trust that, for their part, the Ivorian parties will
continue to push forward, in a consensual manner, the
political reforms they have embarked upon, in
accordance with the letter and the spirit of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement.

There is no doubt that the deployment of a United
Nations operation in Cote d'Ivoire will also have a
positive impact on the efforts to stabilize the West
African subregion as a whole. I am particularly pleased
that the various United Nations offices and missions in
the subregion have already begun to work in close
cooperation. Every effort must be done to strengthen
that cooperation.

In that context, I intend to present proposals
concerning a residual United Nations presence in
Sierra Leone in my next report to the Security Council,
in March.

The operation in Cote d'Ivoire comes at a time
when other United Nations and non-United Nations
operations, either recently established or expected in
the near future, require significant additional resources.
But I hope and trust that, guided by a spirit of
solidarity, the international community will provide all
the necessary resources, including well-equipped and
well-trained military and police personnel, for the
operation to be fully effective.

The progress made by the Ivorian parties in
recent weeks has given fresh impetus to the peace
process. The adoption of this resolution shows that the
international community is determined to support that
progress and to help ensure that there is no turning
back.

