Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome the Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Raymong
Tshibanda, to today's meeting.

We believe that the process of settling the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
seen substantial positive progress. The prevailing
relative stability throughout the country is evidence of
the country's move towards a post-conflict
reconstruction phase. At the same time, in the eastern
provinces of the country, serious threats to security
remain because of the activity of a number of armed
groups.

The military capabilities of those groups remain
fairly high. An alarming factor is the alliances created
by Congolese and foreign rebels to achieve their goals
and maintain their control of the illicit proceeds from
mineral resources. We firmly condemn the punitive
actions by the armed groups against the peaceful
population, attacks on peacekeepers and the seizure of
hostages, including those from humanitarian
organizations, for ransom. We note that the number of
human rights violations in those territories is not
decreasing. Those crimes must not go unpunished.

It is quite obvious that resolving the issue of
armed groups in the eastern part of the country will be
possible only through a comprehensive and holistic
approach, one involving a broad spectrum of political,
economic, legal and military-political instruments. In
that context we welcome the efforts by the Great Lakes
countries to create joint mechanisms for border control
and for managing and certifying the proceeds of
mineral resources in the country, in particular
agreements of the special high-level meeting in Lusaka
in December last year.

A key task is stepping up assistance to the
Government of the country for security sector reform.
Despite the Government's efforts, progress in this area
remains limited. At the same time, the bottleneck in the
process of integrating former combatants exacerbates
problems within the regular armed forces. It is
important to ensure full-fledged implementation of the
agreements between the Government and the
Congolese armed groups of 23 March 2009. Priorities
here include the reconstruction and strengthening of
institutions of State authority in areas freed from armed
groups.

Resolving those issues is increasingly topical in
the context of upcoming general elections, bearing in
mind that preparations for their conduct are at the very
forefront of political life in the country. This period
might be marked by growing political and social
tensions.

Undoubtedly, providing electoral support to the
country by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) is an important task. Such
assistance must be provided on the request of the
National Independent Electoral Commission in an
unbiased way, strictly within the framework of the
existing mandate. We welcome the development of
dialogue and partnership relations between the
Government of the Democratic Republic and the
United Nations Mission to take stock together of the
situation regarding prospects for the United Nations
peacekeeping presence.

We note the Mission's adopting of a range of
measures to enhance the effectiveness of the protection
of the civilian population, which provides for an early
warning mechanism in vulnerable regions and is
intended to bolster the confidence of the peaceful
population in its activities. Such steps are already
yielding palpable positive results.

To uphold long-term stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the international community
should focus its attention on assisting the Government
to resolve issues related to peacebuilding. Of key
importance in this regard is strengthening constructive
cooperation among the countries of the Great Lakes
region to resolve common transborder problems and
development of economic cooperation.

