Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Mr. President, I congratulate
you for holding this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. We very much value the participation of
the wider membership in the consideration of such an
important issue. I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their remarks.

Over a year has passed since the end of the Israeli
operations in the Gaza Strip, and the humanitarian
situation remains a source of grave concern to all of us.
Access to basic goods and services is grossly
insufficient. The lack of building materials continues to
prevent much-needed reconstruction, despite the recent
permission for some glass to enter the Strip.
Palestinians are therefore still forced to live in
conditions that are simply intolerable. That must come
to an end without further delay.

More than a year has passed since resolution
1860 (2009) was adopted, and the blockade has not
been lifted yet. Israeli security concerns can and must
be reconciled with the suspension of the blockade of
Gaza. In fact, it has been argued here that Israeli
security stands to gain from the lifting of the blockade,
and we certainly believe so.

Another unresolved issue related to the war in
Gaza is accountability. There continues to be a need for
credible and independent investigations, in line with
standard international practice, on the disturbing
findings contained in the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48). We look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General on the outcome of the investigations,
as requested by the General Assembly. We note the
payment made by Israel for compensation for the losses
sustained by the United Nations during the Gaza
conflict. It is disturbing and regrettable that serious
incidents of this sort have taken place, and they must
not happen again.

More than a year after the end of the military
operations in Gaza, it is not only the humanitarian
situation that is untenable. The paralysis of the peace
process has also gone on for too long and risks leading
to further deterioration of the political landscape. An
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel in peace and security,
within internationally recognized borders, is long
overdue.

Our challenge now is to find a way forward that
will enable both parties to resume serious and result-
oriented negotiations as soon as possible. My
delegation understands that intense efforts are under
way to create the conditions for the process to resume.
The parties have the obligation to avoid any action that
might jeopardize such efforts. Attempts by Israel to
artificially create faits accomplis on the ground and
change the demographics of the West Bank and East
Jerusalem are especially unhelpful. The revocation of
Palestinian residency rights, evictions and house
demolitions are not acceptable. Settlement activities,
including so-called natural growth, are illegal and must
cease.

Palestinians should also do their part.
Overcoming their divisions, keeping extremists in
check and enhancing democratic governance is
essential. Based on past experience, my delegation
believes that future negotiations should allow for the
necessary engagement of the international community.
We must all remain engaged and provide the
diplomatic support needed to sustain the peace process.
Brazil reiterates its support for holding a
comprehensive international conference on the Middle
East, once conditions are appropriate.

The further involvement of relevant players from
outside the region may prove beneficial. In November,
in the first state visit by an Israeli President to Brazil in
40 years, President Shimon Peres met with President
Lula in Brasilia. A few days later, President Mahmoud
Abbas also paid an official visit to Brazil. President
Lula is scheduled to visit Israel, Jordan and Palestine
in March in order to follow up on bilateral discussions
in a number of areas.

As we all know, there will be no peace in the
Middle East without a Palestinian State, the parameters
of which are well known. Its establishment is in the
interests of Israelis, Palestinians, the region and the
international community as a whole. We must all help
the parties to translate such common interests into a
politically sustainable negotiating process without
further delay, with a view to reaching a peace
agreement at the earliest possible time.

We welcome the formation late last year of a
Government of National Unity in Lebanon. That was a
vital step towards consolidating a stable, inclusive and
democratic State in that country, and a very positive
development for peace in the region.

