Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): Mr. President, we recognize
the gravity of the issue that the Arab Group is bringing
before the Council at this time, and we are confident that
under your experienced, wise and balanced direction, the
deliberations of the Council are in steady hands. We wish
to express our deep appreciation for the very capable and
skilful manner in which Ambassador Emilio J. Cardenas
helped to guide the Council to an auspicious beginning this
year. We also wish to extend our best wishes to the new
members of the Council, whose participation bodes well for
what may again be a year of drama for the international
community.

As Chairman of the Arab Group for the month of
February, and on behalf of the members of the Group, I
have the honour to raise for consideration the question of
the establishment of Israeli settlements in the territories it
has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and the
dangerous consequences of those activities for the
Palestinian people and the Middle East peace process as a
whole. We believe that the draft resolution before the
Council is moderate and balanced, and is a positive
reflection of the desire of the Arab Group to restart the
negotiations in good faith. We ask the Council to conclude
its present deliberations on this matter by adopting the draft
resolution.

A widespread and pervasive mood of mounting
disenchantment has began to permeate the Arab world, and
it is the direct consequence of the near-total lack of
progress in the negotiations between the Palestinians and
the Israeli authorities following the historic handshake
between Chairman Arafat and Prime Minister Rabin during
the signing of the Declaration of Principles at the White
House in September 1993.

 
Those Principles made no attempt to explore or to
resolve the critical differences and issues standing
between the Palestinians and Israel, nor were they
intended to. Rather, they sought to set a tone, to create a
momentum and direction toward the resolution of all
substantive matters separating the two parties. Certainly,
it was implicit in the negotiations that Palestinian
autonomy and self-rule over the West Bank and Gaza
were the immediate goals, and that the Palestinian
Authority was but an interim step in the preparation of
the elections designed to give voice to Palestinian
political preferences and to give them full control over
those areas.

But while the Palestinian leaders were negotiating
with a view to ending the Israeli occupation, the Israeli
Government, by its actions, seemed intent upon making
that occupation endure. The agreement's stipulations for
Palestinian elections in July of 1994, for the withdrawal
or redeployment of Israeli forces from Arab towns and
cities for a safe travel corridor for Palestinians between
the West Bank and Gaza and for the release of Arab
prisoners were all quick to disappear.

We cannot accept the Israeli position that, failing a
demonstration by the Palestinian Authority of its ability
to control all acts of terrorism, implementation of the
terms of the agreement cannot continue. In fact, in 27
years of stifling occupation, Israel has failed to halt the
Violence. Besides, the evidence appears to show that the
Palestinian Authority has maintained the called-for control
over all PLO elements and personnel to ensure their
compliance with the agreement and prevent violations and
discipline Violators. If anything, the bulk of any terrorist
acts must be laid at the door of non-PLO elements in
Palestine. To saddle Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian
Authority now with the task of stamping out terrorism
and, until this is achieved, maintaining the border closure,
defeats the basic objectives of the peace process and
makes a mockery of the honest efforts exerted by the
Arabs.

If the issue of terrorism is to be employed as a
device to halt progress, then surely those factors
contributing to it must be emphasized. Few impediments
to progress are more implacable and emotional than that
of Israeli settlers who both remain in and continue to
settle the occupied territories, and that this could be
supported by the Israeli Government in full knowledge of
the ultimate and unavoidable consequences is difficult to
believe when there is plainly a direct correlation between

 

the violence in the occupied territories and the continued
expansion of Jewish settlements in the West Bank.

It is virtually axiomatic that for the peace process to
resume in a meaningful manner, settlements in the West
Bank must be immediately frozen and those in Gaza
dismantled. To do otherwise exacerbates the security
situation, continues the unlawful application of the law to
Palestinians, fans the flames of resentment and offers
another pretext for the continued presence of Israeli forces.
This simply delays withdrawal, elections and progress in
the peace process. Should extremist elements gain control
of the Israeli Government, one could expect not simply the
halt of progress towards peace and resolution, but also
retrogression to conditions which spawned the outbreak of
the intifadah.

Contrary to the expectations implicit in the Declaration
of Principles of 1993, that Israeli settlements would cease
during the interim period of negotiations, a mounting area
of Palestinian territory is being confiscated each month. Of
particular concern is the huge acreage seized for highway
construction to ease access for settlers, the real effect of
which is to carve the occupied territories into ghetto
enclaves, which prevents the creation of a cohesive nation.
It will also present the Palestinians with a "geographic
fact", effectively predetermining negotiations in the future.
Such acts obviously pre-empt the negotiations and
deliberately complicate issues dealing with settlers,
settlements, the status of Jerusalem, Israeli intentions and
good faith, the wider overall Middle East peace process and
the prospects for near-term peace and regional economic
development.

Israel cannot have it both ways: peace and settlement.
The policy of continuing to construct and sell housing units,
establishing new settlements and confiscating and
expropriating Arab land in Jerusalem and its environs,
while planning still further construction, is sure to bring the
peace process to a halt at some point. That such a policy
and such activities are contrary to international law, General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 is well documented.

For the Arab world the key to negotiations and
agreements with Israel begins with Palestine. The crisis
with Israel began with Palestine, and before there can be
sustained peace elsewhere in the Middle East the issue of
self-rule in Palestine needs to be resolved. Surely the
manner in which widespread efforts were made to meet
with Israel and to settle divisive issues of long standing was
a clear indication of the Arab world's desire to seek peace.

 

But now there is much to question regarding Israel's good
faith in desiring genuine accord with the Palestinians and,
by extension, the rest of the Arab world. The choice for
Israel is to take those genuine measures which will move
the peace process with all deliberate speed. As
Palestinians see their leaders unable to meet Israel's ever
growing unreasonable requirements and at the same time
incapable of doing much, under the circumstances, to
improve their lives, their frustration and level of
desperation will surely rise. In the final analysis, sound
judgment will prevail.

In conclusion, we wish to say to Israel "The Arab
commitment to the peace process is irreversible; don't
give up the ship!"

