Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me, Madam President, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April, and to say how honoured we are
to see the United States of America, a friendly country,
preside over today's meeting. I would also like to
thank you for having taken the initiative of convening
this meeting on the Great Lakes region and the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. I would also like thank all members of
the Security Council for the exemplary readiness and
determination that they have always shown on every
occasion when they have been called upon to consider
the situation in my country.

We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/208) on the implementation of the agreement
on the Framework that Mr. Said Djinnit, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, whose presence I welcome, just presented to
us. Although the report does not, in general, make
any major observations, for our part we would like,
nevertheless, to briefly make several comments that my
delegation deems important.

With regard to the security situation, the Secretary-
General's report highlights the efforts of the Armed
Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
working in cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), to neutralize
foreign and domestic armed groups. My delegation
would like to reassure the Council that those efforts will
continue until the those groups are totally eradicated.

The report also acknowledges the relevance of
the Congolese Government's request to MONUSCO
to rapidly evacuate elements of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition who
remain on Congolese territory, while at the same
time underlining the situation concerning members
of the Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda who
are cantoned in three sites and continue to wait to be
repatriated to their countries of origin or sent to a third
host country. It is important that the Council devote
attention to those two situations, which continue to be
of concern for my country, instead of deferring them to
other countries in the region.

Within the framework of the commitments obligating
the countries of the region not to harbour or, under any
circumstances, provide protection to persons accused
of war crimes, crimes against humanity, acts of
genocide and crimes of aggression, or to persons under
a United Nations sanctions regime, and to facilitate the
administration of justice through judicial cooperation
in the region, my country has apprehended various
high-level leaders of the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) sought by international
justice, who have been extradited to Rwanda through
MONUSCO. Among the names of those high-level
persons to be held accountable, one can cite those
of General Le'opold Mujyambere, Colonel Fe'licien
Nsanzubukire, Colonel Mucebo Habyarimana, Colonel
Anastase Munyaneza, Major Vainqueur Nzabimana,
Captain Theophile Twagiramungu, Captain Ladislas
Ntanganzwa and Mr. Martin Gatabazi .

On the other hand, several international arrest
warrants submitted to other countries in the region
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo within the
framework of regional judicial cooperation in pursuit
of Congolese nationals who are the alleged perpetrators
of crimes against humanity and war crimes remain
outstanding. Yet those individuals continue not only to
move about freely within neighbouring countries, but
are also carrying out destabilizing activities directed
against my country. Iin that context, especially
concerning members of the former Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23), the Democratic Republic of the Congo
reaffirms its determination to fulfil its commitments
under the Framework agreement signed at Addis Ababa
and calls on the other parties to the agreement, in
particular Uganda and Rwanda, to do the same.

During previous Security Council meetings, my
delegation has spoken at length on the subject of the
M-23. I believe that it is useful to resume that discussion
by saying that the efforts taken by my Government,
which have gone so far as to propose to members of
M-23 their unconditional repatriation, have not achieved
their goal, due to the refusal of the leadership of that
movement, which took the former rebels hostage, and
to a lack of genuine cooperation with the neighbouring
countries that are lodging them. That is why my country
has always asked for the Council's involvement, so
as to make such cooperation possible with a view to
definitively resolving that situation.

Concerning the political situation, after the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo reported on
its mission to the President of the Republic, as everyone
knows, he endeavoured to undertake consultations with
the political opposition and the presidential majority.
At the conclusion of those consultations, based on
the proposals made to him by the Rassemblement
des forces politiques et sociales de la Republique
democratique du Congo acquises au changement, he
appointed on 7 April - in keeping the promise made
in his speech given before Congress - Mr. Bruno
Tshibala to the post of Prime Minister. Mr. Tshibala is
a member of the Union pour la democratie et le progres
social - the party of the late Etienne Tshisekedi - and
of the Rassemblement. The latter is already conducting
consultations, so as to put together a Government of
national unity in the coming days. My delegation
believes that the Council must refrain from becoming
involved in the conflict within the Rassemblement,
the ins and outs of which the Council is not familiar
with. In favouring one faction of the Rassemblement,
as some members have just done, they risk reigniting
the conflict.

Moreover, my delegation would like to draw the
attention of the Council to the fact that the political
agreement of 31 December 2016 does not replace
the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Defended yesterday in the Chamber by a large
number of Council members, the political agreement of
31 December 2016 only regulates a temporary situation
linked to the elections, while legitimacy and the source
of power rest in the Constitution.

With regard to the Conseil national de suivi de
l'accord, the President of the Republic has asked the
relevant stakeholders to make a concerted effort to
appoint staff quickly by consensus.

Before concluding, we believe that it is important to
point out that the political opposition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is governed by article 8 of
the Constitution, and that its status is determined by
statute. Consequently, paragraph 65 ofthe report, which
designates as the head of the Congolese opposition an
individual who has not been designated as such by the
opposition parties or recognized by the law has no place
in the report.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm that
the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo place much hope in the Addis
Ababa agreement on the Framework - a hope to build
a lasting peace, promote harmonious coexistence with
the countries of the region and place the foundations of
stability for all our States without which it is difficult
to pave the way forward for regional and mutually
advantageous cooperation. That is why my country
will always remain attached to the agreement and will
pursue its implementation so that it can truly achieve
the objectives for which it was conceived.

The meeting rose at 6.30pm.
