Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to start with a friendly but important
remark concerning procedure. Multilingualism is a
fundamental value of the Organization. The adoption
of resolution 2451 (2018) in a single language is linked
to exceptional circumstances and should not constitute
a precedent.

That being said, France welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2451 (2018) on Yemen.
The resolution is a strong signal of the unity and
commitment of the Security Council, which, as we had
hoped, is putting its full weight beyond the efforts of
the United Nations on Yemen. I pay particular tribute
to the work and commitment of the British penholder,
which brought the members of the Council together
after difficult negotiations.

The resolution marks the unity of the Council and
the international community in support of launching
a political process to end the crisis, as well as the
humanitarian and political action of the United Nations.
Three points emerge from the resolution.

First, it allows us to endorse the outcome of the
Stockholm negotiations, for which we again thank
Sweden, and the agreement on three main points:
prisoner exchange; the withdrawal of the armed forces
from the port and city of Al-Hudaydah and a ceasefire
throughout the province; and the establishment of a
mechanism for de-escalation in Taiz.
Secondly, the resolution provides the necessary
basis for the United Nations to act quickly to assist in
the implementation of the agreements on Al-Hudaydah
by allowing the rapid deployment of a United Nations
monitoring and control team.

Finally, the resolution cites the essential points
of Mark Lowcock's humanitarian requests, which the
Council was called on to address by maintaining the
political course so as to ensure that the parties remain
involved with Martin Griffiths during the next phase.

The swift adoption of the resolution, on which the
penholders worked tirelessly in recent days with our full
support, was essential to preserving and maintaining
the positive momentum of Stockholm and to enabling
the immediate implementation of the arrangements
reached. We remain clear that much remains to be done.
There humanitarian situation remains a disaster and
the Council will have to maintain its mobilization to
respond more fully and to help the Yemeni population
to recover from the tragic conflict. In that context,
those responsible for the most serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law must
be held accountable.

The Council will also have to remain mobilized in
support of the mediation of the Special Representative,
whose efforts and initial results I commend once again.
Maintaining our commitment and unity will be crucial
to the discussions scheduled for January on the political
framework and solution. France is determined to do so.

