The President: I thank Ms. Schmid for her briefing.

I shall now make as statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.

Last week I was in Munich. The annual Security
Conference was, as usual, a lively event with discussions
on issues of global consequence, but one issue was
definitely at centre stage - security in Europe. In
my many previous encounters there, I have rarely
experienced the level of concern that was expressed
this year. The age of de'tente and the common purpose
of making our continent a safer place appear to be in
great danger right now.

How did we get to this point? It did not happen
overnight. We have travelled - and sometimes it has
felt as though we have sleep-walked - down a long and
difficult road to reach today's state of affairs in Europe.
I do not believe that conflicts in Europe have received
the attention that they deserve. Given the shock waves

that European conflicts can send around the globe,
with grave implications for international security and
stability, the situation in Europe needs to be redressed.
As events over the past decade have demonstrated,
ignoring conflicts in Europe and failing to learn from
them are no longer an option. We need to put security
in Europe back into the focus of the Security Council.

The Ukrainian presidency has convened this open
debate so as to address the fundamental challenge
facing Europe. Our world has become dangerously
insecure, and that trend is developing further. If we do
not adequately respond, the rapidly evolving crisis may
bring us to a position where it will be impossible to
implement one of the most important commitments that
we have as United Nations Member States, namely, to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
Strong institutions and shared standards and principles
were supposed to serve as effective safeguards for
the international security order. Peaceful inter-State
dialogue based on the sovereign right of every State to
choose its own destiny and on respect for human rights
are the core elements. Today, both of those pillars are
being consistently undermined.

Transatlantic unity has made Europe a security
role model and a crucial contributor to global efforts
to ensure stability and security. Global security has
always been underpinned by European security. Having
been the cradle of two world wars, Europe has evolved
to become a champion of security across the globe.
But now we find that Europe is once again itself under
threat. In recent decades Europe has faced a number of
conflicts.

The unresolved conflicts facing Europe have one
common feature - the active involvement of Russia
in particular. A strategy of instigating, participating
in, supporting and then derailing instead of mediating
has been used by Russia to create a number of volatile
hotspots across the continent. They can be activated
whenever Russia decides that it is in its interest to do
so. If that kind of aggression goes unchecked, every
protracted conflict could become a hot one, while the
aggressor State continues to create new threats and
challenges in other places.

The fundamental problem facing the United Nations
in that connection is that the architect of that strategy
is sitting at this table as a permanent member of the
Security Council. Bearing the solemn responsibility
to maintain peace and security, Russia has resorted
instead to violating agreed documents that were drawn
up actually as foundation stones for peace, namely the
Charter of the United Nations, the Charter of Paris for
a New Europe and the Final Act of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe, known as the
Helsinki Final Act.

The Russian aggression against Georgia in 2008
became a litmus test for European security. It was a
warning sign that was not heeded. The aggressor
was just slapped on the wrist by the international
community and took that reaction as a green light.
Today, the answer is obvious: we have not learned well
enough. The appeasement of aggressors and the lack
of consequences merely encourage more aggression.
Since 2014, Russia has vigorously implemented
that strategy in Ukraine. Ukraine is enduring direct
military aggression, as illustrated by the illegal partial
occupation of Crimea and part of the Donbas.

Yesterday marked exactly three years since
Russia illegally occupied Crimea, thereby violating
the Budapest Memorandum, which Russia signed and
which also guaranteed Ukrainian security. At the same
time, Russia unveiled to the world its strategy of hybrid
warfare combining military action with concerted
and well-funded propaganda throughout the world.
Following Ukraine's unprecedented act of unilateral
nuclear disarmament in 1994, more disastrous results
for Ukraine could hardly have been envisaged. To date,
10,000 people have been killed and more than 22,000
wounded in the Donbas, and Crimea has become a grey
zone marred by injustice, terror and repression. The
occupying authorities commit systematic violations
of human rights and seek to destroy the identity of
Ukrainians and the indigenous people of the peninsula,
namely, the Crimean Tatars.

The European security system, which was
considered as one of the most stable, has now been put
seriously in doubt. A peaceful, democratic and strong
Europe is a significant contributor to global peace
efforts, but now the continent's own security has been
damaged by frozen conflicts and acts of aggression.
Today, the global and European order based on the
rule of law has reached a tipping point. There are two
options: either allow the destabilization to increase or
rally the international community around efforts to
strengthen institutions and the United Nations Charter,
thereby ensuring full adherence to international law.

Russian aggression against Ukraine targets
European and transatlantic unity, which are basic
elements of the global security order. Reversing the
breakup ofthe Soviet Union, which took place a quarter
of a century ago, has been a kind of obsession for the
Kremlin for a long time. Russia exploits weaknesses,
particularly institutional weakness, by abusing its right
of veto at the Security Council and the consensus rule
in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). An effective mechanism to hold the
wrongdoer responsible for its violations has not yet
been consolidated.

In times of systemic crisis and geopolitical
uncertainty, we require strong institutions that protect
international law, a cornerstone of our understanding of
the world order. Only strong institutions - the Security
Council first of all - can provide international security.
We urgently need to reform the Security Council in
order to remove veto-power abuses. The Security
Council should be capable of efficiently addressing
conflicts, regardless of the possibility of a permanent
member being a party to the conflict. It is no longer
acceptable that paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the Charter
of the United Nations - which states that "a party to
a dispute shall abstain from voting" - continues to be
blatantly ignored. It is imperative that clear proceedings
be introduced for the proper implementation of
that Article.

Europe has a central role to play in the global quest
for sustainable peace. However, as Europeans, we
must put our own house in order first. We hope that
sustainable peace in Europe will start with Ukraine,
but other conflicts cannot be forgotten. We believe that
the existing situation in Europe is not a deadlock and
that protracted and active conflicts in Europe can be
effectively resolved and potential tensions prevented.

The United Nations should not shy away from taking
a more proactive approach in conflict management
and resolution. However, the Organization is only as
strong as its Members want it to be. Therefore, in order
to take necessary action, the United Nations needs the
support and political will of its Members. When that
exists, the United Nations can do its job. We may recall
examples of preventive deployment in the Western
Balkans that helped avert a spillover of violence. In the
Baltics, good offices and fact-finding missions of the
Secretary-General facilitated the orderly withdrawal
of Russian troops from the region and helped avoid
polarization on various controversial issues. Ukraine
therefore believes that the Secretary-General should act
proactively in situations related to conflict prevention
and management.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General that the
Council needs to make greater use of the options laid
out in Chapter VI of the Charter. In our opinion, that is
the way out of the deadlocks we have in the negotiations
processes around Europe.

We are encouraged by the Secretary-General's
expressed readiness to support the Members through
the use of his good offices and through his personal
engagement. The Secretary-General should also not
shy away from bringing to the attention of the Security
Council any dangerous developments, as envisaged by
Article 99 of the Charter. Neither of these tools was
used in 2008 or 2014 by the previous Secretary-General.

We believe that the United Nations should take
more initiative in providing options for conflict
resolution, including through possible political and
security presences and through methods of cooperation
with regional organizations. As the first step in that
direction, the Secretary-General could elaborate options
for a political and security presence of the United
Nations in Ukraine and ways that the United Nations
might cooperate with the OSCE in order to ensure the
full implementation of resolution 2202 (2015).

Like no other region, Europe has powerful regional
and subregional organizations, and they must be used.
However, all participants must work together. The
OSCE, the European Union and NATO have proven
their capacity to deal with conflict management and
post-conflict situations in Europe. The experience
gained through joint work during conflict management
in the former Yugoslavia and elsewhere in the world
now needs to be applied to other areas of Europe.

We also believe that it is worth reflecting on the
existing experience of conflict resolution in other
regions. For example, the establishment of a Security
Council ad hoc working group on conflict prevention
and resolution in Europe - similar but not identical to
the approach that deals with conflicts in Africa - could
increase the focus ofthe Council on conflicts in Europe.
It could also provide assessments of the implementation
of resolutions and make recommendations as to how to
improve cooperation among the United Nations and
the OSCE, the European Union and other regional
organizations.

I would be very grateful to United Nations Members
for their input and suggestions on these issues during
today's discussion. It is the right time to carry out such
work. It is also the right time to open a fresh chapter in
European history, a Europe once again characterized
by peace and progress. Let us begin this work now.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the other members of the Council.

