Mr. Heumann (Israel): The threat that the world
faces from the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) is greater than ever. Advances in
science and technology, combined with the evolving
nature of terrorism, present challenges never seen
before. And nowhere is the threat more real than in the
Middle East, where failing States have transformed
the region into a breeding ground for terrorists who
now control vast areas of territory and dominate
large populations.

For the people of Israel, the scale of the danger
posed by the combination of terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction is not abstract. Israelis have lived with
conventional and unconventional threats for decades,
and the prospect of terrorism is a daily reality. Israel
understands the grave nature of the threat and views
the prevention of the proliferation of WMDs as a matter
of paramount importance for the international agenda.

In our time, we have witnessed the shocking
erosion of the absolute prohibition against the use of the
world's most horrific weapons. We now live in a world
in which the premeditated use of chemical weapons on
innocent civilians is no longer even treated as breaking
news. Nowhere is that trend more evident than in Syria.
And there can be no mistake: the primary responsibility
for the widespread use of chemical weapons in Syria
lies squarely at the feet of the Al-Assad regime. That
is the same regime that has been killing, attacking and
besieging its own people, supported by Iran and its
terror proxy Hizbullah.

Last August, the Security Council established
the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) in response
to the conclusions of the fact-finding mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
which found "compelling confirmation" that a toxic
chemical had been used "systematically and repeatedly"
to attack Syrian villages. The JIM. was given the
mandate to investigate and to identify those responsible
for the use of those lethal chemical weapons.

Over the course of the past year, as the teams
were on the ground working to assign attribution for
that heinous war crime, the Syrian regime brazenly
continued to use toxic chemicals against its own
population. Zaher Sahloul, a Syrian-American doctor
who regularly treats the injured in Aleppo and has
briefed the Council, said,

"Using chemical agents without accountability
has become the new normal in Syria".
In fact, just two weeks ago, Syrian Government forces
conducted air strikes on the Zabadieh neighbourhood
of the besieged city of Aleppo, in an attack that was
widely reported to have included the use of chlorine
gas.

We cannot allow that to become the new normal.
Al-Assad's actions are not only in violation of
international law and an affront to humankind itself,
but they also increase the chances of weapons of
mass destruction falling into the hands of non-State
actors. The systematic use of chemical weapons by
the Al-Assad regime has made WMD-related material
and know-how widely available, paving the way for
non-State actors to achieve such horrific capabilities.
Make no mistake: the regime's actions lead to further
cracks in the WMD non-proliferation regime. At a time
when terrorist groups are increasingly emboldened and
practice unspeakable acts of cruelty on a regular basis,
the consequences of Al-Assad's actions should be clear
to everyone in the Chamber.

In the face of those dire threats, the international
community must show resolve and take determined
action to counter the proliferation of WMDs. Israel
views resolution 1540 (2004) as an essential tool in that
collective effort. This year, we have an opportunity to
review the achievements of the resolution and look ahead
with renewed dedication for the full implementation of
its provisions. A positive trend has been evident over
the years, as a growing number of States have increased
their measures for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Most prominent have been the legal actions
that States have undertaken to prohibit the activities of
non-State actors with regard to nuclear, chemical, and
biological weapons and their means of delivery.
As we look to the challenges ahead, Israel believes
there are practical and legal steps that can advance the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Let me mention three steps that can readily be put into
practice.

First, States must have at their disposal the tools and
the infrastructure necessary to meet their commitments
under the regime established by the resolution. States
must be further encouraged to report, update existing
reports and designate a national focal point to be
responsible for reporting and coordinating the national
implementation of the resolution.

Secondly, Israel believes that cooperation with the
academic community is key. Strengthening outreach
to the academic world can achieve a balance that
preserves the independence of academic institutions
while safeguarding sensitive technology and know-how
against unintentional leakage to non-State actors.

Finally, here at the United Nations, we see room for
increased coordination among the relevant bodies. For
example, expanding the cooperation of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its
Group of Experts with United Nations bodies with
regard to terrorists and WMD proliferation will help the
Committee to better equip States to deal with threats in
their own territories.

The issue under discussion today is a matter of the
highest priority for the State of Israel. Let me conclude
by outlining the steps that Israel has taken as part of our
robust policy aimed at preventing the proliferation of
WMDs. As detailed in the reports submitted by Israel
to the 1540 Committee in 2004 and 2012, Israel has
taken wide-ranging legal and practical steps intended
to curb proliferation. At the national level, Israel has
implemented counter-proliferation measures through
legislation and practices that are strictly enforced by
the relevant authorities. Those measures include, inter
alia, gathering and sharing intelligence, improving
border controls, developing advanced detection and
identification devices, enhancing the security of
facilities and the relevant dual-use materials and
strengthening export controls. That multipronged
strategy is part of Israel's comprehensive approach
to preventing the proliferation of non-conventional
weapons, as well as to preventing terrorists from
acquiring such weapons. As part of the international
community's ongoing efforts, Israel is fully committed
to acting with determination against this threat.

Finally, allow me to comment with regard to what
we have heard today with regard to the establishment
of a WMD-free zone in the Middle East. Israel's long-
held vision of a more secure and peaceful Middle East
requires that all regional States engage in a process
of direct and sustained dialogue to address the broad
range of regional security challenges. Such a dialogue,
based on the widely accepted principle of consensus,
can emanate only from within the region, and address
in an inclusive manner the threat perceptions of all
regional parties with a View to enhancing and improving
their security. Direct contact, combined with trust
and confidence-building, is an essential basis for the
creation of a new security paradigm in a region that is
increasingly fraught with wars, conflicts, disintegration
of national territories and human suffering.

