Mr. Soares (Timor-Leste): Let me begin by congratulating the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its leadership as the President of the Security Council for the month of January 2020 and further expressing to it our sincere gratitude for having invited Timor-Leste to deliver a speech before this body. I wish to also thank Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, for their briefings. Over the years, through the promotion of international cooperation, we have witnessed and experienced some progress in social and economic development. Yet we are still far from having achieved sustainable and equitable development and delivering on the promise of the inclusive, just and peaceful societies highlighted in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Evident challenges, ranging from violent extremism, financial crises, transnational crime and global poverty to environmental degradation, unilateral foreign intervention and occupation, continue to pose threats to international peace and security, human dignity, and, above all, are serious threats to our common existence as nations. As acountry that hosted successive United Nations missions from 1999 to 2012, Timor-Leste has a history that is forever intertwined with that of the Council. Timor-Leste is an example of what can be achieved when the Council unites around the common purpose of upholding international peace and security. Our experience leads us to believe that global challenges and tensions can be addressed and prevented only through multilateralism, based on a spirit of solidarity and inclusivity and in a partnership aimed at upholding fundamental human rights and human dignity, and to that end the Security Council has a fundamental role. Timor-Leste is committed to supporting global efforts to uphold the United Nations Charter and related international laws and norms. Our recent conclusion of a maritime boundary treaty with Australia, through the use of the special conciliation mechanism under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, reaffirms our belief in the international rules-based order and in the United Nations as the appropriate platform to resolve conflicts. We are witnessing the rise of conflicts around the globe, which continue to pose both conventional and non-conventional threats to global security. Climate change, the drug trade, people-smuggling, trafficking in persons and related transnational crimes, as well as extremism, radicalism and terrorism, know no borders. It is no longer the problem of any individual Member State. They have become threats to everyone. We all know well the connection between poverty and rising inequalities, weak State institutions and the lack of political will to act, on the one hand, and the rise of those threats, on the other. In this context, the authority of the Council and of permanent and non-permanent members alike is called upon and critically needed to properly respond to these threats to global peace and stability, fulfil its mandate and uphold the Charter. Timor-Leste is of the view that through genuine and constructive cooperation at both the regional and the global levels, as well as through integrated measures, we can tackle and address the root causes of these global challenges accordingly. In the context of the United Nations, it is imperative for all organs within the Organization to strengthen their work and engage in a coherent and complementary manner. We must ensure that our actions contribute to fulfilling each of the intended mandates of the principal organs of the United Nations and do not undermine the importance of multilateralism. In this respect, and as we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we urge all Member States to recommit to the purpose and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, along with the international laws and norms. We urge in particular the major Powers to lead by example on how to align decisions and actions on international security matters with the Charter and to ensure that actions taken will not contravene and undermine the purpose and principles of the Charter of this multilateral Organization. While the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations is undoubtedly a moment of celebration of all that has been achieved by the Organization, including the Security Council's role in the maintenance of international peace and security, it is also an important moment for reflection. For Timor-Leste, whose future was decided through a Council-mandated mission that organized a referendum, we reflect on why the Council mandate for a referendum for the people of Western Sahara has not been fulfilled. I make the same call for attention to the issue of Palestine. Timor-Leste's Constitution enshrines the principles of self-determination, respect for territorial integrity, non-interference and collective security, and a just and equitable world for all peoples and nations. We also strongly believe in the settlement of disputes through peaceful means, based on international laws and norms. Unilateral coercive measures against any State undermine the spirit of the Charter and do not contribute to solutions. Our recent history makes us firm believers in the power of the Security Council and its role in upholding international peace and security. However, we are also conscious that the world today is very different from the world that gave rise to the United Nations. Thanks to the promise of the Charter, we who were once colonized have joined the international community as independent and sovereign States and are today proud Members of the United Nations, joined together in finding collective solutions to global challenges. The composition and work of the Council can be more effective if it is able to effectively reflect change and address the rising challenges.
