Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I also
wish to thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and the Force Commanders
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus for their briefings. Through them I wish to
pay tribute to all military personnel deployed in the 14
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

Further to your proposal, Mr. President, in my
statement today I will first elaborate on China's views
on peacekeeping operations. Following that I will ask
the Commanders two questions.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are
an important method of maintaining international
peace and security. They play an irreplaceable role in
helping to stabilize the situation in host countries and
in strengthening their security capacity. They help to
create favourable conditions for political settlement.
Therefore, peacekeeping operations overall have been
well recognized by Member States. To further improve
the performance of peacekeeping missions in terms of
implementing the Council's mandates and to deepen
cooperation with the relevant host countries, China
wishes to share the following points.

First, it is imperative to adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
fundamental principles for peacekeeping operations,
as well as to respect the sovereignty and leadership of
host countries.

Secondly, attention must be paid to communication
with host countries and the relevant parties so as to
win their trust. Peacekeeping operations must ensure
smooth communication with host countries at all stages
of deployment, and relevant issues must be addressed
through timely consultations.

Thirdly, it is necessary to assist host countries in
building and improving their national mechanisms and
enhancing their force generation capacity. Peacekeeping
operations must prioritize capacity-building in host
countries when conditions permit. Moreover, at the
request of host countries, peacebuilding operations
should provide support in the establishment and the
improvement of national mechanisms.

I would now like to ask the two Force Commanders
two questions. First, peacekeeping operations take
political settlement as a priority. Based on the
experience of the two Force Commanders, which areas
of peacekeeping mission mandates require further
adjustment? Secondly, to improve the safety and
security of peacekeeping personnel, how have their
two missions cooperated with host countries? What are
some areas for further improvement?

