Mr. Dayri (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): It is a pleasure
for me, Mr. President, to congratulate you on China's
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We have every confidence in your ability to
lead the Council and to achieve fruitful results.

The people and Government of Libya once again
reiterate their deep condolences to our brothers in
the Arab Republic of Egypt; to the President, the
Government and the people of Egypt; and to the
families and victims of the heinous crime perpetrated
by the terrorist group the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) against 21 Egyptian citizens in Libya.
Such a heinous act runs counter to all principles and
values of humanity and monotheistic religions.

My country reiterates its condemnation and
absolute rejection of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of the source, motive
or justification, wherever and by whomever it is
perpetrated. My country reaffirms that terrorism is a
serious phenomenon that threatens the stability and
security of States. We are seeing this phenomenon turn
into a front line that stretches from the Middle East
through North Africa and covers the Mediteranean as
well as the Sahel, demonstrating that no one in those
regions is immune to the phenomenon.

I was eager to personally attend this meeting,
following the 19 December 2014 Security Council
debate on counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7351), in order to
reaffirm the commitment of the Government of Libya
to combating contemporary terrorism as one of our top
priorities. The terrorist group ISIS and its allies have
been working tirelessly to kill and assassinate innocent
people, destroy the infrastructure and economies of
countries, and to offer a safe haven for terrorists of
various nationalities. This is a threat to Libya and other
States, particularly our neighbouring States.
Nevertheless, among the positive indicators that
have arisen, we look forward to a national dialogue
in Libya. The three rounds of discussion will take
place thanks to the remarkable and laudable efforts
of Mr. Bernardino Leon, Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, and his good offices aimed
at ensuring unity and successful dialogue.

As we await further success, the complex situation
prevailing in my country is deteriotating, in particular
since ISIS appeared on the blood-soaked landscape, as
I said earlier. While we await further success, the needs
of the Libyan army have become more urgent than
ever before, with a view to strengthening the national
dialogue based, inter alia, on the need to combat
terrorism. It has become increasingly apparent of late
that the army must be supported in its mission through
strengthened efforts, which must include, first, dealing
with all Libyan terrorist groups and organizations,
such as Ansar al-Sharia and ISIS. That will require the
international community - which helped Libya rid
itself of the former dictatorial regime before leaving it
prey to the security vacuum - to shoulder its legal and
moral responsibilities in providing urgent support, first
and foremost, by rebuilding and rearming our armed
forces so that they can take action.

Before both the General Assembly and the Security
Council, the legitimate Libyan authorities have
repeatedly alerted the international community to the
dangers of terrorism and its spread to Libya. Today, I
am here to reiterate in this Chamber that Libya can no
longer remain silent in the face of terrorism. It is clear
that the challenges facing Libya's legitimate authorities
are enormous now that armed terrorist groups have
taken possession of entire cities in Libya and are
proclaiming the Al-Qaida doctrine and announced to
the entire world that they have joined with ISIS. They
have attempted to take over the ports from which
we export oil and have attacked several oil fields in
order to finance their terrorist activities throughout
the world and to transform Libya into a hub for their
terrorist activities in North Africa, the Sahel and the
Mediterranean basin.

In the light of all this, we welcomed the adoption
last week of resolution 2199 (2015). However, the
Council's interest in the disastrous situation ofterrorism
prevailing in my country is nowhere near the intensity
that benefited our brothers in Iraq and Syria when they
faced similar problems. We therefore call upon the
international community to shoulder its responsibility
in maintaining peace and security in Libya, particularly
since the situation in my country threatens not only the
countries of Africa, but also those of Europe.

Libya requires a decisive stance on the part of the
international community to help it to build the capacity
of its national army by lifting the arms embargo so that
our army can receive military materiel and weapons to
counter the rampant terrorism in my country. Libya also
requires assistance to strengthen its legal institutions
to ensure their capacities to address extremism and
terrorism. A failure to provide weapons and training
to the Libyan army to assist it in confronting terrorism
will only play into the extremists" hands, ensure
instability in Libya and have negative repercussions on
the security sector throughout the region, and thus on
international peace and security.

The most recent success of the Libyan army in its
tireless struggle against terrorism gave vivid proof
of the need for professional training for its military
and security institutions. While I do not call for
international intervention to deal with ISIS and Ansar
al-Sharia, in view of the lack of international support
the Libyan Government has called on brotherly Egypt
to support the Libyan army in confronting terrorism,
although that call was not included in the declaration
issued yesterday, 17 February.

There is a close link between terrorism and
transnational crime in all its forms, including
trafficking in weapons, drugs and petroleum products,
money-laundering and human trafficking, among
others. Cooperation must be strengthened at the
international, regional and subregional levels and
among the States of the region to control their borders.
Appropriate coordination and information-sharing
mechanisms must be established to enable the arrest
and prosecution of those accused of crimes. We need
effective cooperation to deal with foreign terrorist
fighters, in the framework of resolution 2178 (2014),
and action to halt that phenomenon. Furthermore, we
must address the issue of abduction and hostage-taking,
which are used by terrorist groups inside and outside
of Libya as a source of financing and to exert political
pressure.

In conclusion, the House of Representatives and
the Government, in their capacity as the legitimate
representatives of the country, extend their full support
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bernardino Leon, in achieving a political solution
to the Libyan crisis, through dialogue. The grave
challenges facing Libya represent a threat to the entire
region. Given the lack of effective international support,
we run the risk of proving incapable of eradicating that
cancer, whose spread could infest the entire region. We
therefore call on the Security Council to take all these
aspects fully into account. We desire backing for the
legitimate Libyan authorities in their efforts to duly
control the entire Libyan territory and its borders. We
reaffirm our support for the Council in that process.

With respect to the resolutions on monitoring and
controlling the trafficking of weapons and their transfer
to armed groups in Libya, as well as the financing of
those groups, we appreciate in particular the effort of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in presenting a draft
resolution to the Council, and we cherish the hope that
it will enjoy the Council's full support.

