Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the United States for taking the initiative to convene
today's meeting. I wish in particular to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence here today and for
his statement and the concepts set forth in it. We have
taken note of the nine points that formed the basis of
his briefing.

Almost two years since the publication of the
report of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, better known as the HIPPO report (see S/2015/446), Uruguay believes that the report's
recommendations are still valid and that the Member
States must continue to work towards implementing
them. In that regard, many of the questions raised in the
presidency's concept note (see S/2017/287, annex) are
found in the HIPPO report and its recommendations.

As a State Member of the United Nations, an
elected member of the Security Council and a troop-
and police-contributing country, Uruguay supports the
peacekeeping operations review process with a view to
making it more efficient and effective, and to ensure
that they can truly fulfil the purposes for which they
were designed.

In our view, peacekeeping operations are the
shared responsibility of three actors: the Security
Council, States or parties to peacekeeping operations,
and countries contributing troops and police personnel.
Each of these actors has its role to play; each has a
responsibility to shoulder. The Security Council must
assume its multiple responsibilities to ensure that
peacekeeping operations are efficient. Therefore, as
mentioned in the HIPPO report, political solutions
must always underpin the design and deployment of
peacekeeping operations, and political momentum
must be maintained. We must always bear in mind that
lasting peace is not achieved by nor is it maintained
through military and technical interventions, but rather
thanks to political solutions.

Accordingly, the political strategies underpinning
peacekeeping operations must have the support of a
united Security Council. Experience has shown and
continues to show that when there is a lack of unity in
the Council and the lack of a clear role in the support
of the peace process, the success of a peacekeeping
operation can be seriously compromised. Such was the
case - let us be sincere here - with the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan. Furthermore,
and notwithstanding the unity in the Security Council,
the primacy of politics is the responsibility of national
institutions and their political stakeholders. The United
Nations and regional organizations can only back
and facilitate the peace process, but not much can be
achieved if national stakeholders do not show a genuine
commitment to a peaceful solution to the conflict.

Another critical responsibility of the Security
Council is to ensure that peacekeeping operations are
more flexible, have clear, priority-based mandates, and
are capable of adjusting to changing realities on the
ground. Over the past few months, we have seen efforts
undertaken to that end, for example, the development of
the mandates for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where tasks have been established based on
clearly defined priorities. However, much remains to
be done.

In addition, once a peacekeeping operation has been
deployed with a valid mandate, the Security Council
is duty-bound to require and obtain from host States
full respect for and compliance with the terms agreed
upon in the relevant status of forces agreement. These
documents are the guarantees that protect the personnel
that a country voluntarily contributes to peacekeeping
operations. Therefore, any violation of these agreements
is simply unacceptable and cannot be tolerated. Such
actions seriously affect the performance of missions and
prevent them from faithfully discharging their assigned
tasks. I would mention here limitations on the freedom
of movement, restrictions on access to certain areas,
bureaucratic obstacles with respect to the delivery of
visas or the shipping of containers with United Nations
equipment, refusal to allow the deployment of new
forces, or expulsion of peacekeeping personnel, all of
which impede the full functionality of a mission.

Troop- and police-contributing countries must also
shoulder their share of the burden, as they are the ones
acting on the ground and they have to implement an
operation's mandate. It is essential that the deployed
peacekeeping personnel is properly trained, skilled
and equipped to carry out all of the tasks set forth in
the mandate. Therefore, national restrictions - known
as caveats - whether they are declared or, worse,
undeclared, the absence of effective command and
control, the refusal to obey orders, the failure to respond
to attacks against civilians and inadequate equipment
cannot be tolerated because they have an adverse effect
on the shared responsibility for effectively discharging
the mandates.

Unfortunately, we have seen this type of situation
in several peacekeeping operations, and not only at
the level of the contingents and the police forces, but
also in the leadership of the missions and their chain
of command, especially in high-pressure environments
where civilians need protection. On this point, I wish
to stress the contribution of the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians, which Uruguay has
joined, with the understanding that they recognize the
importance the protection of civilians has at present in
preserving the physical and moral integrity of people
in conflict situations, particularly the most vulnerable
populations. My delegation understands that the Kigali
Principles can greatly contribute to the reform process
because they are geared towards improving efficiency
in the protection of civilians, through training, the
behaviour of peacekeeping personnel on the ground
and the important element of accountability, especially
when they do not rise to occasion of the circumstances.

In conclusion, allow me to assure the Council
of Uruguay's commitment to continuing to
work in the reform process of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

