Mr. Titov: Members of the Council may recall
that in the briefing by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to the Council on 24 April (see S/PV.6111),
we called attention to a significant build-up of the
Chadian National Armed Forces in eastern Chad, both
in personnel and in equipment, apparently in
anticipation of a rebel incursion. At that time, we noted
reports of a parallel build-up of Chadian armed
opposition groups across the border in West Darfur, in
the area of El Geneina. While this was cause for
serious concern, this build-up did not, until recently,
result in any significant clashes or cross-border
incursions by the armed opposition groups.

To the extent possible, the United Nations
undertook to deploy much-needed additional United
Nations troops more rapidly to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) in the eastern part of the country, to
enable it to deliver on its protection mandate. As
Council members are aware, the mandate authorizes
the United Nations to protect civilians in danger,
facilitate delivery of humanitarian aid and movement
of humanitarian personnel and protect United Nations
personnel and facilities.

On 26 April, we began receiving unconfirmed
reports, including through MINURCAT, of minor
skirmishes between the Chadian security forces and
small groups of rebels of the Union des forces de la
resistance (UFR) in eastern Chad. Subsequently, we
received unconfirmed reports of air strikes conducted
on I and 2 May by the Chadian National Armed Forces
on rebel positions. This was occurring in the vicinity of
the border with the Sudan. In a statement dated 4 May,
the Secretary-General expressed his serious concern
over the build-up and movement of army and rebel
forces and called on the Governments of Chad and the
Sudan to make every effort to immediately ease
tensions.

On 5 May, MINURCAT was able to confirm that
the Chadian National Armed Forces were conducting
air strikes, using jet fighters and attack helicopters,
against a rebel column in eastern Chad in the area
south of Goz Beida. Reports indicated the existence of
three main rebel columns: two had moved into eastern
Chad, while the third reportedly remained in a static
position across the border. Reports on the actual sizes
09-33090
of the columns vary, but each column is believed to
number anywhere between 50 and 100 vehicles.

Regrettably, the situation intensified, and on
6 May the Secretary-General was compelled to express
his increasing concern and to call for respect of the
humanitarian character of United Nations operations
and the operations of our non-governmental partners in
eastern Chad.

On 6 and 7 May, we continued to receive reports
from MINURCAT on air strikes targeting the rebel
column, which was apparently located in a corridor
extending from Goz Beida to Koukou Angarana and
Kerfi in eastern Chad. These air strikes have reportedly
resulted in heavy rebel losses. The extent of these
losses, however, is difficult to assess at present. No
assessment is available on the extent of losses by the
Chadian army either.

Yesterday, we received reports of very heavy
ground engagement between the Chadian army and
UFR rebels in the Vicinity of Am Dam, north of Goz
Beida in eastern Chad, which is believed to be a pivotal
area for any further progress towards the towns of
Abeche and N'Djamena. According to today's report,
heavy fighting in this area continues and unconfirmed
reports received from the Chadian armed forces
indicate that the Front is claiming 125 rebels and
soldiers killed and over 150 rebels taken prisoner.

Meanwhile, the second rebel column is reported
to have moved southward to the area of Tissi, near the
border with the Central African Republic, and it has
since moved westward towards Am Timan. We have no
confirmed reports that this column has engaged in
fighting yet.

The deteriorating security situation in eastern
Chad has prompted humanitarian actors, including
three United Nations agencies and 11 international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), to relocate
their non-essential staff from Koukou Angarana to Goz
Beida as a precautionary measure. In addition, some
international NGOs have decided to relocate their staff
from areas such as Ade and Abeche. At the request of
the Detachement integre de securite (DIS) command,
MINURCAT has also assisted in the relocation of 25 of
their officers in the area. In total, our Mission assisted
in relocating almost 100 various international and
national staff, who are currently under the protection of
the MINURCAT contingent.
09-33090

The head of MINURCAT, Mr. Victor Angelo,
visited Goz Beida two days ago to personally take
stock of the situation in town and to reassure the
United Nations and NGO staff as to the determination
and capability of MINURCAT to protect them. Also,
two days ago, the United Nations suspended all its
activities in several regions of eastern Chad, owing to
movement of armed opposition groups in those areas.

Thus far, no significant population displacements
have been reported as a result of fighting. The
confrontation, however, has gravely compromised the
ability of the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and their NGO partners to deliver
humanitarian assistance.

On 3 May in Doha, under the auspices of the
Governments of Qatar and Libya, the Governments of
Chad and the Sudan signed a new bilateral agreement
to normalize relations and deny any support, in their
respective territories, to rebel groups that are hostile to
either of them. Only two days later, on 5 May, a
spokesman of the Government of Chad accused the
Government of the Sudan of sending armed elements
into eastern Chad and thus breaching the Doha
agreement. A spokesman of the Government of the
Sudan has denied this accusation, noting that his
country remained committed to the Doha agreement.

It is essential, therefore, that both Governments
act upon the Doha agreement and past commitments to
prevent further rebel incursions from either side of the
border. It is also essential that armed opposition groups
realize that efforts to seize power through force are
unacceptable. In that regard, the current presence of
representatives of the Justice and Equality Movement
in Doha for meetings with representatives of the
Government of the Sudan is an encouraging
development from our point of View.

At the same time, as the rainy season is
beginning, it is critically important that the
humanitarian community be able to pre-position
essential humanitarian supplies and materials,
especially in the communities that become isolated due
to flooded and impassable roads. Should the current
situation worsen, it could potentially jeopardize that
very important humanitarian work.

As of today, the MINURCAT force stands at
2,396 personnel, which represents 46 per cent of its
authorized strength. The force lacks 14 of the 18
military utility and reconnaissance helicopters called
3
for in the concept of operations for the Mission. It has
yet to achieve the full deployment of the Ghanaian
battalion, and will not commence deployment of the
Nepalese battalion as an operational reserve, based in
Abeche', until June, based on that unit's readiness to
move.

As a result, the United Nations military force
lacks the ability to observe and track incidents as they
develop, as well as a force reserve that possesses the
necessary mobility to reinforce sites or to react to
changing circumstances. We therefore urge the Council
to join the Secretary-General and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is appealing to potential
troop contributors to provide MINURCAT with the
required helicopter and other assets in order to enable
it to fully deliver on its mandate. In the meantime, we
commend the work of the United Nations uniformed
and civilian personnel, who continue to serve in eastern
Chad under extremely difficult conditions.

