Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate the friendly country
of Spain on its accession to the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I should like to thank
you, Sir, for your leadership and skill in the outstanding
accomplishment of your tasks and for your positive
response to the request to convene this urgent meeting
of the Security Council.

I further express our thanks and appreciation to the
friendly Russian Federation for its presidency of the
Council last month.

Lastly, I thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun
for his briefing.

We come to the Security Council today to ask
it intervene on an urgent basis to end the aggression
against the defenceless Palestinian people and its
shrines, which have been violated by the Israeli
military occupation, settlers and extremists. We have
documented this aggression in five letters that we have
sent to the President of the Security Council over the
past 10 days, during which more than 35 martyrs have
fallen, including many children, and more than 1,500
people have been injured by live ammunition, rubber
bullets and other means. Most of the victims have been
minors below the age of 18.
We have all witnessed through satellite television
and social media the killings and mass arrests of
Palestinian civilians by the Israeli occupation forces,
merely for participating in demonstrations against the
Israeli occupation and its brutal, illegal practices and
for seeking to end the occupation. Islamic holy sites and
the Al-Aqsa Mosque have been subjected to ongoing
aggression by the Israeli authorities and extremists,
who want to impose a change of the current status quo.
This provocation of our people has further escalated
the situation since September and threatens to give
the conflict a sectarian character that will destroy
everything in its wake.

Israel, the occupying Power, is responsible for
bringing us to this dangerous juncture. We must
hold it accountable for its violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. The illegal
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem and its environs, are fertile
ground for the terrorist threat being faced our people.
There will be no hope for a serious political process
without a full, decisive end to settlement activities.

It is high time to put an end to Israel's actions and to
compel it to honour its commitments under international
law. Israel cannot be allowed to enjoy impunity for its
crimes against our people in the occupied Palestinian
States, including East Jerusalem. Israeli officials
should be held responsible for these crimes, as should
the settlers who have committed such ugly terrorist acts
as the torching of the Dawabsha family in their home in
the middle of the night, which killed an 18-month-old
infant and his parents and burned his 4-year- old brother,
who remains in hospital on the brink of death. Israeli
Minister of Defence Moshe Ya'alon claims to know the
terrorists who committed this act, but they have yet to
be arrested or punished for their terrorist acts. This
would seem to represent a cover-up and collusion on
the part of the Israeli Government.

The occupation maintains its brutality by surrounding
and blockading Palestinian neighbourhoods in East
Jerusalem, which constitutes collective punishment
in violation of the rules of international law. Israel
destroys the homes of Palestinians and permits the
formation of armed Jewish militias, as called for by the
Mayor of West Jerusalem. We believe that such terror
and aggression will not break the will of our people
or weaken our resolve to peacefully resist and end
the occupation and to achieve our independence as a
sovereign State with East Jerusalem as its capital.

From this Chamber, we hail our people for its
steadfastness and sacrifices; we pay tribute to the
martyrs and honour the injured. We express our support
for the Palestinian prisoners.

The Security Council must assume its responsibility
in maintaining international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, by
condemning this aggression, working to bring it to an
immediate end and forcing Israel to withdraw its armed
formations immediately from the areas of contact with
our people, especially in occupied East Jerusalem and
Al-Aqsa Mosque. Israel must respect the established
status quo in those sacred places in word and deed,
and allow our people - Christians and Muslims - to
practise their religion in peace. We do not trust the
words and promises of the Israeli Government. Its
immoral actions speak louder than its words. Israel has
violated its responsibility as an occupying Power to
protect civilians in accordance with the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. It is the responsibility of the United
Nations and the Security Council to provide protection
for our people in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, until the occupation has
ended in the Palestinian State.

In this respect in 1994, the Security Council adopted
resolution 904 (1994) following the Hebron massacre at
the hands of a terrorist settler. The resolution called for
protection for our people in the occupied territory and a
temporary international presence, including observers.
The resolution called upon the Israeli Government to
remove weapons from the hands of settlers. We call
upon States members once again, not only to implement
that resolution and all other relevant United Nations
resolutions, but also to seriously and urgently address
the issue of providing international protection for our
people. This issue has become more urgent than ever
before and it requires the Council's immediate attention.

In conclusion, our people, who are under
occupation and who suffer from injustice, oppression
and aggression, have for many decades asked when the
occupation will end and when the Palestinian people
will achieve independence and security. Is the Council
going to answer that question? Is the Council going to
do something about it?

