Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing my delegation's thanks to the
Secretary-General and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for producing the
report (S/2002/1300) we are discussing today. We
know that OCHA has worked hard to ensure a more
systematic presentation of the issues.

We think that it is important that the latest report
builds on the framework set out by the aide-memoire
adopted unanimously by the Council in March
(S/PRST/2002/6, annex). We need this common, agreed
reference point as a basis for strengthening our own
response and for providing direction to the various
organizations required to fulfil their respective roles.
Given the subject under discussion, it is a
particular pleasure to see Mr. Gnaedinger, the Director-
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, in the Chamber. And we warmly welcome your
presence, Madam President, and that of the Deputy
Foreign Minister of Norway.

The United Kingdom is happy to align itself with
the European Union statement to be made later by
Denmark. The subject under discussion is a high
priority for the United Kingdom that we wish to see
remain prominent on the Council's agenda. I would
therefore like to make a number of points in a national
capacity.

Most important, the United Kingdom agrees
strongly with the point made by the Secretary-General
in his introduction: we need to move now from policy
to practical implementation. That point was
underscored in Mr. Oshima's very helpful presentation.
And it is why the United Kingdom sponsored the
European workshop, one of the six regional workshops
referred to in the report, in an effort to operationalize
the aide-memoire.

The conclusions of that workshop, which was
attended by a wide range of Government officials and
United Nations and non-United Nations practitioners,
closely reflect the report's key observations. Those
conclusions included, first, that there is a need to get
on and implement the aide-memoire more proactively,
rather than seeking to refine the normative framework.
As the aide-memoire is an agreed document of the
Security Council, we need to continue to consider what
needs to be done to promote it actively and how we can
encourage others to do so. Secondly, we need to
consider how to engage non-State actors in the
protection of civilians. Thirdly, a clear idea is needed
of what the protection needs are of civilians caught up
in conflict and how protection is best provided, secured
and sustained. On that basis, we must determine who is
responsible for providing that protection. The report
brings those points out well.

From the report, we would like to highlight the
following United Kingdom concerns and to pose the
following associated questions. First, with respect to
the issue of greater use of inclusive framework
agreements, we agree that they can offer useful ways of
ensuring access to vulnerable populations, especially
where a lack of structured relations with non-State
actors can impede access and stop relief efforts. The
experience of the Sudan is instructive in that context.
And we would like to know more about how the
approach adopted in the Sudan has worked to enhance
prospects for wider peace and security. With this in
mind, can Mr. Oshima perhaps identify other country
or regional situations currently on the agenda of the
Council which could benefit from such framework
agreements or similar approaches?

A further concern is the sending of
multidisciplinary assessment teams to areas of
emerging crisis. The report is very clear about the
heightened threats to the security of civilians posed by
the failure to separate civilians from armed elements,
especially in refugee camps.

The United Kingdom has consistently called for
work in the area of protection of civilians to be an
integrated and cross-cutting issue in terms of United
Nations handling. And multidisciplinary assessment
teams make a good match with this requirement. We
think that early feedback on how those teams have
worked would be useful for informing the future
response of both the Security Council and the wider
United Nations system.

We also welcome the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to develop
comprehensive rule-of-law strategies in the context of
promoting justice and reconciliation. But we would
stress the need to incorporate existing United Nations
efforts in this area of work so as to avoid duplication
and to promote coherence and genuine cross-cutting
integration within the system. So, we would like to ask
how DPKO's efforts will fit in with the mandate of the
United Nations Development Programme in this area
and with the work of the Department of Political
Affairs, for example.

We strongly support the emphasis in the report on

core principles that represent the minimum standards of
conduct for United Nations personnel. The Secretary-
General's call for a zero-tolerance policy for those in
breach of those standards, we think, demands nothing
less. Both civilians and peacekeepers must be held
accountable for violations. We want to see tougher
action taken in this respect and want training
programmes to continue to emphasize the importance
that the Council attaches to it. So, the United Kingdom
will continue to support DPKO's Best Practices Unit in
further developing this issue, and we will work to
ensure that our funding of both the United Nations and
non-United Nations-agency relief work reflects the
importance of our concerns in this area.

We also need to consider how the protection of
civilians agenda can be used as a framework which can
link other, related issues on the agenda of the Security
Council, such as those dealt with in Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
and resolution 1379 (2001) on children affected by
armed conflict. The report touches on this issue but
perhaps does not go into enough detail on how we can
encourage a more integrated approach in dealing with
these issues. I would like to ask Mr. Oshima how we
can improve our work in this respect.

A further United Kingdom concern is to underline
the obligation of Governments to respect and observe
international humanitarian and human rights law as the
basis for protecting civilians. Mr. Gnaedinger spoke
eloquently on this. Failure to do so will jeopardize
efforts aimed at peace and long-term security and
development. The report makes those links very clear.
Governments need to respect those obligations in the
context of ensuring the safety and security of United
Nations personnel. The killings of United Nations
relief workers are an affront to the Geneva Conventions
and to international humanitarian law.

We need to develop an accountability structure
that rewards a proactive approach to protection issues.
With this in mind, we welcome the efforts of the South
African Government to raise the profile of the issue
within the African Union. The New Partnership for
Africa's Development is a good basis for this, we
think. Broad-based economic growth and gains from
development will be lost for many Africans if
protection of civilians issues are not dealt with first in
the context of conflict prevention measures. We hope
the findings from the recent Johannesburg and other
regional workshops can feed into that strategy.

My delegation thinks that the Security Council
also needs to consider how it can be more proactive in
enhancing protection measures. We have already
committed ourselves as a Council to doing this, as a
scan of the language contained in Security Council
resolution 1296 (2000) makes clear. We need to keep
the protection of civilians in mind right across the
spread of countries already on our agenda. We also
need to encourage the Secretary-General's use of
Article 99 of the Charter in this respect.

While welcoming the recent strengthening of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Kingdom is increasingly concerned about the threats to
the protection of civilians in the Ituri region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and also in
Burundi.
We need to promote the use of the aide-memoire
as a living document, updated on a case-by-case basis,
as we agreed in our discussion on 15 March this year,
and as set out in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2002/6). That was the intention of our one-
day workshop, held during the British presidency in
July to highlight how the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and OCHA were working in the context of
the drawdown of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone. We are glad to read in the report that that was a
useful event.

We need to ensure that we develop systematic
ways of dealing with the issues surrounding the
protection of civilians. As the July workshop outlined,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, working
with United Nations partners, has a vital role in
securing protection measures. The Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations should be encouraged to
use the aide-memoire in its deliberations. We must also
ensure, we believe, that the terms of reference provided
to Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
take protection of civilians issues fully into account.

A final concern is the link between the aide-
memoire and the road map, which we still find a little
unclear. With respect to the road map, when can we
expect roles and responsibilities to be clarified and
agreed? And how will the road map and the aide-
memoire fit together?

In closing, the United Kingdom would like to pay
tribute to the efforts of the Governments of Norway
and of Canada in elevating the profile of this subject on
our agenda. There is no doubt that their efforts have
resulted in raising our awareness of the challenges
surrounding the issue and of the cost to peace and
security if we ignore it.

We look forward to further updates from OCHA
and the Secretary-General on this subject and would be
happy with the timings recommended by Mr. Oshima.

