Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I thank the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues
Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, Mr. Jack
Lang, for his comprehensive briefing and in-depth
analysis of the legal options available to combat piracy
off the coast of Somalia. We appreciate the additional
comments provided by the Assistant Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs and thank the representative of
Somalia for his participation in this meeting.

The increasing industrialization of the
phenomenon of piracy and its rapid expansion in the
Gulf of Aden endangers the integrity of the nascent
authorities in Somalia and Puntland. It also threatens
not only to erode the tenuous gains made by the
international community in the Horn of Africa region,
but also provide a fertile environment for extremism
and violence.

We therefore share the Special Adviser's sense of
urgency on the need for swift action to address the
threat. We also agree with his basic premise that
convergent measures will be required to curb piracy
and prevent its occurrence. To that end, we welcome
his recommendations for improving the operational
component of counter-piracy, such as extending the
scope of on-board self-protection, strengthening and
adapting naval operations, and intensifying monitoring
of the Somalia coastline. We also welcome the judicial
and correctional components of counter-piracy,
particularly the measures to overcome the legal
obstacles to the prosecution of piracy suspects.

We believe, however, that the effectiveness of
these measures is contingent on the elimination of the
immediate constraints on the coordination of the
international prosecution of pirates and closer
transnational partnerships. Additionally, initiatives to
suppress piracy and protect vulnerable ships passing
through the waters off the coast of Somalia, such as the
European Union's Operation Atalanta, NATO's Allied
Protector and Ocean Shield operations, and Combined
Maritime Forces, must be streamlined in a coherent
framework.

As we have heard, nine out of 10 pirates are not
prosecuted due to the absence of a clear international
legislative framework. Although article 101 of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and
resolution 1918 (2010) both define piracy as a criminal
act, few States of the region have incorporated this
definition into their criminal code. We therefore call
for a coherent international legislative framework to
address these enduring gaps and uncertainty in
international law.

In our view, the Security Council has established
precedent in this area. In resolution 1950 (2010), the
Council underlined the importance of continuing to
enhance the collection, preservation and transmission
of evidence of acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea
off the coast of Somalia to competent authorities.
Further agreements relating to the exchange of
prisoners, a common definition of piracy, uniform
evidence collection measures and jurisdictional
standards are necessary.

Nigeria notes the Special Adviser's suggested
cluster of measures for preventing piracy. Going
forward, the Council must provide support for an
internal mechanism to complement the efforts of the
international community to deal with the menace. We
therefore support the recommendations of the Special

Adviser on the need to revive and develop domestic
industry and to reform domestic legal institutions.
Nigeria's long-held view is that piracy is a symptom of
the internal strife within Somalia and the absence of
governance structures. A long-term solution to piracy
hinges on improving Somalia's stability and helping
Somalis to forge a State with viable governance
institutions capable of ensuring respect for the rule of
law and of promoting peace and reconciliation. We
renew our call for generous contributions to the Trust
Fund for this purpose.

We must, however, acknowledge the tumultuous
political, economic and legal environment in which
this must take place. We note with growing alarm the
increasing sophistication of pirates. In 2009, revenues
from piracy in Puntland were approximately
$82 million, compared to $16 million for all of
Puntland. The traditional industries of fishing and
livestock trading have been decimated. Additionally,
the once robust commercial international shipping
lanes have been significantly impaired by piracy.

Consequently, there is an urgent need for the
penalization and prosecution of piracy. Clear and
enforceable laws must be promulgated by the
legislature and enforced by a fair and impartial
judiciary and police force. As a first step, we encourage
the Somali Parliament to enact a statute criminalizing
piracy. States in the region should also take similar
action under their domestic law, in accordance with
resolution 1918 (2010). Considering the negative
effects of illegal fishing and maritime pollution, Nigeria
fully supports the Special Adviser's recommendation on
the establishment of an independent investigation
committee on allegations of illegal fishing and dumping
of toxic waste in Somali waters.

Piracy is one of the many hurdles the Council
must clear on its path to stabilize Somalia and the Horn
ofAfrica. The Special Adviser's report (S/2011/30) is a
meaningful contribution to the current efforts to
address the problems. In our view, his constructive
suggestions require timely and more in-depth
consideration. The measures outlined by the Legal
Adviser will be further enhanced by extensive
international support and coordination through regional
arrangements.

Finally, resolving the problem off the coast of
Somalia will require tackling the root causes of
political instability in Somaliland.

