Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Portuguese presidency for the
initiative to hold this open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. It will not only help
Council members to engage in in-depth consideration
and discussion of the working methods but will also
help them to hear the opinions of others, particularly
those of the developing countries, which make up the
majority of the United Nations membership. We have
listened carefully to previous speakers, including the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish to
express our appreciation to Bosnia and Herzegovina
for its contribution as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions.
In recent years the Security Council has held
several open debates on its working methods. China
has always valued and supported improving the
working methods of the Council so as to enhance its
transparency and efficiency so that it can better carry
out its work in accordance with the United Nations
Charter and the Council's provisional rules of
procedure and to better implement its primary Charter-
mandated responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security.

The Security Council has made many efforts to
improve its working methods, including, among others,
using the format of public meetings as much as
possible and the regular briefings for non-members of
the Council by the rotating Council presidency on the
monthly schedule of work. Innovative methods such as
informal interactive dialogue have given Council
members opportunities to exchange opinions with
regard to sensitive situations on the Council's agenda
with countries involved. The Council has also
improved its annual report submitted to the General
Assembly.

On the other hand, there is still room for
improvement of the Council's working methods. The
2010 note by the President of the Security Council
(S/2010/507) should therefore be further implemented.

The Security Council and various other United
Nations organs should carry out their work in
accordance with the division of labour, their
comparative advantages and the demands of the United
Nations Charter in an integrated and coordinated
manner that results in synergy instead of duplication of
efforts, controversy and waste of resources. The
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council should maintain
communication through their Presidents.

China supports the Security Council providing to
countries involved in situations on the Council's
agenda more opportunities to present their positions
and opinions. We also hope that mechanisms such as
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and
the meetings of the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) will be better used to strengthen interaction
among the Security Council, the TCCs and the
Secretariat in carrying out preventive diplomacy and in
the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The Council
should encourage and support regional organizations
such as the African Union and the League of Arab
States and hear their opinions better before making a
decision.

