Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I should like to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
briefing on his visit to Burma. It required courage and
determination on his part to proceed with the Visit. His
decision had our full support; the wider international
community supported it too. That support has been
reflected in many recent statements, most notably the
communique on Burma issued at the Group of Eight
summit on 9 July, which the Secretary-General
mentioned.

We believe that, by going to Burma, the
Secretary-General demonstrated in the clearest possible
way the commitment of the United Nations to the
progress of democracy, human rights and economic
development in that country. The people of Burma will
certainly have taken heart from the strong leadership
that the Secretary-General has shown.

We also welcome the unambiguous messages on
the need for political reform that the Secretary-General
delivered directly to Senior General Than Shwe and the
leadership of the State Peace and Development
Council-messages which set out the international
community's concerns and which the Council has
expressed through its presidential statements. Those
statements have made clear What needs to happen,
including the release of all political prisoners,
including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, and the resumption
of an enhanced, time-bound dialogue among the
Government, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and all political
parties and ethnic groups, facilitated by the United
Nations.

We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General
was able to meet with ceasefire groups and all 10 of the
registered political parties, including the National
League for Democracy, but we echo the Secretary-
General's disappointment at the Government's decision
not to allow him to meet Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
herself. It is a measure of their obstinacy and of their
lack of commitment to genuine progress that they
failed to grant that request, particularly at a time when
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi is subject to a trial widely
acknowledged to be a travesty of justice. As the only
political figure in the country to have received a
popular democratic mandate, she has a central role to

play in the future of a democratic Burma. Her
treatment by the regime is not the only criterion by
which the regime should be judged, but it demonstrates
the regime's fear of a free and fair political process and
its unwillingness to engage with international opinion.

The Secretary-General's visit was an opportunity
for the Government of Burma to transform its
relationship with the international community, which
stands ready to respond positively to real progress. The
regime's failure to take that opportunity has only
served to isolate it further. We can only hope that we
may yet see progress in the coming days; it is not too
late. But if it does not come, and if we see an unjust
outcome in Daw Aung San Suu Kyi's trial, the
international community will need to follow the
Secretary-General's lead and respond robustly. The
onus is on the Government to act.

As the Secretary-General has just said, the world
is watching. The generals cannot have failed to hear
loud and clear the strong messages that the Secretary-
General delivered in Rangoon when he addressed
ministers and the diplomatic and non-governmental
organization community. They can be in no doubt
about his disappointment and the disappointment of the
international community as a whole.

We urge the regime to engage constructively with
the international community to meet our concerns. My
Government has stated on many occasions that it
remains ready to respond positively to real progress. It
is deeply regrettable, therefore, that the regime has yet
to take the steps that will allow us to do so.

We remain committed to working with partners in
a concerted effort to start a reconciliation process in
Burma. For our part, we will continue to support the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his good offices
mission, and we welcome his ongoing personal efforts
to start a reconciliation process in Burma. He remains
the international community's best hope of breaking
the deadlock.

Each one of us must use whatever influence we
have to encourage the regime to engage constructively
and to convince them that the objectives that they say
they seek - national unity, stability and economic
development - are being inhibited by their actions.
They must understand that their road map and the
elections that they planned will have no credibility if
political prisoners, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,
are prevented from playing their full part in the
political process. They must respond positively to the
Secretary-General and to the international community,
which he represents.

