Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, I would first like to
express my great satisfaction at seeing you preside
over the Security Council in this month of June, and
our honour at having the Russian Federation guide the
deliberations of the Council today.

I cannot fail to mention the remarkable stewardship
of your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Korea, at the helm of the Security
Council last month .

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the representative of Malawi on behalf
of the Southern African Development Community. We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving us
the opportunity to speak before the Security Council at
today's public debate on new trends in peacekeeping,
under the agenda item entitled "United Nations
peacekeeping operations".

The topic chosen is all the more significant for being
at the very heart of the activities of the United Nations
since its inception. We recall that the peacekeeping
operations are not just about maintaining international
peace and security; they are also called upon to help
countries torn by conflict to create the conditions for
returning to a lasting peace. Peacekeeping operations
must in particular facilitate the political process,
protect civilians, assist in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, support the
organization of free elections, protect and promote
human rights and restore State authority in conflict-
torn areas.

In my delegation's view, the success of
peacekeeping operations depends on their ability to
adapt to the dynamics of new challenges and current
political realities. As to new trends in this area, I
would like to mention the example of the practices
followed by the Security Council in my own country,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As we all know,
the Security Council recently adopted resolution 2147
(2014), renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and that of the Force Intervention
Brigade. We have all witnessed the effective and
commendable role played by the Intervention Brigade
alongside the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo in support of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the restoration of the authority of the
State over the entirety of its territory.

That is why the second mandate of the Intervention
Brigade will, in fact, be the culmination of efforts
already undertaken to consolidate and preserve lasting
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
throughout the Great Lakes region. Meanwhile, the
Government is now shouldering the task of creating
the rapid reaction force that is to take over for the
Intervention Brigade at the designated time.

The conclusion and implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which was
concluded in Addis Ababa on 24 February 2013, and the
adoption of resolution 2098 (2013), which strengthened
the Framework, represent major innovations in both the
understanding of the crisis in the Great Lakes region
since the late 1990s and the traditional United Nations
doctrine of peacekeeping.
The very first use of surveillance drones in a
United Nations peacekeeping operation occurred in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and sets a precedent,
sounding the death knell for the traditional concept of
peacekeeping operations and paving the way for the use
of modern technology aimed at making peacekeeping
operations effective and efficient. For the long-
suffering populations of the countries in the region,
the Framework and the aforementioned resolution
are seen as compelling evidence of the international
community's determination to help find a definitive
solution to the unstable situation, which has lasted too
long and for which my country has paid such a heavy
toll.

We must recall the sad and often overlooked reality
that my country has lost over 6 million people to our
chronic conflict. That is a tragedy of a scale without
equal in the history of humankind, and humankind
cannot remain indifferent before it, if it does not wish
to lose its soul. Our meeting today therefore reflects
our shared desire to reaffirm our humanity, assess
together and in an uncompromising manner the concept
of peacekeeping and identify the challenges that remain
so that, once lasting peace is restored, the State can
devote its energy and faculties to the key issues of
fighting poverty and improving the living conditions
of its people.

