Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
today's open debate on the dreadful issue of trafficking
in persons in conflict situations, which has become
increasingly widespread. We support the Security
Council's continued consideration of this issue and its
examination of ways to address a phenomenon that is a
flagrant violation of human dignity and human rights.

While emphasizing the significance of the
proposals for countering the issue outlined in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/939), it is our view
that predicting and preventing outbreaks of armed
conflict and their exacerbation, as well as employing
preventive diplomacy, are the best ways to avoid the
untold tragedies and human suffering that such conflict
causes. Regrettably, such hopeful efforts are usually
obstructed by numerous negative foreign interventions
motivated by competing interests that frequently help
to create and exacerbate these conflicts, resulting in
serious hardships reaching far beyond national borders
and becoming a matter of growing concern to the
international community.

We agree the view expressed in the Secretary-
General's report that regions suffering from the effects
of armed conflict and instability are particularly
vulnerable to the practices of human trafficking
networks. Such networks see a State's fragility as an
opportunity to achieve their immoral objectives. Libya
is no exception to that rule. It is, however, anxious
to address any violations perpetrated against illegal
migrants to the extent that its means and capabilities
permit. We were deeply shocked by the information
in paragraph 7 of the report, which noted that media
outlets have been reporting on incidents of trafficking
in persons in Libya in which migrants are being
auctioned as commodities in slave markets. In that
regard, I would like to highlight a statement by the
Libyan Foreign Ministry that we have transmitted to
the Council condemning and denouncing such acts. If
substantiated, the reports describe inhumane practices
that are incompatible with our national legislation and
that Libyan society's values and morals abhor. The
Foreign Ministry's statement confirms that the Libyan
authorities have launched an investigation into the
allegations and will hold the perpetrators and anyone
involved accountable. Libya's Ministry of Justice has
also issued a statement in which it underscores its
willingness to investigate the allegations.

We reaffirm our commitment to the international
agreements that criminalize trafficking in persons.
We are eager to continue to cooperate with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and look forward
to the return to the Maghreb of the subregional office
on drugs and crime so that it can resume its activities
in Tripoli.

Human-trafficking network have benefited from
communications technologies and have become
transnational. That is one reason why we hosted
a border security conference in Tripoli in 2013 in
which neighbouring countries took part, along with
representatives from countries of the Sahel, the
European Union, the United Nations and others. The
conference reached important conclusions that, if
implemented, would help to reduce organized crime,
illegal migration, trafficking in drugs and persons, and
other crimes. We stand ready to hold consultations in
order to reactivate those conclusions.

Libya is a transit country for large and constant
flows of illegal migrants. We have been experiencing
great difficulties that have affected our own citizens.
It is therefore unfair to single out Libya for blame for
the consequences of such migration, which we all agree
exceed the capacities of any one State. We support the
view that a practical way to deal with this issue is by
addressing the real reasons that drive people to leave
their homes, with a view to developing long-term,
lasting solutions. We believe that devising plans to
prevent migrants from entering countries of destination
and to force them to return to our country are simply a
way to Shirk responsibility and represent an additional
burden for Libya, which has repeatedly expressed
its need for technical support in order to manage its
borders in a sound and sustainable manner. We affirm
our rejection of any attempts to settle migrants in
our country, because of the dangerous repercussions
they could have for the social and cultural fabric of
Libyan society.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community to join forces to help Libya address the
challenges posed by irregular migration by adopting
an effective approach to migration and its root causes,
rather than by exploiting unsubstantiated media reports
for the purposes of defamation, which will not help us
to achieve the progress we desire in reducing the risks
and consequences of that type of migration.

