Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): The Security Council is
deliberating on the situation in the Middle East at a
particularly important and sensitive time in the peace
process. Fully conscious of the sensitivity of the issue
before us today, my delegation none the less remains
convinced that this formal meeting of the Security
Council, by reflecting the objective views and
considerations of all sides in the Middle East, will help
provide the necessary impetus and momentum to the
Middle East peace process. We share the View that the
peace process is the only realistic path towards long-term
security and cooperation in the Middle East, and therefore
deserves the continuing support of the international
community.

During the past few years, we have witnessed
historic progress in efforts to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, starting with the

 

Madrid initiative. During the forty-eighth session of the
General Assembly, my delegation welcomed the historic
signing in Washington of the Declaration of Principles on
Interim Self-Government Arrangements between the
Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO), confident that the agreement would
pave the way for more substantive transformations in the
Middle East.

Since then, events have tended generally to confirm
our optimism that, at long last, the region is on the
threshold of peace and stability. Consequently, within the
framework of the peace process, Israel and the PLO signed
the Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area in
Cairo on 4 May 1994, and an Agreement on early
empowerment on 29 August, both of which have enabled
the establishment of the Palestinian Authority, which is a
crucially important first step in the fulfilment of the historic
aspirations of the Palestinian people for self-determination
and nationhood.

Furthermore, on 26 October 1994, another historic
peace treaty between Israel and Jordan was signed which,
aside from opening a new phase in bilateral relations
between the two countries, also enhanced the possibilities
for progress in the Israeli-Lebanese and Israeli-Syrian tracks
of the peace process.

Regretfully, however, the progress towards peace in
the Middle East has not been entirely hitch-free. Indeed, the
extremists who perpetrated the dreadful and totally
unacceptable bombing incidents at Hebron, Afula, Tel Aviv,
Buenos Aires, London and, very recently, in Gaza, attest to
how far the tiny minority opposed to peace will go in the
bid to reverse the gains of the overwhelming majority
committed to the peace process in the Middle East. Nigeria
commends the vision, courage and determination of the
leaderships of Israel and the PLO, and of the other States
in the region, that have maintained their commitment to
peace regardless of the tragedies that threaten to derail the
peace process.

The Declaration of Principles signed in Washington,
on 13 September 1993 and the Gaza-Jericho Agreement -
which enjoy the full support of the international
community - set out a clear timetable for the negotiations
towards the permanent status of Palestine. They also
indicate the particular rules and modes of behaviour which
should guide all parties in the course of the transition. It is
in this connection that my delegation views with concern
the continued building of new settlements in the occupied
West Bank in recent months. We believe that such activities

 

not only undermine the spirit of the peace process, but
could lead to the entrenchment of extremist views within
radical sections of Middle East society. It is vital, at this
delicate stage of the peace process, that nothing be done
to undermine the climate of confidence that is badly
needed in order to build and sustain peace in the Middle
East. In this connection, both parties should utilize fully
the bilateral framework in order to resolve these new and
potentially dangerous problems.

Thus far, Israelis and Palestinians have overcome
formidable obstacles in their collective search for peace.
The other parties in the region have also shown courage
and a willingness to work towards peace in the region. In
spite of the fact that some of the most divisive and potent
difficulties involved in the peace process have yet to be
addressed, we hope that the overriding goal of peace will
ultimately transcend the destructive course of warfare and
regional instability. In this connection, the international
community, in particular the United Nations - which has
always played a critical role - will continue to be relied
upon greatly to assist the parties in moving the peace
process forward. The challenges may be great and the
stakes high, but so too are the rewards of peace and the
attendant social and economic development that should
follow for the people of the region - all of them.

