Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first to congratulate you and your delegation,
Mr. President, for the initiative to hold this debate. I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence here and also the representatives of the
various regional and subregional organizations that are
with us here today.

Allow me also to reiterate what has been the
unwavering position of my country, namely, that in this
kind of debate, it is preferable and useful to hear the
opinion of those people, countries and, in this case,
regions that are affected by the debate, so that we, the
members of the Security Council, can benefit from and
enrich our presentations with their viewpoints.

Achieving peace is a complicated topic that
involves many factors. One of these factors is giving
form and content to the architecture of collective
security, as set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter, and
thereby to strengthen the regional and subregional
synergies that the Charter offers. In this context, allow
me to stress the initiative undertaken by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) to hold its fifth special
meeting in Nairobi last month, with the participation of
a broad range of international, regional and subregional
organizations. The joint statement endorsed at that
meeting established a practical results-based
framework which allows us to promote cooperation
between the United Nations and this body.

Regional organizations are a natural mechanism
for promoting, with local leadership, the aspirations of
the international community. They are the ones that
possess the most complete and direct knowledge of the
roots of conflict in their geographic area. In this
respect, we recognize the work of the Organization of
the American States (OAS). The good offices of the
OAS in peacekeeping in the region as well as its
initiatives to alleviate social problems are a
demonstration, I believe, of a dynamic expertise. In the
case of Haiti, OAS participation as a regional
counterpart has very much helped the United Nations
in its work on the ground.

Day by day, the Security Council adapts a
broader vision of its responsibilities with regard to the
risks to peace and security. However, it still does not
give the regional organizations sufficient logistical and
financial support to enable them to be an effective first
line of defence in conflict. The garnering of funds and
the logistical planning for the joint mission with the
United Nations is a very difficult task, and to
demonstrate this point, we have the well-known
example of the deployment of the hybrid force in
Darfur. On the other hand, when the will is weak and
the priorities of the international community are
divided, coordination and funding are the first
casualties. This is an unfortunate situation. We see this
happening today in Somalia.

It is clear that we cannot overcome these
problems unless we have formal mechanisms for
financing coordinated actions and unless we have
ongoing arrangements that can be adapted among
secretariats to coordinate logistics and training. This
point was mentioned by the representative of the
Russian Federation. Two years after the Secretary-
General's recommendations at the World Summit, our
relations with regional organizations continue to be
organized on an improvised basis where we deal with
issues on a case-by-case basis, handling the challenges
as they present themselves, without creating the formal
structures that would help to strengthen action.

When inaction is not an option, we cannot simply
improvise and assign responsibilities to an organization
or ask it to bear costs. For this reason, it is important
that the presidential statement we adopt stresses the
importance of determining and developing modalities
which will favour the contribution of regional and
subregional organizations to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

