Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea):
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Spain on its successful presidency of the
Security Council this month. We also welcome Spain's
initiative to convene today's open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. We also thank the
President of the General Assembly, the Vice-President
of the Economic and Social Council and the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission for their briefings this
morning.

We recognize that, in addition to the Security
Council's relationship with non-members ofthe Council,
its interaction with those bodies represents an important
dynamic that can improve the overall performance of
the United Nations. Against that backdrop, the Republic
of Korea would like to make several comments on the
working methods of the Security Council.

First, improving the working methods of the
Security Council is indeed an important issue for the
United Nations membership as a whole. During our
term as a member of the Council, the Republic of
Korea made the utmost effort to promote transparency
in the Council's work and to improve its interaction
with the wider United Nations membership. Outside
the Council, we continue our involvement on issues
pertaining to the maintenance of international peace
and security - through various formats made available
by the Council, such as Arria Formula meetings,
informal interactive dialogues and open briefings by
various Special Representatives and Special Advisers.
We therefore urge Council members to continue to
make such occasions available as much as possible.

Secondly, the Security Council's cooperation
and interaction with other bodies of the United
Nations is also very much desired. This morning's
briefers - representing the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission - all expressed their desire to interact
more closely with the Security Council. Coincidently,
the Republic of Korea currently belongs to all three
bodies and will make its best efforts to transform such an
aspiration into substantive and practical improvements,
starting with the ongoing intergovernmental process of
reviewing the peacebuilding architecture. As President
ofthe Economic and Social Council and as a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Republic of Korea
attaches great importance to how peacekeeping could
dovetail with peacebuilding, while taking into account
the visionary global 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), in
particular Goal 16, on peace, justice and institutions.
In that regard, we look forward to working with the
members of the Security Council in the months and
years to come.

My delegation is also strongly committed to
implementing the recommendations of the report
(8/2015/682) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations. In particular, the call for Security
Council's early engagement in conflict situations
and more in-depth dialogue with the Secretariat and
troop contributors should be given due attention.
On its part, in Seoul this Thursday and then early
next year, the Republic of Korea will host a series of
international conferences on ways to implement the
recommendations.

Finally, on the issue of the selection of the next
Secretary-General, my delegation welcomes General
Assembly resolution 69/321, on the revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly, adopted
11 September. The Republic of Korea is of the view that
the selection process of the Secretary-General should
be more participatory and transparent, as reflected in
paragraphs 29 and 30 of that resolution. Overall, we
believe that an important topic for discussion among
the general membership has begun. We hope it will lead
to a convergence of views that will improve the way
that the Organization selects its most prominent officer.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea has long
supported the idea that the working methods of the
Security Council must be improved with a view to
enhancing the Council's transparency, accountability,
legitimacy and efficiency. We view that as an important
matter within the broader context of Security Council
reform. The Republic of Korea appreciates all the
efforts made thus far by various delegations. We stand
ready to work with others to formulate a solution that
can garner the support and understanding of the broader
membership.

