Mr. Srivali (Thailand): Thailand would like to
thank Japan for organizing this timely debate on post-
conflict peacebuilding and for its excellent and
comprehensive concept paper (S/2010/167). Thailand
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Bangladesh on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

We wish to emphasize three aspects of
peacebuilding that we believe are crucial to its success.
The first is the need to foster national ownership,
which many delegations have mentioned. National
ownership must be accompanied by the strengthening
of national capacity. Indispensable to that idea is the
notion of nation-building - a process whereby all
stakeholders and their interests are integrated into a set
of shared goals, norms and values. In post-conflict
societies, that means that institutions of governance
and operational mechanisms will have to be developed
that not only conform to international standards, but
also reflect local needs and conditions.

Building a sense of national ownership therefore
goes beyond the simple transfer of administrative
power to local authorities. It also requires constant
recalibration and continuous dialogue between the
national Government and local constituents, including
civil society and minorities. It may also require
continued consultation and coordination with the
international community, at least in the initial stages.

The second is the participation of women and
youth. Since it is mostly men who are participants in
conflict, it is important to bring out the role of women
to help stabilize post-conflict environments. At the
same time, the element of unemployed and
undereducated youth is a potential risk factor that must
be addressed in order to prevent a society from
relapsing into conflict. The economic empowerment of
women and youth could help dampen the potential root
causes of conflict and encourage greater ownership in
the peacebuilding process. Programmes in such areas
as general education, literacy and vocational training
should therefore be given high priority in order to
ensure the sustainability of peace.

The third point that my delegation wishes to
emphasize is that the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and sustainable development should be
seamless. It can be difficult to pinpoint exactly where
peacekeeping ends and peacebuilding begins. There
will inevitably be a period of overlap where
coordination among all parties involved is essential to
ensure the coherence of the process. We therefore
encourage close cooperation and consultation between
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and other United
Nations bodies, especially the Economic and Social
Council, as well as other United Nations agencies such
as the United Nations Development Programme and
UNICEF. The PBC should also draw upon experiences
and best practices in the United Nations system to
enhance peacebuilding activities. In addition, close
cooperation with international financial institutions and
private foundations can help to address financing gaps
and urgent needs, improve financing efficiency, avoid
the duplication of work and ensure coherence in
peacebuilding.

Peacebuilding is an enormously complex and
multifaceted task. As a member of the PBC
Organizational Committee, Thailand is committed to
continuing to work closely with our partners to further
improve and strengthen the Commission. We hope that
the 2010 PBC review will result in a more efficient,
flexible and adaptive approach to peacebuilding
challenges in post-conflict situations around the world.

