Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence
of the Secretary-General at our meeting.

There is a saying that every road leads to Rome. We
hope that in the near future we will all meet in Rome
and, together with Ambassador Merimee, enjoy the
hospitality of the Italian Government and the Italian
people.

There have recently been encouraging developments
in the situation in Liberia, as evidenced by the signing by
the conflicting parties of an Agreement on a
comprehensive cease-fire and the establishment of the
Council of State, in Abuja on 19 August. The signing of
the Abuja Agreement represents an important step
forward by the parties in the peace process, and the
Chinese delegation warmly welcomes this event.

We are pleased to note that the Transitional
Government established thereafter has won the support of
the leaders of all parties and that of the general public.
The parties to the conflict have ordered their respective
forces to lay down their arms, the disengagement of these
forces has started, and the cease-fire appears to be
holding.

 

The various parties have been fighting and talking for
as long as five years since the outbreak of the civil war in
Liberia in 1989. Fighting has wrecked Liberia's economy,
killed hundreds of thousands of people and made hundreds
of thousands of others refugees. Therefore, bringing an
early end to the civil war so as to restore stability and
tranquillity in the country is in keeping with the general
trend and reflects the will of the people.

We are of the View that the peace process in Liberia
has proved that only when the parties concerned
demonstrate good will for a political settlement and
readiness to truly give up war and persist in peaceful
negotiations can there be a momentum of peace to
transform hostility into friendship. In conflicts in certain
regions, particularly those between various parties within a
country, peace cannot be brought about by mandatory
means or be imposed from outside.

We are also of the view that the active participation of
the international community, particularly regional
organizations, in the mediation and peace-keeping activities
has also facilitated the peace process in Liberia. We
especially appreciate the untiring efforts and important role
of Nigeria and Ghana in this regard.

In View of the positive changes in the present situation
in Liberia, the Secretary-General has recommended that the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) be extended to 31 January 1996. The Chinese
delegation wishes to associate itself with this
recommendation and will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.
The road to peace in Liberia will not be a smooth one,
since the outstanding issues are very complicated.
Therefore, in order to achieve national reconciliation all
parties in Liberia will still have to make arduous efforts.
We sincerely hope that the various parties will continue to
channel their renewed efforts towards the peace process so
that the reconstruction of the country can begin soon and
the people there can resume a normal life.

