The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council this year, I extend
to all members of the Security Council, the various
organs and staff of the United Nations and the
Secretariat in general my sincere wish that the new
year will be a fruitful one and one of greater peace and
development.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to our new members: Algeria, Benin, Brazil,
the Philippines and Romania. We are certain that they
will contribute positively to the work of the Council.
We are confident that the experience and wisdom of
their Permanent Representatives will help the Council
to discharge its enormous responsibilities.

I should like to take this opportunity to express
the Council's deep gratitude to the outgoing
members - Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and
the Syrian Arab Republic - for their important
contributions to the business of the Council.

Since we are speaking of the elected or non-
permanent members, I should like to mention, merely
as an anecdote, that on this date, 12 January, in 1946,
non-permanent members of the Council were elected
for the first time by the General Assembly. This is
therefore an especially propitious date for us to refer to
the non-permanent members of the Security Council,
which, together with the permanent members, are
upholding the principles of the Charter and the
objectives of peace and security.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
January, I should like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Stefan Tafrov, Permanent Representative of Bulgaria to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of December 2003. I
am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing gratitude to Ambassador Tafrov for the
great intelligence with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts


The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Indonesia, Ireland, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Switzerland and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jenie
(Indonesia), Mr. Ryan (Ireland), Mr. Haraguchi
(Japan), Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein), Mr. Helg
(Switzerland) and Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/1070, which contains the text of a
letter dated 1 December 2003 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
transmitting the second report of the Monitoring Group
pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003).

I shall now make a report in my capacity as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).

In my capacity as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban, I
will provide the Council with the second oral
assessment, pursuant to paragraph 14 of resolution
1455 (2003), of the implementation by Member States
of the Council's relevant measures - the arms
embargo, assets freeze and travel ban targeting
individuals and entities belonging to or associated with
Al Qaeda or the Taliban - that are included in the
consolidated list maintained by the Committee.
Given the scope of its content and as agreed by
the Council in its prior consultations, this assessment
will also serve as the fourth 90-day report on the work
of the Committee and the Monitoring Group, which is
also called for in resolution 1455 (2003).

Our main task was to conduct a substantive
review of Member States' implementation of the
sanctions measures imposed on Al Qaeda, the Taliban
and individuals and entities associated with them. It
has indeed been a busy year. The Committee met 34
times informally and four times formally. Our activities
were diverse. New names were added to the
Committee's consolidated list. The analysis of States'
reports continues, despite the disappointing response
rate, including through the Committee's more targeted
approach to key themes. Finally, our ability to assess
implementation on the ground has been enhanced by
the work of the Monitoring Group and through my and
Committee members' travel to selected States.

As envisioned in the resolution, today's
assessment is based, at least to some extent, on the
reports submitted by Member States pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 1455 (2003). The Committee
appreciates the fact that many States have submitted
their reports and is particularly pleased that some have
provided comprehensive reports in accordance with the
reporting guidelines. However, the fact that only 93
such reports have been submitted to the Committee to
date presents a severe limitation. I will return in a
moment to that issue, but I would first point out that
these reports are one of many important facets of
international cooperation in the fight against Al Qaeda
and the Taliban, just as they serve as only one of
several components used in assessing Member States'
implementation of the Council's measures.

The Monitoring Group monitored States'
implementation of the resolution through its visits to
selected countries and establishing contacts with
Government officials and others responsible for
sanctions implementation. The findings of the Group
are reflected in its reports, mainly in appendix VI of
S/2003/1070, issued last December.

In the view of the Committee, the reports were
intended to provide a channel of communication
between it and Member States. My visits to selected
countries also provided another important avenue for
dialogue that, in certain respects, has proven even more
effective, as it is based on personal interaction and
provides an opportunity for the States visited to ask
questions and to learn more about the Committee's
work, which in turn can be beneficial to the work of the
Committee.

In October and December 2003, I undertook two
separate visits to selected countries pursuant to
paragraph 11 of resolution 1455 (2003). During those
two missions, I visited 10 countries in the Arabian
Gulf, Europe, West Asia and South-East Asia.

At some destinations, I was accompanied by other
Committee members or members of the Monitoring
Group established pursuant to resolution 1363 (2001).
In planning my itineraries, we selected States that
represented different regions and political systems,
rather than based on any other criteria. The purpose of
these missions was to enhance Member States' full and
effective implementation of the measures put in place
by the Council.

I wanted to gain a firsthand understanding and to
learn more about how the sanctions are being
implemented on the ground, so as to better perform my
functions as Chairman. Reaching one of these goals
entailed establishing a dialogue with States and thus
acquainting myself with the positive results as well as
the concerns encountered in implementing the
measures.

I consider that both missions were largely
successful in accomplishing these goals. In each
country I visited, I had extremely fruitful meetings,
along with the team that accompanied me, with
officials who were aware of the importance of, and
were actively engaged in, addressing the threats posed
by Al Qaeda and the Taliban. While I feel that my
visits helped the authorities concerned to better
understand the Committee's work and objectives
through my reports, the Committee also learned
something in each country we visited about how the
States concerned are taking steps to implement the
measures and otherwise address the threats of
terrorism.

As one of my goals was to return from my travels
with ideas for improving the existing measures, I am
pleased that the Committee finds the recommendations
contained in my reports useful for assisting the Council
in this regard.

Since I have already had the opportunity, on 24
October and 12 November, to fully brief Council
members on the visits I undertook in October, I will
only touch upon some of our findings during the
second mission, as they relate directly to today's
assessment and to the current and future work of the
Committee.
Among the many topics I discussed in Europe,
the most prominent are the following: the definition
and freezing of non-financial and other economic
resources pursuant to the resolution; the challenges
posed in implementing the travel ban; and concerns
regarding the Committee's consolidated list, human
rights and due process. In some cases, the States I
visited had serious reservations regarding such topics
and our visit permitted us to have detailed discussions,
which were subsequently reported to the Committee so
that the Security Council experts might take these
concerns into account in preparing future resolutions.

The difficulties entailed in maintaining and
administering non-financial assets such as motor
vehicles or real estate were also discussed in detail, and
some of the States and institutions I visited are
continuing to work hard to find ways to define such
assets and to freeze them while at the same time
permitting their continued operation under a
provisional caretaker system.

The successes that States have achieved in
implementing the measures including newly adopted
administrative or legislative enactments were also
discussed in all the countries I visited. For example,
concerns that had been highlighted by the Committee
and its Monitoring Group had led some countries we
visited to strengthen their financial intelligence units,
with one country instituting the use of forms verifying
the identity of beneficial owners and the nature of the
assets. One State visited informed us that property had
been frozen pursuant to the Council's relevant
measures, and I encouraged the authorities of that State
to submit an addendum to its implementation report on
this matter, so that other States could see an example of
how to proceed in similar cases.

In at least one of the States visited, I was
informed that several banned entities had resurfaced
with new names that had been detected by the
authorities. Also, one frontline State in the fight against
terrorism provided us with detailed information on
actions taken and resources committed to secure its
borders to prevent infiltration by listed individuals or
their associates. In this connection, I was told that any
implementation failure was one of technical capacity
and not of political will.

While several authorities mentioned the
difficulties encountered because of insufficient
information provided for some individuals on the list,
we were nevertheless assured that the list was
promulgated, and in one country visited we were given
a copy of the legal instrument by which this was done.

Several countries visited described how their
domestic legal frameworks had been improved,
including through the preparation or enactment of new
legislation to fight money laundering. Valuable
information on how some States are handling the
question of charities was also gained and shared with
the Committee members. We were cautioned against
assuming that all charities were involved in terrorist
financing and informed of legitimate charities that had
been hurt by restrictions. We were also told that many
donors appreciated knowing that steps had been taken
to ensure that their donations would go only to
legitimate causes.

We also engaged in interesting discussions
regarding alternate remittance systems, which touched
upon the necessity of providing legitimate and efficient
alternatives for the traditional users of those systems.
Some countries are beginning to find adequate answers
in this regard.

An overarching theme that kept recurring in
different States was the vital necessity of improving
international cooperation in various areas. States
conducting investigations need to be able to make
contact with States that might have evidence that
would further the investigation. States that control
hawaladars within their territory need to cooperate
with the States where such transfers are destined.
States that offer offshore financial services need to
cooperate with countries where the beneficial owner or
entity resides, to ensure that no financial resources can
be used to support terrorist activities.

The list goes on and on, and I think that these
visits help to bring such needs to the attention of the
Security Council. I also hope that such visits serve as
an indication to all Members that the Committee
recognizes the need for cooperation and at the same
time seeks reports from States to further its work.

I would also say that a proof of the cooperation
that my visits helped to foster is the clear commitments
that were made by the authorities in several States to
provide additional information, including updated
country reports and names of individuals and entities
belonging to or associated with Al Qaeda or the
Taliban, for inclusion in the consolidated list. At least
one report promised to the Committee during my
travels was in fact delivered before the end of last year.

I also feel that the visits served as a catalyst to
bring ministries and other agencies into action. By
virtue of holding substantive meetings with authorities
with diverse portfolios on consecutive days, I could see
that dialogue and coordination between those groups
had often begun even before my departure.

Regarding the implementation reports submitted
by Member States, the majority of these followed the
guidelines of the Committee in formatting their
responses. It was evident from the analysis of the
reports that not all questions were relevant for all
States. It would be more advantageous to adopt a more
precise approach towards submitting reports, and that
may be reflected in the future work of the Committee.

With respect to the lack of information on names
of persons and entities included on the consolidated
list, Member States must also play an important role in
that regard. I used my visits to urge States to submit
additional names and identifying data so as to enhance
implementation.

A review of the reports received to date indicates
that many States have taken positive steps - including
the adoption of special legislation - to curb the
financing of Al Qaeda's activities. Various countries
are in the process of improving their legislative
capacity to ensure compliance with the law. However,
there are still some States that fail to show the same
preparedness.

As verified on my recent travels, the reports
submitted indicate that one of the areas needing
improvement is the freezing of assets other than bank
accounts. That might be addressed by requesting States
to take a more proactive approach in locating and
freezing such assets. Where that is not possible because
of lack of an adequate legal framework, we should
encourage and assist States in establishing the needed
legal provisions, providing assistance as necessary. In
that regard, it would be useful to promote greater
cooperation in the area of international financial
regulatory institutions, as well as cooperation aimed at
universal ratification of the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.

Cash flows to finance terrorist activities remain a
problem. However, during my visits, we received
interesting proposals to deal with this aspect of terrorist
financing. In addition, we must undertake new efforts
to cut the growing links between drug trafficking and
terrorist financing.

Full implementation of the travel ban depends
fundamentally on the quality and credibility of the list.
In general, State reports highlighted the list's
shortcomings and the difficulties encountered by those
States in implementing the travel ban. Approximately
one third of the States that have submitted reports have
still not incorporated the list, or any parts of it, into
their national watch lists. The main reason put forward
is a lack of data to identify individuals. Only half of the
States reported that they were regularly transmitting
the updated list to their border control authorities and
that they also had the capacity to carry out electronic
searches. Here, one should indicate that several States
have requested financial and technical assistance to
upgrade their border control facilities.

In order to more effectively implement the travel
ban, we could undertake two measures: improving the
list and increasing the technical capacity of States. The
first would resolve a problem cited by many States -
not listing individuals at their border entry and exit
points because of insufficient identifying data; the
second would address some States' lack of capacity to
monitor their borders.

The reports received indicate that, of all the
measures in the sanctions regime, the arms embargo is
the most difficult to implement. Generally, the
possession, manufacturing and sale of arms are seen as
matters of national security, making it difficult to
assess the effectiveness of this crucial measure.

Analysis of the reports revealed differing
interpretations of the scope of the arms embargo. The
information provided on the arms embargo referred
mainly to conventional arms, indicating that the
measures in place may not be sufficient to monitor
dual-use technologies and other sensitive material that
may be used to develop weapons of mass destruction.
That was observed primarily in reports from States that
are not parties to the multilateral export control
regimes. In contrast, approximately one third of the
States submitting reports provided data on export
control measures related to sensitive technologies and
dual-use goods, reflecting the awareness-raising and
regulating effects of multilateral cooperation.

In order to addressing those shortcomings, we
need to define the arms embargo in a more specific and
targeted way including the specific mention of goods
and materials related to weapons of mass destruction to
deal effectively with the new reality represented by the
methods of terrorist warfare carried out by Al Qaeda
and the Taliban. In addition, the best way to avoid the
diversion of weapons and dangerous material to A1
Qaeda is to strengthen cooperation at the regional and
international levels. It is also essential that all States
ratify and comply fully with arms-related international
conventions.
To date, a total of 93 reports have been submitted
under resolution 1455 (2003). It must be emphasized
that 98 States - 51 per cent - have not submitted a
report. Of that number, 17 States had previously
submitted a report under resolution 1390 (2002). The
fact that reports have been submitted by less than half
of Member States has seriously hampered the
Committee in accomplishing its task of carrying out the
requested assessments. The Committee remains
determined to complete the written assessment called
for by the resolution, and we intend to analyse and
address the reasons why some States have not
submitted reports. I also feel that we should identify
such States as having failed to comply with Security
Council resolutions.

Moreover, the Committee analysed possible
reasons why there are States that have not submitted
reports. In addition to a possible lack of political will,
other possible factors have been identified, such as
reporting fatigue, a lack of resources and technical
capacity, and coordination difficulties at the national
level. It is also possible that some States have
considered the submission guidelines to be too detailed
and, in some cases, inapplicable to their situation. In
that respect, however, I wish to stress that twice, in
July and November 2003, the Committee requested
such States to provide it with explanations to identify
possible problems and difficulties that they were facing
in order to assist them or to improve the current
sanctions regime.

Both the Committee and I sought to be receptive
and proactive in carrying out our task in 2003. The
number of meetings held and the variety of issues
considered reveal the importance we attach to our work
and reflect the complex and delicate nature of the
issues that we are charged with addressing, analysing
and assessing on behalf of the Security Council. We
have also tried to be frank, direct and objective within
the Committee and with Member States.

After all, the threat represented by Al Qaeda and
the Taliban - especially the threat of Al Qaeda, whose
gravity is all too evident, as shown by the tragic
terrorist attacks, which unfortunately continue - must
remain a top international concern, for obvious
reasons. In that connection, the Committee's work in
2004 will continue to have as its principal objective
ensuring that all States remain focused on the problem
of terrorism and that national counter-terrorist
measures include appropriate policies and actions.

We hope that this year will also be one of great
activity based on direct dialogue with Member States
to improve our common activities. The Committee will
continue to take a proactive approach to its work -
one that is marked by transparency and responsiveness.
In that connection, we will continue to enhance our
guidelines and working procedures, and would
welcome any useful ideas that Member States may
wish to contribute in this respect.

The Committee is also committed to keeping
open the channels of communications with all Member
States, as well as with regional and technical
organizations. We plan to hold periodic open briefings
for all States on the Committee's work in order to
facilitate further dialogue. In addition, the Chairman,
the members of the Committee and the Secretariat will
be always ready to clarify questions and provide
assistance, as far as we are able.

The authorities of several States that I visited
suggested that it would be useful to obtain the names
and contact information of those in capitals or other
locations who are responsible for implementing
sanctions measures, in order to expedite and focus the
exchange of information.

With regard to cooperation, we have been
discussing the possibility of inviting, when we consider
it appropriate, experts from States and regional
organizations, including private and academic
organizations, to brief the Committee in areas related
to our work. We have also been considering the
possibility of enhancing cooperation with the
International Criminal Police Organization, which will
be very useful for our work on the consolidated list.

We remain convinced of the necessity of
continuing to enhance our cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and we have many
ideas that we will be discussing with our colleagues
there with a view to achieving concrete results during
the course of this year.

We will continue to make visits to various States,
and we also plan to visit a number of different
geographical areas. The new draft resolution should
reflect many of these objectives, as well as, we believe,
the close dialogue we enjoyed with Member States in
2003. As our work becomes more focused, we believe
that a similarly frank exchange in New York and in
capitals will help to move the international
community's counter-terrorism efforts forward.

International terrorism sponsored by Al Qaeda
and those associated with it continues to pose one of
the greatest threats to international peace and security.
Every means should be used to combat that threat, at
both national and international levels. The United
Nations and its relevant bodies can coordinate their
efforts to play a crucial role in this endeavour. The
success of their work will depend on the tangible
contribution of each and every Member State. I would
like to take this opportunity, as Chairman of the Al
Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee, to appeal to
States to continue to provide full support to the
Committee, which is resolutely determined to achieve
further progress towards our common goal to make the
world free from any threat or act of terrorism.

In conclusion, I would like to thank every
member of the Committee and those who accompanied
me in my various travels to the countries of Member
States. Committee members actively participated with
me and my team in a spirit of trust and cooperation as
we carried out our many tasks. We would also like to
thank the Monitoring Group for its valuable
cooperation. In particular, I would like to express my
gratitude for the hard work, professionalism and
dedication of the Secretariat, especially the sanctions
section of the Security Council, without whose
valuable and unconditional support we would not come
as far as we have in achieving our objectives.

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

I shall call first on those Council members who
have asked to speak. The first speaker will be
Ambassador Holliday of the United States, whom I
welcome to his first meeting of the Security Council.


