Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for the Implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
thank him for the fiftieth report (S/2016/911, annex) of
the High Representative to the Security Council. We
commend his work in support of the implementation
of the General Framework Agreement and for the
consolidation of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2315
(2016), which extends the mandate of the multinational
stabilization force EUFOR ALTHEA for an additional
12-month period, focused on capacity-building and
training and to contribute to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
authorities' deterrence capacity.

Angola is fully committed to respecting and
supporting the unity, independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
the General Framework Agreement for Peace. In our
statement, we will basically focus on three issues: the
general political environment, challenges to the General
Framework Agreement and the lack of cooperation with
the High Representative.

We are concerned about the political environment
prevailing in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The holding of
a referendum in September by the Republika Srpska
authorities is in violation of ruling of the Constitutional
Court that stipulates that any referendum must be
consistent with the country's Constitution and the
General Framework Agreement. The Republika Srpska
authorities must abide by the Constitutional Court's
decisions and avoid, by all means, unilateral elections
that might undermine peace and stability in the country.

We welcome the holding ofpeaceful local elections
in October as an important step for the consolidation
of peace and democratic institutions in the country.
Although they were peaceful in general, the elections
were marked by inter-ethnic incidents, irregularities
and unrest in some polling stations. The electoral
process should be completed and voting held where it
has not taken place. We urge the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to create political and socioeconomic
conditions conducive to the voluntary repatriation
and reintegration of refugees and displaced persons
in their territories and communities of origin, while
strengthening reconciliation and social cohesion so as
to consolidate peace, healing and forgiveness.

Regarding the challenges to the implementation of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we are very worried by the statements
made by high officials that challenge the country's
territorial integrity. The provocations by the Republika
Srpska authorities, such as offering congratulations to
war criminals, should be universally condemned. Such
statements and actions threaten the General Framework
Agreement and Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence. They
help to undermine a multi-ethnic society's cohesion
and the country's unity and national reconciliation.
In line with resolution 2315 (2016), we reaffirm that
Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of two entities by

virtue of its Constitution, and that any change to the
Constitution must be made in accordance with the
procedure it prescribes.

Regarding the lack of cooperation with the High
Representative, we reject the decision of the Republika
Srpska authorities to deny him access to information and
documents, as required under annex 10 of the General
Framework Agreement, and we call on them to allow
him access, as requested by his Office, that will enable
him to carry out his mandated duties accordingly.

In conclusion, we commend the European Union for
its support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in the security
and defence sectors and in the implementation of
socioeconomic, rule-of-law and public administration
reforms. We call on the European Union to continue
helping the country to overcome its remaining
challenges and to implement the reforms. Today's
adoption of resolution 2315 (2016) gives expression to
that commitment. Lastly, we call on the international
community, and the United Nations in particular, to
continue supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in fully
implementing the Peace Agreement, which is key to
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina's attainment of
stability, peace and security and well-being, as well as
in the Balkans as a whole.

