Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would also like to welcome the participation
in today's meeting of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Vice-President of the United
States. We thank the speakers for their thoughtful
briefings on the humanitarian situation in Venezuela.

cote d'Ivoire, which is following developments
in Venezuela with particular attention, notes with
regret the political and institutional impasse in the
country. This political tension is seriously affecting an
already difficult economic situation and exacerbating a
humanitarian crisis marked by the deterioration of the
health and food situation and whose repercussions at
the subregional level are palpable. In total, according to
humanitarian agencies, 7 million Venezuelans, nearly
a quarter of the population, need food and medical
care. Some 3.4 million of them have found refuge in
neighbouring countries.

The humanitarian emergency in Venezuela
requires greater involvement of our Council in order
to provide an appropriate response to the current needs
of millions of suffering people, while respecting the
principles of international humanitarian law. In this
regard, my delegation believes that, with its leadership
and great expertise in humanitarian matters, the United
Nations should play a leading role in mobilizing its
specialized agencies and coordinating the assistance
of the international community. In this perspective,
it is necessary to establish close collaboration and a
synergy of actions among the Venezuelan authorities,
the specialized agencies of the United Nations and
all international partners, in order to mobilize the
necessary resources to meet the needs and ensure safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to populations
in distress.

My country would like to remind all parties of their
obligation to respect human rights and international
humanitarian law. It also welcomes the authorization
granted to the Red Cross to distribute emergency aid
and thanks neighbouring countries for their solidarity
with the Venezuelan people.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its consistent
position in favour of a peaceful solution to the crisis. It
therefore once again urges all parties to engage in frank
negotiations to resolve the crisis.

