Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Honore Braithwaite for her briefing
today. I would like to pay tribute to her and to the
important work she has done during her time in Haiti.
It is particularly encouraging to hear that the transition
from the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) to the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is on track.

It is important that that continue. A smooth and
seamless transition will send a clear signal to the
people and Government of Haiti that the United Nations
relationship with Haiti has changed but our commitment
has not. MINUJUSTH marks a new era in the United
Nations support for Haiti. Its three-pronged focus
on police, the rule of law and human rights will help
Haiti to address its future opportunities and challenges
independently for the first time in many decades.
The successful delivery of MINUJUSTH's mission
will allow it to eventually leave Haiti, having laid the
framework for security and stability that Haitians can
continue to build on themselves.

I know that there is a lot of work ahead, both for
Haiti and the United Nations. I suspect that few of
us who recently visited Haiti believe that success is
guaranteed. In the weeks following the visit, I have
come to believe that three fundamental conditions are
required to make MINUJUSTH a success.

The first condition for success requires the new
Mission to be equipped with the tools that are fit for
purpose and matched to Haiti's needs. For example,
to further develop the capacity of Haiti's police, the
United Nations Police Commander will need officers
with the right technical and language skills to engage
meaningfully with their local counterparts. Another
example is the United Nations country team. Joint
analysis and programming with MINUJUSTH will
help ensure that it is better placed to support long-term
justice reform in Haiti. As the Secretary-General's most
recent report (S/2017/604) rightly points out, all of the
United Nations tools will need to be more politically
acute if they are to catalyse change. Indeed, United
Nations tools only go so far.
The second condition for success is a Government
that embraces Haiti's challenges as its own and
proactively takes on new responsibilities. The gap left by
MINUSTAH is not primarily for its successor Mission
to plug, but for Haiti's Government and institutions to
fill. That means providing Haiti's police with proper
equipment and salaries and not squandering those scarce
resources elsewhere. As the Special Representative has
outlined, it means investment in a justice system that
protects all Haitians with the rule of law, leaving no
space for corruption to flourish and impunity to fester.
It means making critical appointments to the Supreme
Court and taking urgently needed reforms through
Parliament. And finally, it means doing much more
to tackle the scourge of gender-based violence. All of
this requires that the priorities of Haiti's politicians are
aligned with those of Haiti's people.

The third condition for success is also about taking
responsibility. MINUJUSTH and the whole of the
United Nations must continue to win back the trust of
Haiti's people. On our trip to Haiti, we heard about two
issues that have damaged the United Nations legacy.
One relates to cholera - a tragedy for the Haitian
people and an obstacle to the United Nations turning its
own page in Haiti. I am pleased to hear that infection
rates are down. Eradication is within grasp, and like the
Ambassador of Kazakhstan, I call on donors to do what
they can to make that a reality.

The other tragic issue that has damaged the
reputation of United Nations peacekeeping is the
shockingly widespread sexual exploitation and abuse
carried out by peacekeepers sent by the Council in the
past to Haiti. Such crimes have left deep scars across the
country. If we are to ask people to trust in peacekeepers
and their mission, we cannot allow that to happen
again - not in Haiti, not anywhere. We have agreed
to a clear framework of action through resolution 2272
(2016). There can be no space for backsliding on those
commitments.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom looks forward
to a smooth and seamless transition over the next few
months. We also hope that those three conditions: a
mission equipped with the right tools, a Government
ready to lead on Haiti's challenges and a people ready
to trust in the United Nations again can accompany
the next phase of the United Nations relationship with
Haiti.

