Mr. De Mistura: Let me first clarify one point.
When I had the very intense and long meeting with
Minister Al-Moualem, he did not raise the issue of
terrorism. That is why I did not specifically refer to
that in today's meeting about my visit to Damascus.
The only issue was the constitutional committee.

Let me remind the Council that November is a
very special month, not because of my departure,
but because there are a lot of opportunities for some
progress with regard to the constitutional committee.
First, the Istanbul summit is scheduled for tomorrow,
27 October. Secondly, there will certainly be a meeting
of the Astana group, and we are looking forward to
seeing whether the Astana group will be able to draft
some type of proposal that the United Nations can
hopefully approve and decide whether it is credible and
inclusive. Thirdly, there will probably be more than
one meeting of the small group, with one taking place
on Monday 29 October. We also heard of a possible
summit between President Putin and President Trump
in November, and we are scheduled to brief the Security
Council at least once more on 19 November.

So during this period, I have been asked to monitor
especially the Astana group, because they have a task
that was given to them for the month of November. I
will continue to ascertain the feasibility of the follow-
up to the Sochi declaration and that of the constitutional
committee in order to report accordingly to the Security
Council and to the Secretary-General.

I will leave no stone unturned until the last day of
my assignment in order to be able to take advantage
of any opportunity to issue invitations to a first
meeting of the constitutional committee and to assess
the outcome of all those discussions and meetings,
including by briefing the Secretary-General and the
Security Council about the clarity of the constitutional
committee and why things are moving or why they are
not moving. The Council deserves to have all of that in
November, and I have the duty to clarify that.

The meeting rose at10.45 a.m
