Ms. Willson (United States of America): We have
taken the floor to respond to some statements that we
have heard here this morning. Contrary to those
statements, the United States has taken a number of
actions with respect to Luis Posada Carriles. In taking
those steps, the United States has acted in accordance
with international law as well as with our domestic
legal framework that provides for due process and
various constitutional safeguards. As is the case in
democracies around the world that follow the rule of
law, those safeguards provide that an individual cannot
be brought to trial or extradited unless sufficient
evidence has been established that he committed the
offence with which he has been charged. In the United
States, that standard is described as "probable cause".

Permit me to give the Council a brief overview of
steps that the United States has taken with respect to
Posada within that legal framework. Posada entered the
United States illegally in early 2005. He was detained
by immigration authorities in the United States on
17 May 2005 and was, in accordance with United
States law, placed in removal proceedings. The
immigration judge who handled the removal
proceedings ordered that Posada be removed from the
United States on 27 September 2005. That order
remains in effect. The United States has been seeking
ways to implement it in accordance with the terms of
the order and United States regulations that implement
the obligations of the United States under the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

Specifically, at the time that the immigration
judge ordered Posada removed, the immigration judge
also determined that Posada could not be removed
either to Cuba or to Venezuela, as it was more likely
than not that he would be tortured if he were so
transferred. As a matter of United States immigration
law, the United States is not in a position to remove
Posada to either country.

Moreover, the United States sought and obtained
a criminal indictment charging Posada with violations
of our immigration laws. The Federal District Court, a
part of the independent judiciary of the United States,
handling that case, dismissed the indictment. The
United States filed a notice appealing the Court's
decision on 5 June 2007. Posada also remains under
investigation for past activities.

In the meantime, Posada is subject to the order of
removal issued by the immigration judge and is
without legal status in the United States. He is also
subject to an order of supervision from the Department
of Homeland Security, Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, which imposes certain restrictions on
him, including reporting and monitoring requirements.

In sum, the United States continues to be engaged
in an ongoing series of actions consistent with our
legal requirements and due process with respect to
Posada.

