Mr. Al-Shafi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your successful presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I thank you for convening this meeting on
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, in the form of an open debate,
which affords us the opportunity to participate. I would
also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing. Allow me to
associate my delegation with the statements made by
the representatives of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, of Syria on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, and of Oman
on behalf of the Group of Arab States.

We meet today a year after the Israeli military
assault on the Gaza Strip, the so-called Operation Cast
Lead, and the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009). The
fact that one year has passed since that criminal
operation does not mean that it has been forgotten. The
crimes that have been and continue to be committed in
Gaza and throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories are violations of international law. They are
subject to no statute of limitations and should not be
forgotten, even with the passage of time. How can such
violations be forgotten when they continue to be
committed in various forms, in particular the unjust
siege imposed on an entire people?

Israel's military forces have caused massive
destruction and damage to various infrastructures in the
Gaza Strip, whose population of over 1.5 million was
already suffering from shortages of food and health
supplies. The siege imposed on the Strip continues to
hinder the access of humanitarian supplies and basic
building materials to the Strip.

The State of Qatar was one of the first countries
to take the initiative to help our Palestinian brothers in
the Gaza Strip to overcome that humanitarian disaster.
However, financial support is useless unless it can
reach its beneficiaries.

Although the Human Rights Council has acted in
response to the events that occurred in the Gaza Strip
last year and is still considering the issue, it is more
incumbent on this Council to act, because the question
of Palestinian lies at the heart of its mandate and is one
of its main agenda items. The report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/HRC/12/48), mandated by the Human Rights
Council to investigate war events in Gaza, has clearly
shown the gravity of the violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed in Gaza. Our
humanitarian conscience requires us to ensure that the
perpetrators of such crimes do not go unpunished. For
its part, the Security Council has taken no concrete
action on the recommendations in the report of the
Board of Inquiry established to investigate the
targeting of United Nations premises and facilities
during that act of aggression (see S/2009/250).

It seems clear to all that the continued military
occupation is the root of the problem and that that
occupation will not provide security for Israel. It
causes the worst violations of human rights perpetrated
against an unarmed and oppressed people under the
pretext of combating violence and terrorism, when in
fact it is one of the root causes of terrorism. The claim
that excessive military force can serve to protect the
security of Israel is false, because the right to struggle
for liberation from foreign occupation is a legitimate
right that cannot be equated with military aggression
by occupation forces.

We stress our firm rejection of Israel's illegal
measures in occupied East Jerusalem and its attempts
to change the city's Arab identity, demographic
composition, legal status and religious character. We
stress that all such attempts remain null, void and
without any legal effect. The international community
must reject the attempts by the Israeli Government to
desecrate Islamic and Christian Holy Sites, demolish
houses in the city, expel its Arab residents and
confiscate their identity cards in order to Judaize the
city. Those attempts violate Israel's obligations, as the
occupying Power, under international law, are contrary
to relevant United Nations resolutions and undermine
the foundations of a peaceful solution to the question
of Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict. Furthermore,
such measures disrupt international efforts for an
alliance of civilizations.

Israeli authorities continue to commit numerous
human rights violations against Arab populations
within the so-called Green Line and to defy the
international consensus on the need to cease building
and expanding the illegal settlements in an effort to
annex more Palestinian land, de facto. Those actions
undermine international mediation efforts, in particular
those of the Quartet.

The State of Qatar believes that resolution of the
Palestinian issue can come only through the
establishment of two States living side by side in peace
and security. We believe that the Israeli Government's
attempts to expand settlements, particularly in and
around East Jerusalem, undermine efforts for a two-
State solution based on the 1967 borders because they
threaten the contiguity of the Palestinian territory,
which is an essential component of a viable Palestinian
State.

The Israeli Government seeks to justify the
expansion of settlements with what it calls natural
growth. However, let me emphasize Qatar's rejection
of such a concept altogether, because such settlement
activity is fundamentally illegal and that growth is not
natural, since Israeli public policy encourages the
colonization of the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly East Jerusalem, by offering Government
subsidies and incentives to encourage the transfer of its
civilian population to the Palestinian territory, in
contravention of international law.

We must also note the continued Israeli violations
of Lebanon's sovereignty, in contravention of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006), and the ongoing
Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory and the Syrian
Golan. We reiterate that the Israeli decision to annex
the Golan is null and void. The Golan must be returned
to Syria, just as the remaining occupied Lebanese
territories must be returned to Lebanon.

The establishment of a lasting, comprehensive
and just peace in the Middle East can be based only on
the principle of land for peace, the Madrid terms of
reference, relevant United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative. The Arab Peace Initiative was

reaffirmed at the Doha summit in March 2009, with a
reference indicating that the Arab side will continue to
bring it forward conditioned on its acceptance by the
Israeli side. Therefore, the new Israeli Government
must refrain from taking extreme positions. It must
take advantage of the goodwill on the Arab side in
order to end the crisis in the Middle East.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the need
to involve all of the Palestinian people in the peace
process to ensure its success. The Palestinians must
seriously pursue everything that will help to foster
national unity in their own interest and guarantee a
unified Palestinian territory, both geographically and
politically. We would be remiss not to salute and
express our pride in our brothers and sisters, the
Palestinians, who remain steadfast in the face of
occupation, injustice and oppression.

