Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by wishing you, Sir, and the other
representatives present good health, happiness and
peace throughout 2012. I also take this opportunity to
convey my delegation's warmest congratulations to
you on your accession to the presidency of the Council
this month.

My delegation thanks the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Albert
Koenders, for his excellent briefing on the situation in
cote d'Ivoire, which accurately portrayed the reality
on the ground. I also congratulate him on his
outstanding work and on the perfect understanding of
the situation he has demonstrated in his brief tenure.

It has been nine months since the post-electoral
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire came to en end. The toll in
human lives, estimated at approximately 3,000, would
have been higher without the decisive involvement of
the United Nations in protecting the civilian
population. Indeed, acting under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter and in keeping with the
mandate defined in resolution 1975 (2011), the United
Nations saved an untold number of lives. In hindsight,
we can better grasp the entire scope of the United
Nations intervention in Cote d'Ivoire and the full
meaning it gives to the concept of the responsibility to
protect. We must clearly state that we were on the
verge of genocide in Cote d'Ivoire during the
post-electoral crisis.

We are therefore in a good position to echo the
Secretary-General's statement to the conference on the
3
responsibility to protect convened on 18 January by the
Stanley Foundation in New York. The Secretary-
General said that the principle of the responsibility to
protect is a fundamental humanitarian principle that is
here to stay. My delegation commends the Secretary-
General's decision to instruct his Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect to consider ways to make
effective use of the provisions of Articles VI, VII and
VIII of the United Nations Charter with a View to
better operationalizing that principle. We look forward
eagerly to the results of his study.

My delegation notes the excellent report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) contained in document
S/2011/807*, and of course endorses the conclusions
contained therein. The report correctly notes the
significant progress that has been achieved in a number
of areas, including the peaceful legislative elections
held on 11 December 2011. The report also
underscores, however, some significant challenges
ahead. I should like to make a few brief remarks on
issues that my delegation deems to be critical.

I turn first to the stabilization of the security
situation, which is manageable in Abdijan but also
requires considerable resources. This is due to the high
number of light weapons in circulation and the
presence of numerous common criminals who escaped
detention during the crisis. The security situation in the
western part of the countries remains a source of
ongoing concern owing to the recurrent activities of
mercenaries and militias, especially on the border with
Liberia, which is densely forested and difficult to
control. My delegation believes that the optimization
of the military resources of UNOCI and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia in the context of inter-
mission cooperation has been a successful experiment
that should be pursued, as it provides a deterrent to
potential or real threats of stabilization.

The subregional aspect of the security situation in
the border zone actually extends to the entire Mano
River region and encompasses such cross-border
threats as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, drug
trafficking, money-laundering and the terrorist threats
posed by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Boko
Haram, as well as the influx of weapons from Libya.
The issue must therefore be addressed in the context of
a collective security system that includes C6te d'Ivoire,
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. Indeed, that was the
purpose behind the meeting of the Chiefs of Staff of
the four countries that was held from 22 to 25 January
in Freetown, Sierra Leone.

In this regard, my delegation commends South
Africa's initiative to convene on 12 January a high-
level debate of the Security Council (see S/PV.6702),
personally presided by President Zuma, on the critical
cooperation, under Chapter VIII of the Charter,
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States, in the prevention, management and resolution
of regional crises.

Secondly, with respect to security sector reform
(SSR), my delegation believes that it is a key element
of the entire post-crisis normalization process
inasmuch as it forges a direct, positive link to national
reconciliation that triggers a virtuous chain reaction in
other areas of the post-conflict architecture. However,
national ownership is essential to the SSR process, as
was recognized in the conclusions reached last year in
the Security Council debate (see S/PV.6630) held under
the Nigerian presidency, to which we pay tribute.

Cote d'Ivoire intends to secure national
ownership of SSR through the holding of public
hearings on security and defence, which will include
the convening of a national dialogue between the
people and the army. We seek an interactive exchange
in which the people's perspective enriches the reform
process. Our goal is for the people in all their aspects,
including soldiers and the army, to assume ownership
of the reform and ultimately for the army to be
reconciled with the population. Once national
consensus has been achieved, SSR must be geared to
creating a reunified, professional, disciplined
republican army subject to civilian executive authority,
respectful of the rule of law and mindful of human
rights.

Thirdly, with respect to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), I note that our
experience of this process over several years has led us
to conclude that the cantonment of former combatants
in recruitment centres was counterproductive. We
therefore feel that vetting is key to the process. Indeed,
accurate vetting will allow us to select those who
should remain in the new army and ensure that those
who are not selected will be directed forthwith to
technical centres where they will receive practical
training to assist their reintegration into working life.
12-21574
Moreover, we are planning innovative approaches,
concerning the establishment of a reserve force to
undertake non-military activities, in particular civil
construction and agricultural projects.

Fourthly, with respect to humanitarian assistance,
let us recall that, at the height of the post-electoral
crisis a year ago, we had 1 million internally displaced
persons and 500,000 refugees in neighbouring
countries. Today, there are no more than 185,000
internally displaced persons and 161,000 refugees in
neighbouring countries. We are pursuing our efforts to
bring all Ivorians home. We want that to take place on
a voluntary basis and in the context of a tripartite
agreement framework between Cote d'Ivoire, the host
country and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Four such agreements have been
concluded - with Liberia, Ghana, Togo and Guinea.
Based on our experience as part of that process, all
indications are that the pace of return would increase if
people had confidence in assurances with regard to
living conditions and security. In that regard, there is a
need to build 17,000 housing units and 100 health
centres.

My delegation welcomes the $8 million provided
by the Central Emergency Response Fund to address
dire situations. We also welcome the recent trip to C6te
d'Ivoire by Ms. Catherine Bragg, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, during which she
launched the 2012 consolidated appeal intended to
raise $173 million, which is the level of resources
needed by the humanitarian sector to address the needs
of more than 2 million vulnerable people.

Also on the humanitarian front, it is worth noting
the growing awareness on the issue of gender, in
particular with regard to sexual violence. Rape victims
are increasingly being informed of the treatment
available to them and are being encouraged to take
advantage of their legal rights. The Minister for
Families, Women and Children has been responsible
for significant progress in that area.

With regard to health, the President's free health
care initiative, which has been in place for a year, will
end this month. A system for participatory medical
coverage will then be put in place, following a study
currently under way. In the meantime, free treatment
will continue to be provided for the most
disadvantaged sectors of the population, in particular
12-21574
children under the age of six and pregnant women
without means, who will be provided free birthing kits.

Fifthly, with regard to national reconciliation and
the pursuit of political dialogue, the Commission on
Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation is now fully
operational, is expanding consultations and appears to
be setting up its functions for the long term, as
reconciliation is not a time-bound event but, instead, a
process that takes time.

Pursuing a political process is an inescapable
requirement in that context - a process that makes it
possible for all of the country's political stakeholders
to develop political maturity and to exercise their
constitutional rights. It is for that reason that we should
acknowledge - without self-satisfaction - that the
holding of peaceful legislative elections in Cote
d'Ivoire just seven months after emerging from the
crisis is an outcome that merits being highlighted. In
addition, while we regret that the party formerly in
power did not participate, we hope that, for the sake of
the upcoming municipal and regional elections, the
Front populaire ivoirien will take advantage of the
opportunity to participate, which will only benefit C6te
d'Ivoire's democracy. My delegation will soon submit
to the United Nations an official request for assistance
for those elections.

Lastly, I would like to say that in order to
overcome all the challenges to which I have referred,
my country more than ever needs the invaluable
support of the international community, first and
foremost that of the United Nations - and in particular
that of its leading organ, the Security Council.

My Government will soon submit a formal
request for a reconsideration of the sanctions regime on
cote d'Ivoire established by resolution 1572 (2002),
with a View to the partial or full lifting of the embargo
currently in place.

Peace and stability are slowly but surely making
progress in C6te d'Ivoire. My Government would
therefore officially like to invite the Security Council
to visit C6te d'Ivoire from 22 to 30 March, in order
that its members can have an opportunity to genuinely
see the progress that has been achieved on the ground.

Cote d'Ivoire is a country open to the outside
world, and it intends to once again pursue its natural
calling. It is for that reason that, soon after being sworn
in, His Excellency President Alassane Ouattara carried
out numerous State visits, beginning with his partners
in neighbouring countries and in the subregion. As I
speak, President Ouattara is on an official visit to
France. Two weeks ago, he met with Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton of the United States. And, at the
beginning of the year, he received China's Minister for
Foreign Affairs in the course of his official visit to
C6te d'Ivoire.

The African Development Bank is preparing to
bring its headquarters to cote d'Ivoire.
In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire is returning to the
international stage, ready to once again take up its role
as an anchor of stability and growth in the service of
international peace, security and cooperation.

