Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing,
which was indeed, as always, a very useful and
thought-provoking statement. I would also like to
highlight our appreciation for the briefing by
Ambassador Viotti.

The Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission has truly been doing
remarkable work, not only for the country, but in a
wider sense for the Commission itself, strengthening
its relevance and credibility as a critical body in the
United Nations peace and security architecture. We
have to recognize that potential, epitomized by the
record participation in the voter registration exercise in
Guinea-Bissau and by the continuing progress of
grassroots dialogue, showing the strength and Vitality
of that country's civil society. Equally commendable
has been the determination of the country's leadership
to hold legitimate elections as scheduled.
It will be important for donors to remain flexible
in order to allow for coverage of the remaining
sovereignty costs of the elections. We should also react
to the challenges reflected by the Secretary-General's
emphasis on the expansion of drug trafficking against
the backdrop of worsening political and economic

malaise. Reports of mounting pressures on the
country's institutions and of alleged collusion with
organized crime are particularly disturbing.

Twelve months after we first addressed the new
challenges confronting Guinea-Bissau, in presidential
statement S/PRST/2007/38 of last October, not only
has drug trafficking not been curtailed, but, as
indicated in the report before us, it has reached
volumes much greater than previously assumed. The
Secretary-General has expressed himself very clearly:
confronted with a phenomenon that is already affecting
peace and security, this Council should take strong
action and, to that end, consider establishing an expert
panel to investigate the identities and activities of those
involved.

That proposal would need to be further detailed,
including from the perspective of its likely impact on
the ground. In our reading, such an initiative should
not necessarily be seen as opening the way to coercive
measures, but rather as a way to deepen our
understanding of the phenomenon with a View to
assisting the investigative and judicial action of
national authorities, whose ownership and sovereignty
we should aim to preserve and enhance. If so
construed, the initiative may send a useful signal, first
and foremost to narcotraffickers, that Security Council
interest will not remain only on paper. However, it has
to be clear that the creation of a new structure,
whatever its scope, will not in any way be a substitute
for what is really needed on the ground.

Operation Bissalanca, as described in the report,
showed once more that only by strengthening Guinea-
Bissau's rule of law institutions and regional and
international cooperation among interested police and
judicial systems will we be able to curtail the
expansion of drug trafficking. That is why the action of
the Peacebuilding Commission remains crucial, and its
full involvement and interaction with the Security
Council in any initiative that the Council considers
should indeed be a priority. The upcoming regional
conference in Cape Verde will be crucial to the success
of the fight against narcotics.
