Mr. Fernandez-Arias Minuesa (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting, and to
congratulate you on your leadership and the great work
done by your team for the development and success of
your presidency. At the end of the first month of my
country's presence, for the fifth time, on the Security
Council, Iwould like to make some general observations
at this first wrap-up session in which my delegation is
participating.

We are pleased to see the good atmosphere of
collaboration within the Security Council and the many
concrete outcomes we have been able to negotiate and
adopt in recent weeks. My country is and will be a
constant and faithful partner in this work, and we are
very aware of the importance and centrality of the
work of the Security Council to the entire international
peacekeeping and security architecture, as well as the
Council's responsibility. It was precisely in order to
help maintain peace in the world that we presented our
candidature, and we have always borne in mind that
in electing us, the Member States of the Organization
have entrusted us with that responsibility.

Spain champions a Security Council that is open to
discussion, seeks to broaden its sources ofinformation,
and takes advantage of the work and knowledge of
the entire United Nations system. In that effort of
transparency, we will therefore listen to all Members
of the United Nations on matters on the agenda of the
Security Council, particularly those with a special
interest in them. We will promote decision-making that
bears in mind the points of view of countries, regional
organizations and other stakeholders.

This first month during which we have participated
in the work of the Council has shown us that it is
essential to work in an orderly and predictable fashion,
but that it is equally important to have the necessary
flexibility to deal with questions that call for our
attention. The consultations held on the crisis in Yemen
or, yesterday, in the case of Lebanon, where sadly a
Spanish Blue Helmet lost his life, have demonstrated
the unanimity that Members have always shown in
the fight against terrorism. Moreover, we believe that,
beyond the calendar marked by mandate renewals
and regular consultations and debates, it is essential
for the Council to address all issues affecting world
security, which constitute a variable geometry, and to
use its tools, interactive dialogues and Arria Formula
meetings, which we clearly welcome.

I wish to express my delegation's appreciation to
the Chilean presidency for the ministerial-level debate
held on inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security, presided over by
President Michelle Bachelet (see S/PV.7361). That
meeting reminded us that peace has many dimensions
and that the Security Council should bear all of them
in mind when it confronting an issue or creating or
renewing a specific mandate.

The Council's mission to Haiti, on which we heard
a briefing earlier today (see S/PV.7372), reflected the
importance of the Security Council's trips to keeping
it up informed and effective on issues on its agenda.
We also welcome tomorrow's debate on the protection
of civilians. My delegation especially appreciates the
focus on the particular vulnerability of women and
children in conflict that the presidency has emphasized
for the debate. Spain is deeply invested in all questions
related to the issue of women, peace and security,
the interconnectedness of which we will continue to
support and champion at all times.

In my delegation's opinion, the overall outcome of
this month's work is positive, both because of results
achieved and because the Members of the Council have
come together in a solid group able to agree on many
things. It is essential, however, to show unanimity and
resolve in our response to situations that call for the
Security Council to speak out firmly and in a timely
fashion. That has not always been possible this month,
as those who have spoken before me have made clear.

I wish the greatest success to the delegation of
China when it assumes the presidency of the Council
in February, and I reaffirm that all members count on
our delegation's continuing to build and strengthen the
Council's resolve.

