Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has been closely following the situation in the
Horn of Africa and welcomes the progress made by
the Federal Government of Somalia in promoting the
political process and reconstruction. We commend the
African Union and the countries of the region for their
contribution to the fight against the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab.

We call on the international community to continue
to help Somalia in its State-building efforts. We support
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali
National Army in their efforts to speedily achieve
peace and stability in the Horn of Africa. The Horn
of Africa is geographically important, and peace and
stability there have a direct bearing on the interests
of the countries of the region, which should live side
by side as neighbours and belong to an interdependent
community with a shared future and intertwined
interests. They all face the important task of achieving
economic development and improving the benefits to
their people, which will require a peaceful and stable
environment. Harmony benefits the countries of the
region, whereas confrontation harms them.

China sincerely hopes that the countries of the
region will take into account the bigger picture ofpeace
and stability in the Horn of Africa and the fundamental
interests of its peoples, strengthen good-neighbourly
relationships, promote unity and cooperation, and
reconcile their differences through dialogue and
consultation, which are in the common interests of all
the countries of the region.

The sanctions set out in the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council are not conducive to achieving
the aforementioned objectives. China hopes that the
Security Council will take the changes on the ground
into account, continuously revisit the relevant content
of its resolutions, and make timely adjustments. China
also hopes that the relevant country will adhere to
the principle of maintaining friendly relations with
its neighbours, heed their legitimate concerns and
adopt practical measures to improve relations with its
neighbours so as to achieve common security, mutual
benefits and win-win outcomes.

China is ready to continue to play its constructive
role in achieving peace, stability and development in
the Horn of Africa.

