Mr. Licharz (Germany): I would like to echo the expression of gratitude by colleagues to our briefers. I am delighted to see the High Commissioner for Human Rights briefing the Security Council. She has our full support. We look forward to more briefings from her in the very near future. Colleagues and briefers have eloquently elaborated on the importance of transitional justice. Let me share with the Council an example of our recent past. In 1991, in the aftermath of the fall of the Berlin Wall and in the process of reunification, the so-called State SecurityRecords Agency was established in Germany. The task of the Agency was to manage research and, most important, make accessible files, documenting how the authorities of the German Democratic Republic spied on its citizens. People were able to obtain hundreds, even thousands, of pages of those files, in which the State Security Agency recorded details of their personal lives. People were also able to obtain the names of those who passed on information that could lead to incarceration, torture or even more severe consequences. Perhaps some representatives have seen the movie The Lives of Others. It is an Oscar-winning movie that addresses the issue. If representatives have not seen it, I strongly recommend it. The shocking findings once the files were opened led to further measures. The German Parliament set up two commissions aimed at the reconciliation of society to create a framework for coming to terms with the German Democratic Republic's past, give back to the people their right to information self-determination, strengthen democratic education and dialogue with the public and support the development of a common political culture. The commissions and the Agency helped keep the subject in the public debate. It was no coincidence that the Head of the State Security Records Agency, Joachim Gauck, became the German President. What are the lessons that we have learned from our own experience? In echoing what the Ambassador of the United Kingdom said earlier, transitional justice should have a survivor-centred approach. It should not limit itself to punishing perpetrators, but should also respond to the needs of the individuals affected and their families and networks and to the needs and perceptions of communities. That holds especially true for the most egregious crimes against those who are vulnerable, such as sexual and gender-based violence. Resolution 2467 (2019) therefore for the first time introduced a survivor-centred approach. In the search for reconciliation, it is equally important to establish accountability and to fight impunity. Holding those who are _ individually responsible for atrocities and human rights violations accountable under criminal law is a key prerequisite for sustaining peace. Therefore, Germany is a strong supporter of the International Criminal Court, as well as the investigative mechanisms mandated by the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly. National ownership can be guaranteed only by the inclusion of all, most important marginalized groups and civil society, and by the promotion and protection of everyone's human rights. Transitional justice at the local level must be embedded in a broader national discourse and policies. I listened with great interest to the very inspiring statement by Francisco de Roux about the peace process in Colombia. Through project funding, Germany supports the peace process in Colombia and helps strengthen peace institutions involved in conflict resolution, such as the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Truth Commission and the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing in the Context of and Due to the Armed Conflict through the German-Colombian Peace Institute. Every country, society and community should decide for itself whether it needs outside assistance. If anyone requires such help, we should provide it to the extent possible. In order to help national solutions to progress, we support the Joint United Nations Development Programme-Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Programme on Building National Capacities for Conflict Prevention through peace and development advisers, who have proven to be very apt at supporting reconciliation processes. In that vein, we explicitly want to express our support for the United Nations toolbox. We need to strengthen the Security Council's focus on human rights, conflict prevention and respective instruments. Reconciliation and mediation capacities must be included in missions' mandates more often. The Security Council should invite commissions mandated by the Human Rights Council to brief the Council on their efforts in collecting evidence and establishing a path leading towards accountability. In South Sudan, for example, the Commission on Human Rights has a mandate critical for collecting and preserving evidence, with a view to ending impunity and providing accountability and to make such information available to all transitional justice mechanisms. Therefore, I very much welcome the participation of Ms. Yasmin Sooka, Chair of the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan, in today's debate. We also heard earlier that the transitional Government in Khartoum has publicly apologized to the victims of the military rule. I think that that is a very positive signal with regard to the reconciliation process in the Sudan.The Peacebuilding Commission plays a crucial role in post-conflict situations, as well as prevention efforts. It contributes to the much-needed platform for cooperation and the exchange and sharing of lessons both within and outside the United Nations. Germany wants the Peacebuilding Commission to make more frequent use of its expertise and advisory role to the Security Council. The Security Council should also look at emerging conflicts more frequently and use mediation as a tool to prevent outbreaks, as called for by Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations. The link between mediation and transitional justice needs to be reflected in the design of transition processes for peace to be sustainable. No country can ever be guaranteed that violence and conflict will not reoccur. Transitional justice has no endpoint. It is a constant endeavour that we have to undertake every single day in order to safeguard ourselves and the societies in which we live against sliding back into disaster. Assuming responsibility for its past, Germany is convinced that safeguarding the human rights of all and working towards more inclusive societies is the only way to achieve reconciliation and peace.
