Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Thank you very much,
Sir, for convening this important meeting. The
situation in West Africa commands the ever-greater
attention of the Council, since not only are States in the
region suffering from years of conflict, but some may
even relapse, and new crises are not excluded.

In that regard, we echo the calls made by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, for all parties in Togo to
exercise maximum restraint. We also commend the
prompt reaction of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to preserve the democratic
process in that country.

As we have stated time and again here in this
Chamber, conflicts happen and recur for a reason; they
are not self-generated explosions. They have
immediate causes and they have root causes. One such
cause, which should be placed at the top of the list, is
poverty. The lack of means to lead a dignified life will
leave people with nothing to lose. Violence has always
been a last resort of the oppressed - oppressed by
different ethnic or religious groups, by Governments
and also by poverty, hunger and hopelessness.

The dire humanitarian situation still faced by the
countries in conflict in West Africa must be addressed
from an integrated and strategic long-term perspective
that covers cross-border needs. The cross-border
approach is of particular relevance in that context
because problems and crime feed into each other from
country to country across the porous borders of the
region. Even when there is success in tackling them in
one country, we cannot be effective if neighbouring
countries are not being offered the same path. From
international donors and humanitarian agents, we
require not only the fulfilment of pledges under the
consolidated appeals process, but also greater
coordination so that efforts and resources are not
wasted and valuable lives and human dignity are
preserved.

We have been dealing with the particular
situation of different countries in the region under four
different items of the agenda of the Security Council.
Since we are dealing specifically with cross-border
issues in West Africa, I take this opportunity to centre
my comments on two issues: small arms proliferation
and reintegration.

There are still important loopholes in the
international regime for the legal transfer of arms that
allow for the diversion of arms to the illegal market,
although we have been working over the years with
like-minded delegations to minimize them. We are
discussing the matter thoroughly in the Open-ended
Working Group established by the General Assembly,
and also took it up last week in the Council. In the
regional context, we welcome recent initiatives taken
by ECOWAS towards greater control of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We
particularly welcome the establishment of its Small
Arms Control Programme, aimed at converting the
ECOWAS moratorium into a legally binding
instrument. We urge international partners and donors
to offer technical assistance and support to ECOWAS
efforts to reach that highly anticipated objective.
South-South cooperation ought not be excluded either;
there is a wide array of possible ways in which it can
prove useful to developing countries.

We may be reaching the point where criminal
activities, such as trafficking in small arms, linked to
numerous violations of human rights and to the
criminal exploitation of natural resources, may be
subject to the proceedings of the International Criminal
Court. They place a heavy burden on the integrity of
human life and affront our ideals of peace.

The dignity of human life leads me to the other
point I want to raise: the importance of reintegration
and development initiatives to avoid the recurrence of
conflict. My delegation is truly heartened by the
attention given in the report of the Secretary-General
before us to the question of reintegration programmes
and the absolute need to generate economic activity in
order to ensure sustainable peace. We fully subscribe to
the assessment made by the Secretary-General in
paragraphs 27 to 30 of his report, on the importance of
reintegration, with specific attention to child and
female ex-combatants and to youth unemployment. We
are particularly pleased by the ongoing collaboration
between the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the International Labour Organization - working with
other United Nations entities and the Economic
Community of West African States, civil society and
the private sector - to devise a regional strategy to
address youth unemployment. We note that fair trade
for African commodities remains elusive; that issue
will have to be urgently tackled in the appropriate
forums.

We have to find durable solutions to the lack of
economic development - and I mean not only by
attracting foreign investment and generating jobs, but
also by promoting sustainable income-generating
activities and training for self-employment. The news
that the United Nations Mission in Liberia is mapping
women's organizations involved in small businesses is
a very positive development. We expect that that
exercise will bear fruit in terms of offering needed
support and training.

The delegation of Brazil would also like to take
this opportunity to welcome the recommendation of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change to
establish a peacebuilding commission in the United
Nations. The matter should rightly be discussed in the
General Assembly, but the idea itself - that
peacebuilding must command greater attention - is a
very welcome one. Whatever decisions are taken in the
General Assembly, it has already been demonstrated
that we can benefit from greater cooperation between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council under Article 65 of the Charter. Even if one
were to consider it from a strictly utilitarian
perspective, it is not useful for the Organization to
invest so much in peacekeeping and in disarming and
demobilizing combatants if we do not do enough to
remove the temptation of power and the stimulation
conferred by the possession of weapons and to avert
vicious behaviour towards other human beings. We
need a more comprehensive approach to armed
conflict. It is not a purely military matter, and it is
certainly not confined within borders.

I would like to say one final word to commend
the increasing efforts undertaken by United Nations
missions in the region to work together and to build a
constructive partnership, as referred to by the Special
Representative. I thank him and his Office for their
leadership in a very challenging environment. That is
the right path to follow. On that path, we must increase
our efforts to achieve an all-encompassing
understanding of conflict and to take action.

