Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation has had more than
one occasion to express its deep concern at the tragic
events in Burundi. The acute political crisis that has been
going on there for more than three years now,
accompanied by bloody inter-ethnic clashes, has already
cost the lives of tens of thousands of people and has
unleashed a wave of refugees and displaced persons. A
large-scale humanitarian crisis is taking shape there,
which threatens to destabilize this already troubled part of
Africa. Throughout the entire Burundian crisis, the
Security Council has been paying very close attention to
exploring ways and means of handling it. We hope that
today's official meeting will provide a further incentive
for efforts to be mobilized in that direction. The Russian
delegation is firmly convinced that the problems of
Burundi cannot be resolved by military means or by
coups. We believe it is important to ensure the restoration
in this country of constitutional forms of governance, both
for reasons of principle and in order to provide the
necessary conditions to revive an inter-Burundian
dialogue. We believe that clear priority should be given
to political methods.

The main things now are to prevent the worst of all
possible developments - the outbreak of bloody
violence - to force the leaders in Burundi to sit at the
negotiating table, to ensure a lasting cease-fire and to
promptly organize talks without any preconditions
between the representatives of all political forces without
exception.

The task of the international community and the
mediators in which they have placed their trust is to
promote carefully gauged and well-balanced decisions,
which, on the one hand, would remove the threat of
another wave of bloodshed and genocide and, on the other
hand, would set the parties to the conflict in Burundi on
the road to creating political machinery that would

 

provide the appropriate security guarantees for all
Burundians. Otherwise, we believe it would be impossible
to really normalize the situation and to establish lasting
peace and agreement.

In this connection, we have always welcomed and
supported the efforts of the countries in the subregion,
which have proved to be a key factor in the settlement.
They have demonstrated the growing resolve of the African
States to make sincere efforts to calm dangerous hotbeds of
civil war and inter-ethnic conflict in their own backyard.
We also have great respect for their decision, reached by
consensus, to exert pressure on Burundi, including through
the imposition of sanctions.

We also value deeply the aspiration of countries
neighbouring Burundi to take into account the obvious
consequences of these steps for ordinary Burundians and to
keep open the possibility of humanitarian efforts by
international organizations, because, after all, this is a
matter of principle. We need to ensure the proper
observance of humanitarian standards for sanctions in order
to minimize their detrimental effect on the already grievous
situation of the broad segments of the Burundian population
that have been worn down by a protracted and bloody
conflict.

Sanctions should have very clear-cut criteria and time-
frames for their introduction and lifting, and they should be
aimed first and foremost at extremist forces both within the
country and beyond its borders - those forces that oppose
the cessation of violence and are hindering a serious
negotiating process. These pressures can yield the desired
political effect, provided that they are quite clearly selective
in nature and that they are utilized flexibly and adapted to
Burundi's domestic political dynamics, including the
specific acts of each of the parties.

Here we believe that the most effective steps would be
the imposition of an arms embargo on all Burundian
opposition parties, the freezing of their assets in foreign
banks and the introduction of other possible restrictions
affecting the personal interests of the extremist leaders,
until they put an end to the violence and conclude a lasting
peace agreement.

It is very important that pressure tactics be backed by
a clear signal to all extremist forces indicating that if acts
of violence become widespread and if a large-scale
humanitarian catastrophe is looming, the international
community will be obliged to react accordingly. We believe
that the United Nations Secretariat should intensify its

 

efforts to provide advance planning for such humanitarian
action, taking into account all possible scenarios.
We are convinced also that sending a Security
Council mission to Burundi at the appropriate time could
prove extremely useful to thoroughly assess the situation
and to influence the parties to the conflict by stimulating
them to make progress in the peace process.

Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council, is aware of its responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Therefore, in concert
with other members of the Security Council, it will duly
participate in efforts made by the international community
to normalize the situation and to prevent the spread of
violence in Burundi, as well as to ensure the strict
observance of generally accepted norms of human rights
and humanitarian law.

