Mr. Fulci (Italy): Allow me first to join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February.

Italy shares and endorses the Views that will be
expressed by France later on in its capacity as President
of the European Union. My delegation would like to add
a few points and comments to the statement to be made
by France.

Italy was among those that, in the Council's informal
consultations yesterday, supported the request for today's
meeting made on behalf of the Arab Group by the
Permanent Representative of Djibouti, Ambassador Roble
Olhaye. In our opinion, that request was justified,
procedurally and substantively. From the legal point of
View, the relevant provisions are contained in Articles 34
and 35 of the Charter and in rules 2 and 3 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure. Those rules
provide for the President's calling a meeting at the
request of any member of the Security Council.
Moreover, they provide that any member of the United
Nations may bring to the Council's attention any dispute
or any situation that might lead to international friction or
give rise to a dispute. Moreover, we believe that this
meeting is equally justified from the political point of
View, because the Security Council could certainly not
ignore a request emanating from 21 Member States.

My authorities believe that this debate ought not to
interfere with the ongoing negotiations between Israel and
the PLO. On the contrary, it should provide an
opportunity for a constructive exchange of thoughts.

Three and a half years after it began at the Madrid
conference in October 1991, the Arab-Israeli peace
process has made notable progress on the Palestinian and
Jordanian tracks. However, terrorist attacks by factions on
both sides opposed to the coalition for peace - most
recently the one cited by the representative of Israel, the
22 January suicide bombing by an extremist, in Beit
Lid - have led to a stalemate that we all fervently hope
will end soon.

 

Italy, along with many other countries, is strongly
convinced that there is no alternative to the diplomatic
approach to the problem taken by the four-party Summit in
Cairo on 2 February. Above all, one must keep in mind the
growing convergence of objective interests on the part of
the four protagonists. Nevertheless, it is still true that the
concrete results of the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations are
now more than ever placed at risk by the new terror
offensive, and this at the very moment when the peace
coalition is trying to consolidate the basis for a resumption
of the talks.

The road to fostering a true return to the peace process
is therefore, in our opinion, the fight against terrorism -
in other words, the fight against the enemy, as terrorism is
the real enemy of the peace process. Extremism on all sides
and of all extractions must be routed. It is not hard, frankly,
to place ourselves in the shoes of the people who are
constantly exposed to the threat of indiscriminate terrorism;
only thus can we possibly understand their concern and
anxiety. And the fight against terrorism is obviously not the
sole responsibility of one or two Members, but of all the
Members of the United Nations, which must resolve to
drive out the enemies of peace, wherever they may lurk.

As concerns the settlement policy, Italy cannot but
support the precise stand unanimously taken by the
European Union on 5 January last: that the settlements are
illegal, since they are against international law and in
particular against existing Conventions. With regard to the
other matters - pulling out troops from the West Bank,
organizing the election of the Palestinian Council and the
free circulation of Palestinian workers - Italy also joins its
European partners in calling upon the parties concerned to
demonstrate political foresight and mutual goodwill so as to
rapidly bring this stage of the negotiations to a successful
end.

It would be truly paradoxical if a discussion in the
Security Council were to make the peace process more
complicated rather than easier. Italy, like almost every other
country, has strongly supported the Washington agreement
and its follow-up. Ever since those agreements were
reached, we have done what we could in order to facilitate
the process, not only politically and by contributing our
share of the necessary financial support, but also, together
with our friends from Norway and Denmark, by sending
units of our police to help ease the tension in Hebron,
within the framework of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, which was, as we all know,
successfully concluded.

 

We believe that it is our precise duty to continue to
support and facilitate in every possible way the peace
process, which remains the only possible road to ending,
once and for all, this very long and very tragic conflict.

