Mr. Skoog: I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this very important debate. I also thank the briefers this morning. I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, as well as Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this statement. Countering terrorism is a shared priority for Africa and Europe. In partnership, we remain committed to tirelessly mitigating this scourge. African partners have paid a huge price. I want to express our full solidarity with the victims of the recent terrorist attacks in Africa. Despite tremendous efforts, the threat has not been curbed. The twenty-fifth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 2368 (2017) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities (S/2020/53), issued in January, emphasizes the spread of the threat in West Africa as well as to new areas, including in East Africa. I want to make a crucial point of departure in this entire discussion. In all our counter-terrorism efforts, respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law has to be the basis. That must go hand in hand with gender- and child-sensitive measures. The failure to comply with human rights contributes to increased radicalization and further violence and fosters a sense of impunity. All our counter-terrorism efforts must therefore be framed in a human rights- based approach. Terrorism is a transnational issue. As stressed by the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, Smail Chergui, terrorists have globalized their means and have a "new modus operandi". The globalization of terrorism calls for more coordinated and integrated responses. Terrorists benefit from various factors, including weak Government institutions, poor governance and border porosity, all of which foster corruption, illicit trafficking and exploitation of natural resources. The nexus between organized crime and the expansion of violent extremist ideologies further endangers the stability of fragile States, whose resilience needs to be enhanced in a comprehensive manner, as many around the table have said this morning. In that regard, the European Union supports the efforts of its African partners to address the full spectrum of challenges that terrorism brings. The broad and growing range of our programmes in the field of preventing and countering terrorism and violent extremism have focused on the Horn of Africa, the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel regions. We are deepening our support to African peace efforts, with a focus on a holistic and integrated approach to conflict and crises, investing in prevention, the fight against radicalization, building stabilization and better linking humanitarian, development, peace and security efforts. We also continue to strengthen our cooperation with United Nations agencies with regard to counter- terrorism and prevention measures in African countries and regions. For example, we work with the Office for Counter-Terrorism to support the Sudan's efforts towards reform and reinforcement of the country's counter-terrorism structures. That includes assisting the transitional Government's counter-terrorism efforts and contributing to normalization of relations with the international community. We are also expanding contacts with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, with the aim of strengthening our own understanding of the African region and better tailoring EU programming to local needs. More focus is needed on diagnosis of the root causes of violent extremism. An integrated approach is key. The Pau summit of 13 January brought together the members of the Group of Five for the Sahel and launched the coalition for the Sahel. That is a good example of regional cooperation in the context of counter-terrorism in Africa. The EU is acting with the full range of policy, security and stabilization measures, development cooperation and humanitarian aid. In conclusion, the European Union is fully committed to continuing to support and work with its partners in Africa and beyond. We look forward to the outcome of the African Union's extraordinary summit on counter-terrorism, to be held in South Africa in May.
