Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me start by thanking you, Mr. President, for bring us
together to discuss these new challenges to peace and
security. Many thanks also to Executive Director
Fedotov, High Commissioner Guterres and Director-
General Chan for their briefings today. I also welcome
the Ministers from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil and
Colombia to our discussions.

The threats we are discussing today - illicit
trafficking, climate change and pandemics - know no
boundaries and cannot be tackled by one country alone.
They require collective action, which the Council
encourages by placing these items on its agenda and
taking stock of United Nations programmes aimed at
addressing them. I would like to comment briefly on
each.

First, illicit trafficking of drugs, arms and,
particularly, trafficking in persons is devastating,
destroying lives, fuelling conflict and preying on the
powerless. The criminals involved operate in
increasingly complex and diversified underground
markets and networks, without respect for borders,
laws or basic human dignity. These networks subvert
legitimate economic activities, undermine sustainable
development and political stability, fuel violence and
corruption and weaken the rule of law. In some areas
these criminals are aiding and abetting terrorists, thus
undermining effective development and governance.
We must continue to work together to deny these
criminals every advantage and defeat them at every
turn. We must continue to set and update international
standards, pool our resources and expertise and close

safe havens. We are already on the right track. The
United Nations provides critical assistance to States for
implementation of the three United Nations drug
control conventions that form the backbone of our
common approach.

In 2009 the United Nations Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly adopted an action plan to
counter the world drug problem. International
organizations such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) are essential in the fight
transnational organized crime and drug trafficking.
Member States can rely on the 2001 United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International
Tracing Instrument to deal with the issue of small arms
and light weapons. The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, together with the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
form the primary international framework and are
essential to counter trafficking in persons.

The United States continues to do its part. In
2010 we contributed $34 million to support UNODC's
programmes for treaty implementation support. In the
past year we have announced three initiatives to
combat transnational threats: the Central American
Citizen Security Partnership, the West Africa
Cooperative Security Initiative, and the Central Asian
Counternarcotics Initiative. We are committed to
working with UNODC and with other nations to deny
safe havens to transnational crime and to provide an
environment where laws can be enforced, rights are
protected and sustainable development and business
can proceed.

I turn now to climate change. This Council held a
debate last July and heard Member States' deep
concerns that climate change will be a threat multiplier,
exacerbating existing challenges and vulnerabilities.
Climate change has the potential to reduce the
availability of food and water, threaten biodiversity,
raise sea levels and disrupt weather patterns, exposing
all of us to greater risk. Many regions of the world will
be vulnerable to more intense and longer droughts,
putting lives and livelihoods in peril. This is a
particular concern where poverty or conflict already
strains the capacity of communities to cope. Small and
low-lying island States have real concerns about
erosion and land loss due to sea-level rise.

As our understanding of the effects of climate
change on security evolves, including the risk of
displacement and migration, we recognize the need for
more collaborative analysis and action. We believe the
Security Council should remain open to continuing to
consider this issue.

The United States reaffirms the important role of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in facilitating an urgent response by all
countries to address the challenge of climate change.
We are committed to working with all countries to
achieve a balanced and comprehensive outcome at the
Framework Convention negotiations in Durban next
month.

Finally, our interconnections are especially
evident in global health. New infectious disease threats
such as the severe acute respiratory syndrome, or
SARS, and H5N1 avian influenza have emerged.
Nearly eradicated diseases such as polio have returned.
Infectious diseases pay no heed to international
borders. A threat that emerges in one country can
quickly spread across the globe and can be addressed
only through collective action. The international
community's response to the H5N1 outbreak -
including sharing of information, expertise, medicines
and vaccines - was unprecedented and led to
significantly improved animal health surveillance and
response capacities around the world.

We all faced the challenge squarely, both in
capitals and in national forums. Now we must maintain
momentum to ensure that those systems are
regularized, not only to keep the H5N1 virus in check
but also to protect ourselves from the next pandemic
threat that emerges.

The United States actively supports several
initiatives of the World Health Organization (WHO)
that build on the lessons learned, including the
Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Framework and the
2005 International Health Regulations. We recently
concluded a memorandum of understanding with WHO
to strengthen collaboration in global health security.
We continue to work with partner countries to improve
their own public health surveillance, preparedness and
capacities for response.

Transnational threats are relevant to the Council's
core responsibilities. The Security Council of the
twenty-first century must continue to work to
anticipate potential threats and be part of broader
efforts to intensify collaboration across the system. We
look forward to working with fellow Council members
to find ways to be better informed, including by
opening dialogue with institutions such as the WHO
that do not deal with conventional security threats but
which are on the front line in facing these new dangers.

It is also important to be open to greater
engagement with other parts of the United Nations
system and to encourage United Nations agencies to
work more closely together to anticipate and manage
unconventional threats.

Finally, these issues remind us of the importance
of a more traditional priority for us: the need to build
State capacity. For example, post-conflict countries
already struggling to rebuild infrastructure, strengthen
institutions and consolidate peace are especially
vulnerable to some of the stresses generated by
transnational threats. Climate change will demand
stronger and more resilient institutional capacities for
development and for disaster prevention and response.
Emerging infectious diseases require stronger public
health systems. Village clinics will often be the first to
observe emergent diseases and need to be able to
respond swiftly and in cooperation with wider
international capacities to manage infectious disease.
Trafficking networks thrive where State institutions are
fragile and interdiction capacities are limited.

New challenges to security will be an important
part of our Council's work in the future. Today's debate
is a step in the right direction, and we thank Portugal
for its initiative.

