Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica wishes you every success during your presidency of the Council. On behalf of my country, we invite the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to adhere to the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, to which several of the delegations that have spoken have referred. We also acknowledge the valuable contributions made to this debate by the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, and the Chair of The Elders, Mrs. Mary Robinson. The contemporary world is witness to the increasing impact of complex factors that are contributing to global destabilization and sparking, worsening and prolonging conflicts. These factors, including inequality, the climate crisis and the emergence of cross-border armed militias and extremist groups, have become increasingly complex, regionalized and internationalized. These are the new challenges to international peace and security, which the United Nations must confront and resolve on the basis of its Charter, 75 years after its entry into force. Member States must therefore fight to uphold the Charter of the United Nations, and that is why today's debate is so timely and urgent. Costa Rica believes that this anniversary must be a call to action to fulfil the mandates enshrined in the Charter. It is also time to redouble efforts to promote the reforms that will ensure that the United Nations system as a whole, and the Security Council specifically, become more responsible, consistent and transparent. This must be the anniversary that consolidates the leadership of the United Nations as the epicentre of global governance, at a time when multilateralism is floundering and unilateral actions are jeopardizing global stability. In order for the United Nations to take up the reins of global governance, the Security Council must shoulder the responsibilities incumbent upon it in the maintenance of international peace and security, bearing in mind human rights considerations in its actions and enhancing its conflict-prevention efforts. When Governments fail to comply with their responsibility to protect their citizens, the international community, particularly the Security Council, must use means such as preventive diplomacy, good offices and mediation. We must aspire to ensuring that the Security Council acts in a timely manner, not when it is too late or, worse still, does not act at all. So that the United Nations can be consolidated as the epicentre of global governance, we must be very cautious about the use of instruments such as the veto - tacit or express - that distort the purposes for which they were designed and prevent the United Nations from addressing global challenges. When a permanent member resorts to the veto or the threat of the veto, it publicly turns its back on the right of victims to justice and peace and undermines international efforts to combat impunity. If a Security Council is to discharge its crucial role of upholding respect for the Charter, it must be borne in mind that the use of the veto, principally when atrocity crimes are involved, betrays the trust of millions of people in the United Nations as their last source of hope. For that reason, Costa Rica supports Liechtenstein's proposal that when that occurs, the General Assembly should be convened and informed and express its views on the issue. Placing the United Nations at the epicentre of global governance is not only limited to enhancing the work of the Security Council and its role in preventing conflicts and maintaining international peace and security but also implies further strengthening the General Assembly and the Organization as a whole. Our efforts must therefore be focused towards that end.
