Mr. Choi Jong-moon (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I wish to express my best wishes to the new
members of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the Swedish presidency for selecting the topic
of "Conflict prevention and sustaining peace" for
today's debate.

My special appreciation goes to Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his informative briefing at his
first address to the Council.

We are at a critical moment vis-a-vis the
international security landscape. The nature of today's
global conflicts has become increasingly complex and
intractable, while terrorism and violent extremism are
spreading to each and every corner of the world. In
turn, that has created the worst humanitarian situation
of our time, which calls for a new way forward.

At a time of such global turbulence, it is significant
that the Security Council and the General Assembly
adopted landmark resolutions last year, laying out a
road map towards a more peaceful future by welcoming
a new vision of sustaining peace. That entails taking
down the fragmentation and duplication that are
prevalent across the United Nations system, while
pursuing a holistic approach that integrates peace and
security, human rights and development. It reflects the
renewed awareness that conflict prevention should be
the centrepiece of all the United Nations engagements.
In this connection, Korea welcomes the Secretary-
General's strong emphasis on prevention as a guiding
raison d'etre of his stewardship of the Organization
from the very outset of his term, in particular his
outlining a surge in diplomacy for peace.

It is no coincidence that all three of the recent
global reviews on peace and security, including the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
highlighted the essential role of conflict prevention
and sustaining peace. The Secretariat has made some
progress in implementing the recommendations of these
reviews, but more needs to be done to make United
Nations peace operations fit for purpose. In striving
for a way forward to close the implementation gap and
to advance the international community's capacity to
effectively prevent conflicts and sustain peace, Korea
recommends the following.

First, the Council should make better use of its
investigatory tools under Article 34 of the Charter
of the United Nations. Secondly, the Council should
implement and continue to build on the language in
its resolutions 2086 (2013) and 2333 (2016), which
specifies the Council's role in peacebuilding efforts.
Thirdly, greater engagement with the Ad hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa
could facilitate action on potential conflicts. And last
but not least, the Council must make more proactive
use of the advisory function of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).

In fact, Korea is expected to become the next Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission. In this new capacity,
Korea hopes to contribute to securing sustainable
peace across the globe in a constructive way. Korea is
of the view that scaling-up inclusive capacity-building
and greater coordination through PBC initiatives are
effective means to prevent conflicts and sustain peace.
Enhanced coordination between the Council and the
PBC is essential in this regard.

As the Council is well aware, over the past decades,
the Republic of Korea, together with the Council, has
been making all-out efforts to prevent the nuclear
programme of North Korea and thereby achieve the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. However,
even at this moment, while we are gathered in this
Chamber to discuss ways to secure sustainable peace,
North Korea continues to develop its nuclear and missile
capabilities, blatantly violating relevant Security
Council resolutions. It is critical that the Council
continue to be engaged with this issue to sustain peace
in this region.
In conclusion, as the presumptive next Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Korea will work closely
with the Council, Member States and other partners
to create a platform whereby the United Nations can
effectively sustain peace.

