Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, allow me to thank you and
your country for organizing this open thematic debate,
as well as for the concept paper circulated with your
letter dated 18 June 2010 (S/2010/322).
We welcome the continued willingness of the
Council to address the promotion and strengthening of

the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security. In spite of new mechanisms at the
United Nations and the wealth of experience and
lessons learned built up in recent years, the rule of law
continues to be at risk from impunity and evolving
threats and challenges. Our interest in participating in
today's debate is not only rooted in our commitment to
the universal values of the United Nations Charter, but
also stems from the current state of affairs in
Guatemala.

The fight against impunity, the strengthening of
the rule of law and the protection and full respect for
human rights, both within our country and at the
international level, are central to our Government's
policies. We acknowledge that there remain serious
weaknesses in all of those aspects within our own
society, which are in part due to the legacy of an
internal conflict that lasted four decades. The
significant progress achieved in implementing the
commitments flowing from our peace agreements has
been partially compromised by a culture of impunity
that is made worse by an expansion in the activities of
organized crime cartels.

In that connection, we have taken very concrete
steps to address shortfalls and strengthen our own
institutional democracy. The International Commission
against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG), which has
been in operation since 2007, is the most important
tool in that regard. We have benefited enormously from
that independent body, which was the outcome of an
agreement between the Government and the United
Nations and which enjoys the firm support of both the
Government and civil society. We are now beginning to
see the first fruits of its efforts to combat impunity. In
that connection, allow me to highlight some of the
important aspects of the work of the Commission.

First, we cannot overstate the significance of new
approaches and best practices for enhanced capacity
building in the justice and rule of law sectors. This
innovative mechanism is based on a treaty and operates
on the ground with mixed functions and through a
partnership with the Office of the Public Prosecutor in
prosecuting high-impact cases. What the launching of
CICIG has revealed is that the way forward is not to
build international substitutes for national structures,
but to help build domestic capacities.
Secondly, CICIG operates within a very
precarious environment that is marked by extreme
poverty and violence. Peace and stability will only
prevail if the population understands that highly
politically charged issues can be resolved fairly and
legitimately. That requires credible institutions and
verification processes to ensure minimum standards of
integrity in public services. Verification processes in
Guatemala now play a crucial role in transforming
institutions that during the conflict were involved in
serious abuses against public human rights agencies
but are now beginning to enjoy public confidence.

Thirdly, promoting and strengthening the rule of
law requires a measure of stability, genuine
governmental authority and political will. But that is
only possible within properly resourced and audited
public institutions. In that regard, ending impunity first
requires a duty to respect as well as to guarantee the
rule of law.

In considering the subject of this debate, we note
that the rule of law has now been mainstreamed into
the core activities of the United Nations. Furthermore,
it has become institutionalized in the latest structure,
namely, the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource
Group, which is backed by the Rule of Law Unit.
Although that allows for better coordination and
coherence within the United Nations system, we must
also respect the purview and mandate of each player in
the system responsible for rule-of-law activities.
Neither the Group nor the Unit has addressed the need
to avoid duplication and overlapping of functions.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
combating impunity is difficult and that strengthening
the rule of law requires the commitment of all
concerned. It is for that reason that we value
international cooperation and alliances with relevant
actors of the United Nations and the donor community
to promote and strengthen the rule of law.

