Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin by saying that we welcome the very wide support from members of the Security Council for resolution 2542 (2020), adopted to renew the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). I would also like to say that I am surprised by the decision of Russian and China to abstain in the voting. I listened very carefully to the Russian Ambassador's explanation of his vote. Council members and Council colleagues will know that once the Russian Federation raised its concerns over the language in the resolution after it had gone under silence, we were very quick as penholders to accommodate them. We understood the concern around consultation, which is why we added new language to the draft text in response, and that new language makes clear that UNSMIL would only be involved in implementing a ceasefire "once it is agreed by the Libyan parties" (resolution 2542 (2020), para. I (iv)). I cannot think of any way in which this does not make clear that there will need to be consultation with the Libyan parties or that they are not responsible for any decisions about a ceasefire. Again, I listened to the explanation of vote of my colleague from China. Indeed, there were a number of requests from China to remove language supporting the human rights agenda and on conflict-related sexual violence. We removed a number of those references at China's request. However, other members of the Council feel that they are important issues. While they compromised in good faith to secure a consensus text, they were not ready to compromise to that extent. It is my hope - and I hope that I can ask our Russian and Chinese friends to join me in that hope - that,despite those abstentions today, all Council members will support the resolution and the new Special Envoy - who, we hope, will soon be appointed - in working with the Libyan parties and external actors to bring about a sustainable political settlement, which is what the Libyan people desperately need.
