Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I am
deeply moved by your remarks, Mr. President, and I
thank you not only for the remarks, but for adjusting
your schedule so that you could remain here to preside
over this important meeting. You spoke accurately
about my respect and affection for Singapore, a country
I first visited in 1966, shortly after it became
independent. It is a country for which I have the
greatest of respect, and which is represented so ably by
my old friend Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, whom
I have known for more than 25 years. I am deeply
honoured that you are presiding here today, and that we
are also joined by the Minister of International
Development of Norway and by my other friends here.

I am also very deeply honoured by the presence
in the Chamber of so many friends, my own family,
students from Columbia and Barnard and friends of
mine from private life, as well as so many prominent
members of the HIV/AIDS community. These include
Mercy Makhalamele, who, many of you will remember
was the heroic figure in Ed Bradley's great one-hour
special on AIDS that came out last year; Dr. Mathilde
Krim of the American Foundation for AIDS research;
Joshua Lederberg, the great Nobel Prize winner in
medicine; my great friend Senator Tim Wirth, who is
now the President of the United Nations Foundation,
who is seated behind me in that tie that he and I and
Ted Turner and others wear; and so many other friends
of ours.

It is very fitting that the last Security Council
meeting I will participate in as United States
Ambassador addresses this issue, because I think it
marks one of the great steps forward for the United
Nations in the last year. I am very pleased that we have
just heard two important addresses, by Under
Secretary-General Guehenno and Dr. Piot, and I am
also very grateful that, in the absence of our great
Secretary-General, the Deputy Secretary-General,
Louise Frechette, is with us today.

This is our third open meeting on HIV/AIDS in
the last year. A little over a year ago, 10 January 2000
to be precise, Vice-President Gore opened the first such
meeting and the first meeting of the new millennium,
and the first meeting ever on a health issue. More than
4,000 meetings had preceded it. I am so pleased that
this Council has participated in broadening the
definition of security. I know it was not always easy to
do, and I remember the controversy surrounding that
initial meeting. My friend to my right, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, passed me a hand-written note in the
middle of the meeting, saying, with characteristic
British understatement, "I dare say this is the first time
the word "condoms" has been used in the Security
Council." Now we just throw that word around.

We debated at first whether we ought to be
debating the issue at all, whether it was a security
threat, or whether the Security Council, the highest
international body legitimizing international
involvement across borders should even address the
issue at all. I know that many countries in the room,
going back to the historic roots of the United Nations,
had doubts about it. But I think we should all look back
on the last year, and, bearing in mind the important
statements made by the two previous speakers, say, "It
was worth it."

And why was it worth it? For the simplest of
reasons. It appears now that if the Security Council
continues its work, and the cooperation we heard about
earlier today - cooperation that not only did not exist,
but was not even contemplated until recently -
continues, the Council will actually do what it is
supposed to do: save lives.

But I am not deluding myself. This is a tough
issue. I know there are some Governments, including
many that are not on the Security Council, that think
this issue ought to be left entirely to the Economic and
Social Council. I understand that point, and I am
deeply, deeply honoured that so many non-Security
Council members are here in the audience today. These
are my dear friends among the diplomatic corps, and I
will say a personal word to them at the end of my
comments on AIDS. I am pleased that they are here to
register their concern.

I particularly want to address, as I did yesterday
in the Kosovo debate, the issue of the troop-
contributing countries. I believe in transparency of
deliberations, and I believe in the maximum
involvement in the Security Council deliberations,
within the current rules of the Security Council, of
countries other than its 15 members. We also have
recommended a revision of the Security Council
structure. I hope that going forward, the Security
Council will grow to be more representative. It is a
difficult issue, but meanwhile, until this is done - and
it is going to be a tough issue - I am just delighted
that so many of our colleagues are here today to learn,
to exchange views and to give us more input.

As I leave here - having worked with Council
members day and night on the crises in the Middle
East, Kosovo, Bosnia, East Timor, Sierra Leone,
Congo, Ethiopia/Eritrea, Iraq - it is clear that, as
horrible as these conflicts are, and as pressing as the
need is to resolve them, the issue that is common to
every one of them is the issue we are here to discuss
today. I have elsewhere called it the most important
and biggest problem in the world today, and I am often
questioned about that. But I say that because all the
other issues are specific problems - they can be
solved; they will be solved - but if we do not address
AIDS, it will go on and on. Because of the long
incubation period of the disease, because of the stigma
attached to it and because of the way it is spread, it will
kill more people and undermine more societies than
even the worst conflicts that we deal with here. I thank
all my colleagues on the Security Council for opening
up this issue to Security Council debate, and I urge
them to continue.

I first came into direct contact with this issue -
that of the connection between peacekeepers and
AIDS - when I was in Cambodia in 1992. My son,
who is sitting behind Ambassador Cunningham, has
handed me a note which I will read out in part to the
Council because he wants to take credit for this
meeting. It says,

"Dad, remember our trip to Cambodia, when I
first brought this very important problem-
United Nations peacekeepers spreading AIDS -
to your attention".

So I thank my son for convening this meeting. In point
of fact, we did see in 1992 the issue that we are here to
discuss. At that time, I wrote Under-Secretary-General
Yasushi Akashi a letter saying that it would be the
cruelest of ironies if people who had come to
Cambodia to end the war were spreading an even more
deadly disease. Finally, eight years later, we are
starting to do something about it.

I cannot say we are winning this war, but I have
heard some positive things this morning. I want to
acknowledge those because, as the Under-Secretary-
General knows, I am going to make some critical
comments in a moment. I hope that we all listen to the
very important statements concerning the joint
memorandum, the conferences that you are going to
hold and the line-item in the peacekeeping budget. I
stress that the latter should not be a voluntary fund
issue but, rather, a regular part of the budget. I think
that the idea of a pocket card for peacekeepers is a very
good one. I think that a focal point at the headquarters
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
is essential. And I am very gratified by the signs of
cooperation.

I would point out to our guests that when we met
in closed session on this same issue only a month ago
no one from the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) was present. I complained very
strongly about the absence of UNAIDS at that meeting
and at the fact that the meeting was closed. I thought
that the world and other member nations and
ambassadors should have been here. Every other
ambassador in this room supported that call, which is
why we are meeting publicly today. It was only a
month ago that we were unable to hold this meeting in
public. Transparency is the only way to deal with this
disease because of its unique nature and the way in
which it is spread.

I would also like to draw members' attention to
the fact that Secretary of State-designate Colin Powell,
who will assume office tomorrow, addressed this issue
in very strong terms at his confirmation hearing the day
before yesterday. I would also like to draw the
Council's attention to a related subject, namely, the fact
that he endorsed very strongly the reform effort of the
United Nations and pledged himself to continue that
effort, as well as to improve United States support for
the United Nations financially.

Let me turn now to resolution 1308 (2000), which
is the resolution we are here to discuss today. I hope
that the number 1308 will become as famous to
followers of the United Nations and to people who care
about this issue as other famous numbers in United
Nations Security Council history, like 242 - probably
the most famous of all Council resolutions - on the
Middle East, 1967; or 338, on the Middle East; or
1244, on Kosovo, or 1284, on Iraq. Resolution 1308
(2000) should be as well known as those resolutions,
and it should be fully implemented. It should not be the
end of the process, but only a cornerstone for future
efforts.

I was encouraged by your remarks, Dr. Piot and
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno, because you both
recognize the deadly nature of this disease. As I said a
moment ago, it is the cruelest of all United Nations
ironies that every time we vote to establish a
peacekeeping mission, we are unintentionally helping
to spread a killer disease. That is not necessary. But
this is a complicated issue. Under the present structure
of the United Nations, of course, every country
contributing troops sets its own standards for testing
and treatment. Some countries like my own and others,
which I congratulate, will not send a soldier overseas
unless he or she has been tested. If they test positive
they are not sent overseas; they are given treatment.
But other countries that do not have our resources do
not carry out such testing, either because they consider
it to be socially or culturally unacceptable, or because
of its costs, or because - and I must be honest here -
the incident rate of infection is so high that they do not
want to reveal that they will not be able to field a
peacekeeping force.
Of course, all of us who have travelled in Africa,
or other parts of the world where this disease is
raging - as my wife Kati and I did last year - have
seen the stigma attached to being found HIV-positive. I
want to say to my friends in countries that have been
hard-hit that this is not an attempt to say that the
United States knows better than other countries. All the
Americans in the Chamber can remember very well
when the stigma in this country was as great as it is
today in other countries. Even with the benefits of
instantaneous communication and a sense that we are
enlightened - and I say "sense" because I think that
we were not enlightened in the United States on this
issue - I can remember very clearly, and I am sure
every American in the Chamber can remember too,
when people were afraid that a handshake could
transmit AIDS. That was the level of ignorance in the
United States. Therefore, when we talk about stigma
and de-stigmatization, I want to stress that there is
nothing here that should be read as implying any kind
of cultural superiority. The United States has
confronted this problem belatedly and inadequately,
and we still have trouble with it.

Of course, we are here to discuss peacekeeping.
But it cannot be underlined too much that this is the
smallest fraction of the world-wide problem. When we
talk about this I hope that we are also talking about the
larger issue.

The compromise that was worked out under
resolution 1308 (2000) was that the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations was going to
do a hands-on, aggressive job of education. I laud your
efforts and I laud the new agreement, but here I must
be frank. I must say some words that will not be
entirely enjoyable to the people in DPKO. I say this
with great reluctance because, as all of you know, in
the 17 months that I have been Ambassador the United
States Mission has worked endlessly to strengthen
DPKO - it has been our strongest single theme - and
because I have the highest personal respect for Jean-
Marie Guehenno and his team; because I fully support
the Brahimi report and Deputy Secretary-General
Frechette's implementation plan - which I hope will
be completed this year - and because no one needs
more people than DPKO, which has barely 400 people
do deal with crises throughout the world and which is
understaffed for such pressing problems as the Congo,
Sierra Leone, East Timor, Lebanon and Kosovo. To add
this burden in the midst of all that is genuinely
difficult. I know the Department is under-staffed and
that the loss of gratis personnel has made it more
difficult. Getting resources to DPKO has been a
crusade of mine. I do not like to end my tenure here
with anything less than very generous praise of an
organization that I admire and which has been under
intense pressure.

Quite frankly, despite what we have heard today,
I am still not satisfied. The mandate of DPKO under
resolution 1308 (2000) is clear, and I wish to read it. It
calls for

"further steps towards the provision of training
for peacekeeping personnel on issues related to
preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS and to
continue the further development of pre-
deployment orientation and ongoing training for
all peacekeeping personnel on these issues".
(para. 3)

Until today, I was prepared to say that nothing had
been done to implement resolution 1308 (2000). But on
the basis of what has been said by the two previous
speakers, I am ready to say that a start has been made.
But it has been six months since the resolution was
passed. Up until today, the answer was a resounding

cc 57

I10.

I must share with the Council one example. My
friend Jean-Marie Guehenno cited it, and therefore I
will cite it too - these two books which he says have
been given out to people. I have read them very
carefully, and I urge all of you to read them and ask
yourselves whether or not these books are conceivably
usable for United Nations peacekeepers.

First of all, they were written five years ago.
Neither of them mentions resolution 1308 (2000).
Secondly, one would need a magnifying glass to find
out what AIDS does to a person. On page 10, in very
small print, it mentions - and this is the only
mention- that all people who are HIV positive
eventually die. Well, thank you. Why is that not on the
cover? And these books are very sexually explicit. I do
not want to talk here about any euphemisms. The books
are very clear on how AIDS is transmitted, but they are
not user-friendly to the average soldier in the field
unless he has an advanced degree from a college or
institution of higher learning. They are technical,
wordy, not clear-cut and out of date. I also do not
believe that the book on policy guidelines for United
Nations military planners is conceivably usable. And,
again, they are five years old, reissued and edited
slightly, but they do not even mention resolution 1308
(2000). Therefore, the United Nations peacekeeping
commanders do not know, at least not from these
books, that this is a mandated responsibility of the
Security Council.

Now, I am being blunt about this because lives
are at stake. I know these books can be rewritten, that
they can be made clearer and that they can be made
more useful to troops in the field at lower levels.

A second point: the Under-Secretary-General
referred to tasking the Medical Support Unit of DPKO,
whose chief is seated behind Jean-Marie Guehenno
now. I commend him for doing this, but it is my
understanding that the Medical Support Unit is
responsible for all medical issues. It is also my
understanding that of five available slots - an
inadequate number - only two are filled, and that
therefore there are three empty slots out of five in that
office. I think that we need to ask DPKO not only to
fill the empty slots, but to create an office dedicated
specifically to this issued, in furtherance of the
mandate given to it by the Security Council.

Again, I say this not in a hostile sense, but in a
hortatory sense, like a coach at halftime saying, "We
are making some progress; let's do more".

We spend billions of dollars on peacekeeping at
the United Nations. We spend millions to protect our
peacekeepers from terrorist attacks and from hostile
forces. But I do not think we are spending even
$500,000 yet to protect them from HIV/AIDS. I do not
know the exact figure because we were unable to
obtain it, but it is very small.

Let me make some very brief suggestions. First,
as regards personnel, I have already said that I hope
that the Department will staff itself fully and will set
up a separate unit. Secondly, the most difficult issue of
all - testing. What I have heard from Dr. Piot this
morning is very encouraging. No issue is more difficult
for the Member States of the United Nations and, in
particular, for the troop-contributing countries -
countries that are doing something of indispensable
importance to the United Nations. I commend the
troop-contributing countries. I recognize that the costs
of testing are real, and that the cost of treatment, which
should be available to all those tested, is prohibitively
expensive in the current situation.

We would suggest that DPKO add the costs of
pre- and post-deployment HIV testing into the cost of
its operations so that the costs are not picked up
separately by the troop-contributing countries. It
should be a standard line item in the peacekeeping
budget. It will increase the budget, but it is so
important that I cannot imagine that it would not be
appropriate to do so.

I understand that testing technologies are on their
way to the market that are 99.9 per cent accurate and
will cost less than three dollars.

The challenge of peacekeepers as vectors of HIV
is not largely, or even primarily, the burden of DPKO,
but the Department should become more engaged.
Prevention, testing, identification, treatment and
education - all are squarely on the shoulders of the
nations that contribute troops to the peacekeeping
operations.

Resolution 1308 (2000) calls on the troop
contributors to create effective strategies for
HIV/AIDS education, prevention, voluntary and
confidential testing, counselling and treatment of
personnel.

The Defense Department of the United States was
last year - the current fiscal year - given $10 million
additionally by Congress for the first time to assist
other nations with this task. Ten million dollars is not a
lot, but in this particular field it can be very helpful. So
now, for the first time, the United States Department of
Defense has joined in the effort to assist the militaries
of other nations. I am very pleased about that. I worked
directly with Secretary of Defense Cohen and the
Congress to get that $10 million, and I hope it will be
part of the next budget in the new Administration.

I want to close the section on AIDS simply by
reiterating what I said at the beginning. I am honoured
that I have been part of this effort. I am deeply touched
by the words of Dr. Piot and of the Foreign Minister of
Singapore. I am honoured by the plaque awarded me
this morning, and I hope that the special session of the
General Assembly on AIDS, from 25-27 June, will be a
success and will work not only on the peacekeeping
part of this issue, but on the global issue.

My comments and criticism should be read, and
all of you who have worked with me over the last 17
months know this, not as hostile, but as an attempt to
encourage you to do more.

I think it is fitting that I end this section of my
remarks by quoting Kofi Annan, my great friend and,
in my view, the finest Secretary-General in the history
of the United Nations. I should say parenthetically that
it was Kofi Annan who first suggested that I spend
time on this issue in this job. Our Secretary-General
said
"We know that we came too late to this tragedy. I
know that as Secretary-General of the United
Nations the response has been painfully slow in
the great multilateral community. But finally we
are galvanized. We must make people everywhere
understand that it is not over. It is not about a few
foreign countries far away. It is a threat to an
entire generation; a threat to an entire
civilization."

Let me now close with some personal remarks
about the United Nations, about the Security Council
and about my 17 months in this job.

First, let me begin by thanking all my colleagues
on the Security Council, my friends in the international
Secretariat and my fellow diplomats. The international
civil servants of the Secretariat who work so hard for
Kofi Annan and Louise Frechette have also borne the
brunt of the pressure and occasional criticism from me,
including this morning. That is my job. My job was to
encourage you to do better. But I am always aware of
the fact that many of you are overworked and
understaffed, particularly in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and I admire and appreciate
your good work. This is particularly true of the refugee
workers and peacekeepers, the staff of UNAIDS, and
the World Food Programme and all the specialized
agencies that we have seen in such awfully difficult
places as Kupang, in West Timor, and Atambua, where
three brave members of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees were
slaughtered last year, one of them an American; it is
true of the brave people who live in places like Luanda,
under intolerable conditions, that they do not need to
work in; but are there because they care; and of the
people who have worked for the United Nations all
over the world. That is what we are here to support,
and there is no nobler cause.

Secondly, I want to address my friends in the red
seats - in the diplomatic corps. I have said before
publicly - and I say again today - that in 38 years in
and out of the Government, this is the best diplomatic
corps, from a professional point of View, that I have
ever worked with. There are more world-class
diplomats - professionals in the best sense of the
word - around this table, in this group - although
some are not here today - than I could possibly name.
The quality of the diplomats is extraordinary, and their
commitment to what we are doing is extraordinary.

I understand fully why we differed many times on
issues. People keep saying to me, "What's wrong with
the United Nations?"; and I say, "What United Nations
do you mean? The United Nations has 189 Members,
and each ambassador is representing his or her
country's national interests." The "collective will of
mankind" is a nice phrase, but it is meaningless when
we are up against the complexities of the problems that
we have dealt with here.

All have represented their countries with great
skill. In many ways I most admire some of the
ambassadors with whom I have had the most serious
confrontations, for the skill and generosity with which
we fought a battle, won or lost it, and moved on to the
next battle as friends and colleagues. There is not a
member of the Security Council that has not differed
with the United States on some major issue in the past
17 months. In fact, within the past 24 hours we
discussed an issue on which the United States was
completely isolated; my friends to my left and right,
from Bangladesh and the United Kingdom, were
hammering us and, because we are very reasonable
people, we gave up.

We all differ; that is what we are here for.
Openness in the United Nations, and more transparency
and flexibility, in which we put outcome ahead of
process is important. My greatest criticism of this
institution, really, is about the dominance of process
over outcome. The United Nations has its own
language, as we all know. "Permanent" means
"temporary", as in my job. "Temporary" means
"permanent", as in Israel's membership in the Group of
Western and other States. When anyone says to me that
it is a question of principle, I always know that it is a
question of process. That is the way the United Nations
works. But put outcome over process, and we will
accomplish even more. That is what we did here today.
There was a procedure that did not allow for a health
issue in the Security Council; we broke through, and
now we are having a productive discussion which will
save lives. We can do that on very many other issues.

So I want to thank the diplomatic corps; they are
an exceptional group of people. I cherish their
friendship, as does my wife, Kati. By the way, we want
to make a public service announcement: we lived in
New York before this job; we are going to stay in New
York. We are New Yorkers, and we hope to see all of
you and continue our friendship.

I also want to say to the Secretary-General - and
I hope that the Deputy Secretary-General will convey
this to him - that it has been my greatest honour and
privilege not only to call Kofi Annan a friend, but to
work under his leadership and under that of the Deputy
Secretary-General and her colleagues. Without
question, he is the finest Secretary-General in this
Organization's history. I am sure that I speak for almost
everyone else - I hope, everyone else in this
Chamber - and the whole United Nations community
when I ask her to thank him on my behalf for his
tireless efforts on behalf of the world's needy, hungry
and forgotten.

Representing anyone's nation in the United
Nations is an awesome responsibility and one that must
not be taken lightly. What we do matters; what we do
not do - what we fail to do - can also matter. Day in
and day out we are confronted with questions that
challenge our collective conscience - questions of war
and peace, life and death. We are confronted daily with
issues as stark and grave as they are unimaginable:
ethnic cleansing, war crimes, genocide - dire issues
that demand not only our attention but our answers. We
have confronted these regularly while I have been here,
in East Timor, Kosovo, Sierra Leone, the Horn of
Africa, the Congo, the Middle East and elsewhere. The
Council will continue to address these issues after I
leave. We have addressed these issues, and also added
HIV/AIDS to the agenda, as well as international
terrorism. The record is not perfect and, more
importantly, the record is not complete. But I think that
progress has been made. Again, being an ambassador
in the Security Council is not only an honour, it is a
responsibility, and, occasionally a burden. But I am
delighted to have shared it with all members, and their
distinguished predecessors, and to have participated in
discussions in this historic Chamber where history has
been written for over half a century.

In the course of the events that we dealt with,
people may have occasionally been annoyed, or
perhaps even offended, by my persistence on issues.
But I know that they understand that, in the words of
the movie The Godfather, it was never personal. We
pushed because we believed in our issues. We
compromised when we could not win. We formed
coalitions which were quite unusual at times. We
respect the Organization and the sovereignty of every
nation here. I am touched by their friendship. But we
must remember that we are not here on behalf of
ourselves, or even entirely on behalf of the
Governments that give us instructions. We are here to
fulfil, or try to fulfil, the hopes and dreams of billions
of people who look to the United Nations, as I did
when I was a child, as a beacon of hope. That belief
remains.

I asked my mother to come here today because
she brought me to this building over 50 years ago,
when it was being built, and when it was a great hope
for the world's population. I hope that she feels that,
while it may not have lived up to all of her and my
father's dreams, it has done a good job. I think the
United Nations is stronger today than it was two years
ago. I think that, most importantly, the United States
support for the United Nations is much stronger, as
those who were generous enough to come to
Washington with me 10 days ago for the hearings
before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee saw. I
think that the future looks brighter for the United
Nations if you persevere.

So I thank you. Your work - our work - is not
finished. I leave with great hope and encouragement
that you will keep it going.

