The President (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania,
His Excellency Mr. Lemrabott Sidi Mahmoud Ould
Cheikh Ahmed. I welcome him and invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (Mauritania)
(interpretation from Arabic): May I first of all
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I should like to
thank you and the other members of the Council for
acceding to the request of the Arab Group and for holding
this meeting. I should like also to pay tribute to the close
ties that bind our two countries. In addition, I should like
 

to acknowledge the exceptional role played by your
predecessor, His Excellency the Ambassador of Germany,
during his presidency of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting today to consider this
grave situation, which results from the latest measures taken
by the Israeli authorities. These have as their goal, among
other things, opening a tunnel under the Haram Al-Sharif
in the Holy City of Jerusalem. This is but one link in the
chain of provocations and harassment against the
Palestinian people, which runs counter to the spirit and the
letter of the peace accords concluded by the Palestinian
Authority and the Government of Israel. My country, which
condemns these measures, would like to reaffirm here that
it is convinced that peace in the Middle East can be just,
comprehensive and lasting only if Israel withdraws from the
occupied Palestinian territories, including the Arab city of
Jerusalem, and if it guarantees to the Palestinian people the
right of self-determination as well as its right to an
independent State and to exercise it inalienable and
legitimate rights. There can be no true peace until Israel
withdraws from the Golan and Lebanon.

It is important here to recall the unanimous Arab
position, as adopted by the Arab summit in June: that the
peace process is a strategic option that requires the same
commitment from Israel. That is why Israel must comply
with the rules and resolutions underlying the peace process
and honour its commitments. In this regard, and in order to
overcome current obstacles and guarantee the continuation
of the peace process, my country requests the Council to
take the necessary steps in dealing with the consequences
of the latest decisions taken by the Israeli authorities, and
it also asks for a return to the negotiations with regard to
Palestinian-Syrian issues and for respect for the principle of
land for peace and the principles of other Security Council
resolutions.

The Security Council today must discharge its
responsibilities in accordance with the United Nations
Charter and take the necessary steps to restore all rights to
their legitimate holders. Permanent members of the Security
Council should also assume their role in ensuring a lasting,
equitable and just peace, opening up a new era guaranteeing
understanding and cooperation among all the States in the
Middle East.

The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the kind words he
addressed to me.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Brazil in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr.
Amorim (Brazil) took the seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.


