At the outset, I would like to congratulate Russia for its successful presidency of the Security Council this month. We appreciate your efforts, Sir, and those of your predecessor. I would like also to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing. The Kingdom of Morocco is deeply concerned about the situation of the Palestinian people. The coronavirus disease pandemic and its repercussions exacerbate the economic, humanitarian, and social crises in the region. His Majesty King Mohammed VI, as the Chair of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, stands with the Palestinian people in their quest to achieve their legitimate right to establish an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and reaffirms the importance of ending settlement activity. The Palestinian people are suffering under the Israeli occupation of their territory, daily violations of their legitimate rights, and activities on their land that flout internationally recognized resolutions and international humanitarian law. The Kingdom of Morocco expresses its concern at the advancement of nearly 5,000 housing units by Israel in the West Bank. Settlement activities are a violation of international law and one of the major hindrances to peace. They threaten the possibility of reaching a viable two-State solution. Morocco rejects any unilateral steps that would undermine the legal and historical status of Jerusalem, Al-Quds Al-Sharif, as a holy city, and attaches great importance to its spiritual significance, as well as its special vocation as a city of peace. I wish to recall the Al-Quds Call, signed by His Majesty King Mohammed VI and His Holiness Pope Francis, during His Holiness's visit to Morocco in March 2019, aimed at promoting and enhancing the specific multi-faith character of the holy city, its spiritual dimension and its special identity. My country reiterates its strong support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its mandate. UNRWA plays a vital role in supporting the education, health and social services of millions of Palestinian refugees in the West Bank and continues to do so, especially under the challenging circumstances of the coronavirus disease pandemic. For its part, the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency, the executive branch in the field of the Al-Quds Committee, continues to support the city's people through a range of key projects concerning, in particular, cultural and urban heritage conservation, social assistance and the preservation of the Palestinian national archives. In conclusion, the international community should step up its efforts to bring the Palestinians and Israelis back to the negotiating table to achieve a two-State solution within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine.
