Mr. Skoog (Sweden): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February 2011,
I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the
same resolution. The report covers the period from
29 August to 16 November 2017, during which time
the Committee met once in informal consultations and
conducted additional work via the silence procedure.

At the outset, I would like to note that, based on
the requests of the Libyan Government, on 20 and
31 October, respectively, the Committee renewed
the listings of the Capricorn and the Lynn S vessels
for a further period of 90 days each. Pursuant to
information received from the Panel of Experts on
Libya, the Committee also updated the most recently
known locations of those vessels on its sanctions list.
As the Council will recall, the vessels were included
on the sanctions list for attempting to illicitly export
gasoil from Libya. During the reporting period, the
Committee also responded to a request for guidance
from Egypt on the scope of the measures contained in
paragraphs 10 (a) and 10 (b) of resolution 2146 (2014),
as they relate to vessels transiting the Suez Canal.

With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
approved two requests for exemption, submitted under
paragraph 9 (c) ofresolution 1970 (2011). Those requests
came from the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and the Netherlands, respectively.
The Committee also received, and did not object to,
a notification submitted under paragraph 13 (b) of
resolution 1970 (2011) from UNSMIL, and received
two post-delivery notifications from the Mission.
There was no agreement on the Committee on follow-
up action with regard to recommendation 5 contained
in the final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2017/466),
which relates to the arms embargo.

With regard to the assets freeze, the Committee
sought further clarification on an exemption request,
submitted by Switzerland pursuant to paragraph 19 (b)
ofresolution 1970 (2011). The Committee also continued
its consideration of an exemption request submitted
by Canada, without reference to any specific
exemption provision.

The Committee is also considering technical
updates to its guidelines for the conduct of its work.
The previous time such an exercise was undertaken
was in October 2011.

Finally, on 10 November, the Committee convened
informal consultations jointly with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan on the subject of the presence and activities of
Darfuri armed groups in Libya and South Sudan. That
was an initiative of the Chair of the 1591 Committee
following his visit to the Sudan in May 2017. During
the discussion, the Panels of Experts assisting the
three Committees shared their findings on the illicit
cross-border activities of the Darfuri armed groups,
including fighting as mercenaries for different sides
in Libya, engaging in actions that violated the arms
embargo in relation to Libya, and participating in or
facilitating fuel smuggling and migrant trafficking
in Libya. Committee members exchanged views on
the matter.

