The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.

Monsigneur Kassas (spoke in Arabic): The Holy
See commends the presidency of the People's Republic
of China for bringing today's topic to the attention of
the Security Council and the international community.

Notwithstanding the multiple challenges facing the
Middle East today, the Israeli-Palestinian peace process
cannot be allowed to slip out of the top priorities of
the international community and the Security Council.
The Holy See wishes to reiterate its firm support for
the two-State solution, which would allow the State of
Israel and a Palestinian State to exist side by side in
peace within internationally recognized borders. Ifboth
Israel and Palestine are to enjoy security, prosperity
and peaceful coexistence, there is no alternative to a
negotiated settlement leading to a mutually agreed
solution directly negotiated between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, with the firm and even-handed support of
the international community.

For that process to take place and succeed, Israelis
and Palestinians must agree on substantial steps to
reduce tensions and de-escalate the violence on the
ground. Both sides must refrain from actions, including
with regard to settlements, that contradict their stated
commitment to a negotiated solution.

The two-State solution will also require all the
Palestinian factions to show united political will and
work together to address the needs of their people. A
united Palestinian front would prove the commitment
of the Palestinians to a peacefully negotiated settlement
and would be key to the economic prosperity, social
cohesion and political stability ofa Palestinian State.

The Holy See deeply regrets the loss of life and
property in many parts of the Middle East caused
by wars and conflicts, particularly in Syria, Yemen
and in the northern region of Iraq, where the tragic
humanitarian situation calls for renewed commitment
by everyone to arrive at a political solution to those
conflicts. Pope Francis deeply appreciates the tireless
efforts of those who are working to find a political
solution to the conflict in Syria. He encourages all
actors to work towards a Syrian-led political process
leading to a peaceful and inclusive transition, based on
the principles of the Geneva communique of 30 June
2012 (S/2012/522, annex).

Christian communities have existed for more than
2,000 years in the region, and they have peacefully
coexisted with other communities. In that context, the
Holy See urges the international community, through
the Security Council, not to forget those communities.
The Holy See believes that the rule of law, including
respect for religious freedom and equality before the
law, based on the principle of citizenship and regardless
of one's race, ethnic origin or religion, is fundamental
for the achievement and maintenance of peaceful and
fruitful coexistence among individuals, communities
and nations.

We must not forget Jerusalem, a city sacred to Jews,
Christians and Muslims. The historical status quo ofthe
holy sites is a matter of profound sensitivities. The Holy
See confirms its position in line with the international
community and renews its support for a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the question of the city of
Jerusalem. In that regard, the Holy See reiterates the
importance of an internationally guaranteed special
status in order to ensure the freedom of religion and of
conscience of all its inhabitants, as well as secure, free
and unhindered access to the holy places by the faithful
of all religions and nationalities.

Only last Sunday, during the Angelus prayer in
Saint Peter's Square, Pope Francis, who is deeply
concerned about the situation in Jerusalem, made a
strong appeal for moderation and dialogue, praying
that all may be inspired by the resolve to work for
reconciliation and peace.

We appeal to the Council to act urgently on its
obligations in order to restore hope in the possibility of
peace and to make that peace a reality.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.


