Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate today.
Japan has made an important contribution over recent
years to the development of Security Council working
methods, including through your leadership on the
presidential note contained in document S/2006/507,
which has helpfully codified and clarified our working
practices. Our guiding principle should be
effectiveness, and I would like to highlight seven
points, picking up the themes of your concept paper for
this debate (S/2010/165).

First, we welcome the positive trends identified
in your paper towards greater transparency of Council
working methods. A particular responsibility falls on
the presidency each month to keep other Member
States informed of the Council's work. We have made
such briefings a priority during our recent presidencies
and encourage others to make this a consistent practice.

Second, we need to make sure that the current
arrangements for meetings of the Council in these new
temporary premises do not impede interaction between
Council members and other Member States.

Third, we need to balance transparency with
effectiveness. The Security Council needs to be able to
discuss some sensitive matters out of the public eye.
But when we do meet in private the onus is on us as
Council members to make sure that we have a
genuinely interactive discussion. On occasion, our
private consultations differ little from formal meetings
in the Chamber. I hope that we can make a collective
effort to make the informal consultations a forum for
real debate. The Secretariat should help by keeping its
briefings short and operationally focused.

Fourth, broadening the range of views available
to the Security Council can often help its effectiveness.
The United Kingdom and France have led efforts to
improve the Council's dialogue with troop- and police-
contributing countries. Under our presidency in August
last year, the Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2009/24) which reaffirmed the Council's
intention to further strengthen its cooperation with
10-32351
those countries and the need to build on this progress.
We commend the current presidency for providing
summaries of troop-contributing country meetings at
the start of Council discussions. But it is not just the
troop-contributing countries. As the Permanent
Representative of Austria has said, we should also seek
more focused advice from the Peacebuilding
Commission as we discuss peacekeeping mandates.

Fifth, we welcome the recent innovation of
informal interactive dialogues, which has widened the
scope for interaction with non-members. This has
enabled the Council to discuss sensitive issues in a
flexible format, and we encourage further use of such
informal formats for Council meetings.

Sixth, Security Council missions can be an
effective tool for the Council to understand and
influence high-priority issues. We now need to
consider how to maximize their operational
effectiveness. The Council must be clear from the
outset on its objectives and must design the format of
the mission accordingly, including, where appropriate,
by sending missions composed of a limited number of
Council members.

Seventh, the Council should pay greater attention
to conflict prevention. There should be a greater
openness to discussions in the Council on situations of
emerging conflict, so that we can determine an
effective preventive response. We would like to see
more frequent briefings by the Secretariat, on an ad
hoc basis, on situations of emerging concern. The
Secretary-General and his senior officials should be
invited to brief the Security Council as a matter of
routine when they return from visits to countries on the
Council's agenda or other countries of concern. We
would also support regular briefings from the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide and Mass Atrocities.

In conclusion, note 8/2006/507 covers a lot of
ground, and today the Council will hear many
proposals for how it might be improved. It is right that
the Council's procedures as a whole should be
reviewed, but we would encourage you, Mr. President,
to identify for agreement by the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions a short list of priority areas for
implementation, which it would be the responsibility of
future presidencies to take forward. We look forward to
participating actively in that ongoing debate.

10-3235]
