Ms. Kang: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief it on the latest humanitarian
developments in Yemen on behalf of the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien.

We welcome the cessation of hostilities, which is
a long-awaited respite at a time of appalling suffering
and trauma in Yemen. More than 6,400 people have
now been killed, and over 30,500 have been injured.
Displacement has spiked, with some 2.8 million people
having been forced from their homes. Livelihoods have
been ravaged. Some 14.1 million people now need help
accessing adequate health care as a result of a year of
intensified conflict. The lack of supplies, medicines,
electricity, fuel for generators, and staff or equipment
have caused health services to decline across the
country. Entire governorates have been engulfed in
relentless violence. For example, in Ta'izz governorate,
intensified fighting in and around Ta'izz City since
mid-March has left scores of people dead and wounded
and has also significantly hampered relief work.

Children have been particularly affected; they are
among the most vulnerable in any society but they are
all the more so in Yemen. Up until 10 April, when the
cessation took effect, an average of six children had
been killed or maimed in hostilities each day since
March last year. Secondary effects of war and neglect
also kill. UNICEF estimates that some 10,000 children
under the age of 5 may have died in the past year from
preventable diseases, and this in addition to the 40,000
children who die in Yemen every year before their
fifth birthday.

Nor can we ignore the dismal reality that women face
in Yemen today, which is a crisis that barely registers on
the world's radar. Over half a million pregnant women
lack access to health care that would ensure safe births,

and, although notoriously underreported in Yemen, the
number of recorded cases of gender-based violence is
steadily increasing. And at the time when the burden
upon the women of Yemen is increasing, with women
the primary providers for nearly a third of all displaced
households across the country, over 40 per cent of
women-run businesses have closed in the past year.
This paints a very bleak picture, but there is
some cause for very cautious optimism. The cessation
of hostilities is bringing calm to many areas of the
country, reducing the crippling violence that has
devastated communities. In addition, following efforts
by the United Nations and partners to prepare to scale
up operations where possible in anticipation of the
cessation of hostilities, humanitarian organizations
have begun to respond in areas that were previously
difficult to access. For example, in Sa'ada, UNICEF
was able to restart the rehabilitation of a water facility
in Kitaf district serving some 10,000 people, which had
been damaged in air strikes. As a result of the calm,
parents in the governorate are also more willing to send
their children to school again, and efforts are being
undertaken to reopen around 100 schools. And unlike
in previous efforts in Sa'ada, the calm has allowed for
vaccination teams to go door to door, increasing the
number of children reached.

In Ta'izz City, one of the most severely affected by
hostilities, three mobile health and nutrition teams have
been deployed, including to districts in the enclave,
and partners will be delivering medical supplies for
over 130,000 people. Some 240,000 people are now
receiving food assistance in the Al Jawf, Al Dhale'e
and Ta'izz governorates. As the cessation of hostilities
continues to strengthen, the humanitarian community
will similarly increase assistance on the ground in the
most affected areas.

At the same time, United Nations agencies and
partners continue to ramp up ongoing relief efforts
across the country. Coinciding with the start of the
cessation of hostilities, a nationwide polio vaccination
campaign targeting around 5 million children was
successfully launched with the support of UNICEF,
the World Health Organization and the World Bank.
This extraordinary effort has involved more than
19,000 mobile vaccination teams of over 46,000 health
workers and some 5,000 vehicles that were rented to
facilitate monitoring across all governorates. Around
3.5 million people are receiving food assistance each
month from the World Food Programme. So far this
year, around 2.2 million people have been reached with
health interventions in 22 governorates through the
procurement of medicines, the provision of trauma kits,
immunizations, and the maintaining of an uninterrupted
supply-chain management system. Some 2.3 million
people have been reached with emergency water and
sanitation programmes, and United Nations Population
Fund has this month established two shelters in Yemen
where survivors of gender-based violence can receive
legal, psychosocial and health services.

Millions of fearful, innocent civilians across
Yemen, on whichever side of the conflict lines they
reside, are being reached, and lives are being saved. But
this is hardly enough. The cessation of hostilities must
be made to hold.

Despite these efforts by humanitarian agencies,
vital operations continue to be hampered by a variety of
bureaucratic impediments, principally by the authorities
on the ground. Missions are frequently cancelled due
to lack of clearance. Interference with implementing-
partner selection is common. There has been no
headway in negotiating the start of the nationwide
emergency food-security and nutrition assessment,
which has been blocked for seven months now, and
there remain long lists of critical humanitarian supplies
sitting in warehouses or in ports awaiting clearance by
the authorities. These include United Nations armoured
vehicles, along with approximately 100 protective vests
and helmets required for United Nations staff to expand
and operate safely, particularly on missions outside
Sana'a.

Progress is also required towards simplifying the
current deconfliction mechanism with the coalition. For
operations to meaningfully expand during the cessation
and beyond, as well as for existing humanitarian relief
efforts to consistently reach those most in need, these
impediments must be immediately removed.

In that context, I underscore that the terms for
the cessation of hostilities not only include a halt
in hostilities but also obligate the parties to allow
unhindered humanitarian assistance. I remind all
parties that this facilitation is an obligation under
international humanitarian law. While air strikes,
rockets and ground fighting indiscriminately kill
civilians, these administrative obstacles are only
nominally less devastating, as they directly contribute
to hunger, sickness, deprivation and death.

Operations are also being impacted financially.
Now into the second quarter of 2016, the Yemen
humanitarian response plan remains critically
underfunded, at only 16 per cent. To date, $296 million
has been received against the $1.8 billion requested. In
order for humanitarian agencies, both United Nations
bodies and non- governmental organizations, to continue
their work, more funding is required now. Because it is
so critical that this assistance reach everyone in need
across the country with impartiality, it is important that
funding be given through the humanitarian response
plan released earlier this year.

Commercial imports have notably decreased over
the past two months, primarily because of delays in the
coalition clearance process, in particular for vessels
trying to reach the port at Al Hudaydah. Delays in the
delivery of commercial goods into Yemen have a direct
humanitarian consequence. Constricting the pipeline of
food, fuel and medical supplies into the country means
that less will be available for civilian consumption
and that what is delivered will be available only at an
inflated price. For example, in February, only 15 per
cent of the monthly fuel requirement was delivered,
while food imports fell by a quarter. As a consequence,
prices rose and civilians faced greater hardship.

The Steering Committee of the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism (UNVIM)
met for the first time on 11 April, to be followed by a
second meeting on 18 April. In the past 12 hours, the
representative from the Government of Yemen to the
Steering Committee affirmed to the United Nations that
the Government of Yemen had agreed to the UNVIM
head office being located in Djibouti. It is now a matter
ofurgency that, during the upcoming meeting, UNVIM
be fully operationalized as a single mechanism for the
clearance of commercial vessels into Yemen. To delay
further will have far-reaching consequences, increasing
the already severe humanitarian needs.

Despite the overwhelming human tragedy that
characterizes Yemen today, we maintain hope that the
parties to the conflict will choose the only path to a
solution, namely, negotiation and dialogue over the
coming weeks, no matter how challenging that path may
seem. There is no military solution. We will continue to
deliver humanitarian assistance to those in need, but
what is needed above all in Yemen is peace - peace for
nearly three and a half million children, the country's
next generation, to return to school; for the displaced
to return home; for livelihoods to recover and for the
rebuilding of social service infrastructure, heritage
sites and communities.

For the people of Yemen, peace is not something
abstract; it is vital to their survival. I call on the parties
to redouble their commitment to finding a negotiated
political settlement to the conflict, and call upon all
Member States and the Council to continue to support
such genuine efforts. Meanwhile, as the process
develops, we cannot simply wait and hope. Action is
required. Parties to the conflict must recognize their
responsibility to protect the civilians of Yemen and
facilitate the unfettered delivery of impartial aid to the
people in need. Similarly, the delivery of commercial
goods to the country must be better managed through
the UNVIM. process to relieve the acute price and
availability pressures on daily necessities. Building
barriers around the people of Yemen - through
access restrictions, delivery delays or visa denials for
humanitarian staff- is not in the interest of peace or of
the Yemeni people. It will prolong the suffering of those
in need and drive more and more communities into real
and life-threatening risk. The cessation of hostilities is
a crucial window of action, both for the parties to the
conflict to consider peace and for those civilians caught
in its grasp to receive much-needed aid.

