Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): It is
always an honour for me to brief the Security Council
on developments in Mali, in this case in the light of the

latest quarterly report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2019/782).
First of all, I would like to warmly congratulate His
Excellency Mr. Jerry Mathews Matjila, Ambassador of
the Republic of South Africa, both on his country's
assumption of the presidency of the Council and on
the outstanding way in which he conducts the work of
the Council.

I would also like to express our deep appreciation
to the delegation of Russian Federation for its excellent
leadership of the Council in the month of September.
I would be remiss ifI did not reiterate here the deep
gratitude of His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, President of the Republic of Mali, as well as
the deep gratitude of the Government and the people
of Mali, to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his
strong commitment to the stabilization and development
of both Mali and the Sahel region,

I would like to add my thanks to all the members of
the Council, the countries that have contributed troops
and personnel to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the African
Union, the European Union and the Economic
Community of West African States for their decisive
and valued support to Mali during this particularly
difficult time.

I would also be remiss ifI did not commend the
tireless work carried out by Ambassador Ahmed
Boutache of Algeria in his role as Chair of the
Monitoring Committee for the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. I also thank Ambassador
Jose Singer Weisinger, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017), concerning Mali, both for his briefing and the
plans he has made to visit Mali next week.

The Government of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General under consideration. I thank
my brother Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali, for
his briefing and update on the latest developments in
Mali since the finalization of the report. I have also
taken note of the comments and high expectations that
the members of the Council just expressed. I will be
conveying them to the Government of Mali and to all
Malian stakeholders. For my part, I would like to make
several remarks on behalf of my Government.

Exactly 12 days ago, on 25 September, the President
of the Republic of Mali, his Burkinabe counterpart, in
his capacity as the current President of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, and the Secretary-General of our
Organization co-chaired a high-level meeting on Mali
and the Sahel. It was an opportunity to take stock of the
progress made and assess the challenges and consider
perspectives in Mali and the region.

The Government, led by the President of the
Republic, remains today more than ever firmly
committed to implementing the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, the outcome of the
Algiers process. That political will is reflected in the
substantial progress we have made in implementing the
Agreement. I am delighted that the Secretary-General
has noted that progress, as did many members of the
Council in their statements this morning.

Therefore, with regard to political and institutional
reform and after two unsuccessful attempts, the
Government is now focusing on the timely organization
of an inclusive national dialogue whose overall
objective is to formulate a rigorous diagnosis of the
problems that have plagued our country for more than
three decades and to analyse, in a participatory and
inclusive manner, the causes and consequences of those
problems with a View to proposing solutions to end the
crisis through a concrete plan of action and timelines
for its implementation.

1 am pleased to inform the Council that the
dialogue has already begun in Mali. Talks between 611
communes were launched yesterday and are ongoing
at this very moment. Consultations at the level of the
cercles and communes of the district of Bamako are
scheduled for 14 and 15 October - in one week's
time. Dialogue at the regional level, in the district of
Bamako and among Malian Embassies and consulates
abroad, will be held on 21 and 22 October. Those steps
demonstrate that we are fulfilling that commitment,
which is particularly dear to our hearts, so that Malians
have the opportunity to talk to one other and take
ownership of the peace process.

The overarching inclusive national dialogue will be
held soon - according to the Secretary-General, it will
be held towards the end of October or, at the latest, at the
beginning of November. Again, that shows that we are
taking steps in the right direction and that we remain
firmly committed to creating a framework for Malians
to converse and take ownership of the peace process. I
must state here that one of the specific objectives of the
inclusive national dialogue is to discuss institutional
and political reform, including the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, the outcome of the Algiers
process. I also wish to stress that the inclusive national
dialogue is intended to foster greater ownership of the
peace process by the Malian people.
I am pleased to inform the Council that tangible
progress has also been made in the area of defence
and security issues. In the context of the establishment
of the reconstituted national army, nearly 2,000 ex-
combatant members of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism have been registered in the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. Half of those fighters have just completed
an updated predeployment training cycle and those new
members of the reconstituted national army are waiting
to be deployed on the basis of a consensual deployment
plan that is currently being finalized.

In addition, the signatory parties agreed on
the modalities for the distribution of ranks and
responsibilities among ex-combatant commanding
officers who will join the reconstituted national army.
Meanwhile, the process of security sector reform is
ongoing and gaining momentum with the adoption of
a plan of action by the National Council for Security
Sector Reform.

With regard to the development issues in the
northern regions of Mali, the President of the Republic
has promulgated all the texts constituting the legal and
institutional framework of the northern development
zone. We have also created the Sustainable Development
Fund, which is the financial instrument responsible for
implementing the development strategy for the northern
regions of Mali, to which the Government has already
allocated $72 million.

As of 28 June, as recognized by the Secretary-
General, the Government had earmarked 21 per
cent of its national budget - out of the 30 per cent
planned - for implementing the Agreement. In that
regard, too, we have made tangible progress. The State's
financial efforts serve yet again to demonstrate of will
of the Malian Government to honour its commitments
under the Agreement.

In terms of national reconciliation, I can assure
Council members that an important step has also been
taken in that area. The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission has to date registered 14,191 depositions
from victims, while public hearings are scheduled
to begin in December. Moreover, the mandate of the
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission has been
extended until 31 December 2021 and now covers all
incidents that occurred in Mali from our independence
to the present day.

In the same vein, the President of the Republic
promulgated the law of national understanding in July.
Admittedly, the law exonerates persons who committed
or were accomplices to crimes in the context of the
painful events that occurred in Mali from January
2012, in accordance with the recommendations of
the Conference of National Understanding. However,
the law does not constitute a guarantee of impunity.
On the contrary - the law of national understanding
specifically excludes war crimes, crimes against
humanity, rape and crimes not subject to the statute
of limitations. It also provides for recognition and
reparation measures for the victims of those events,
as well as a reintegration programme for the collateral
victims of that painful experience endured by
our people.

It is clear that genuine progress is being made in
the implementation of the Agreement, although I am
aware that Malian stakeholders must live up to their
commitments and redouble their efforts to honour the
relevant provisions of the Agreement so that our entire
people can fully enjoy the dividends of peace.

I understand the impatience of our partners
regarding the delays in the Agreement's implementation.
However, it must be kept in mind that the implementation
of the Agreement continues to be impeded by a number
of significant challenges, such as the deterioration
of the security environment and the lack of financial
resources, particularly in terms of funding pledged by
our partners.

I therefore take this opportunity to appeal to our
partners to honour their commitments so that we can
expedite the implementation of the Agreement. The
Government remains firmly committed to advancing
its implementation in a timely manner, as evidenced by
the adoption of a new road map for the Agreement's
implementation in July by both the Government and the
signatory parties.

The situation in the regions of central Mali remains
a source of major concern for the Government. The
tragic events of the night of 30 September to 1 October
in Mondoro and Boulekessi are a bitter reminder that
our adversaries - terrorist groups, drug traffickers,
human traffickers and others - are determined to
further destabilize Mali, its neighbouring countries
and the region as a whole. Worse still, in addition to
sowing terror in our common space on a daily basis,
those forces of evil are exploiting our populations and
turning them against each other. The factions created
and manipulated by those criminal groups are fuelling
the intercommunal violence that is inflicting deep
suffering upon our nation.
The Government is fully aware of the complexity
of the situation that is developing in central Mali. That
is why it has opted for a comprehensive approach by
adopting an integrated security plan for the regions of
central Mali. The plan provides for political measures,
including dialogue among communities, strengthening
the security apparatus to protect people and their
property, and providing peace dividends to our people,
in particular basic social services.

I wish to emphasize that the Government remains
very committed to accountability and the fight against
impunity. Thus, following the violence that the centre
experienced during the first half of the current year,
several alleged perpetrators were arrested and are now
in the hands of the courts to answer for their actions.
In addition, I also wish to reiterate the Government's
resolve to respect and uphold human rights. Indeed,
justice is systematically activated whenever cases
of human rights violations are reported. It is true,
however, that security conditions, the absence of
competent public services in certain localities and the
lack of expertise in some cases do not favour the rapid
conclusion of some open procedures.

The regional dimension of the Malian crisis is
another major challenge to the implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It
is the very foundation of the commitment of the G-5
Sahel member States to stabilizing our region. As I said
earlier, the proliferation of terrorist attacks in recent
weeks in the Sahel region underscores the urgent need
for the international community to work more closely
with us. In that regard, I welcome the heartfelt message
sent by the President of the Security Council. Mali and
the Sahel are a bulwark against the common threat we
face from terrorism. If it were to collapse, the rest of
the world would suffer. I therefore ask the Council to
stand with us and support us in addressing our common
challenges. That is my appeal.

That having been said, our region is ready to play
its part. We have invested our own material, human
and financial resources in implementing the G-5 Sahel
mandate, and we are determined to assume our share
of the responsibility. However, we are aware that no
amount of security alone can overcome those challenges.
That is why, alongside the security component, we are
working together to implement the Priority Investment
Programme to create economic, social and development
opportunities for our populations, particularly our
youth. In that regard, I welcome the ECOWAS decision
to strengthen its support for our common efforts.
In closing, I wish to commend the outstanding
work of the women and men of MINUSMA on the
ground, under the able leadership of Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif. I know they work in extremely difficult
conditions - and I know what I am talking about, for it
is my country. They are far from their homes and their
families. I pay tribute to the sacrifices they make every
day to help us. The recent attacks on MINUSMA, on
6 October in Aguelhok and Bandiagara, which claimed
the life of a Chadian Blue Helmet and wounded five
others, remind us of those sacrifices. I address the
heartfelt condolences of the Malian people to the family
of the late hero and to the brotherly Chadian people. I
wish a speedy recovery to the wounded, including the
Togolese Blue Helmets hurt at Bandiagara.

Similarly, I pay homage to all the victims of
the Malian crisis - civil and military, foreign and
Malian - who have fallen on the field of honour in
our country. I reiterate the gratitude of the Government
and the people of Mali to the French Force Barkhane, to
the troop-contributing countries of MINUSMA and to
all partners, multilateral and bilateral, for their tireless
support for Mali and a lasting and final settlement of
the crisis.

