Mr. Lamptey (Ghana): I am honoured to speak before
the Security Council today, and I thank you, Sir, for that
honour.

My Government has deemed it proper that I should
bring before the Council the positive developments in the
Liberian peace process and the enormous financial and
material resources that would be needed for the permanent
establishment of peace and ordered civil life in that country,
as the Council considers the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL).

On 19 August 1995 the Abuja Agreement on Liberia
was signed by all the Liberian parties, both military and
civilian, to supplement the Cotonou and Akosombo
Agreements, as subsequently clarified by the Accra
Agreement.

Following this significant achievement, a cease-fire
went into effect throughout Liberia at midnight on 26
August 1995. To date there has been no major violation of
the cease-fire.

In accordance with the implementation provisions of
the Abuja Agreement, a six-man Council of State, under the
chairmanship of Professor Wilton Sankawulo, was installed
in Monrovia on 1 September 1995 as a Transitional
Government, under the auspices of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), with the
President of the Republic of Ghana and Chairman of the
ECOWAS, His Excellency Flight Lieutenant Jerry John
Rawlings, doing the honours. Present at this emotion-filled
and colourful ceremony were representatives of the other
Heads of State and Government of the West African
subregion: President C. Banana, Organization of African
Unity (OAU) Eminent Person in Liberia; Ambassador Dane
Smith, President Clinton's Special Envoy for Liberia; and
Ambassador Nyakyi, Special Representative of the United
Nations Secretary-General in Liberia.

After many false starts and failures, the six-year old
Liberian civil war, with its devastating impact on the people
of Liberia and the ruinous destruction of the country's
physical infrastructure, is finally being brought to an end.
We at long last can see the light at the end of the tunnel.

The States of the West African subregion,
themselves in dire economic straits, have borne an
enormous burden in trying to contain the Liberian civil
war and to bring peace to that suffering land. Nigeria and
Ghana, especially, have felt compelled to make great
sacrifices to bring the Liberian situation to where it is
today. Our countries are now exhausted.
Thus it is that the United Nations must now assume
its rightful duty in marshalling the financial and material
resources needed to turn the hope of a permanent peace
and ordered civil life in Liberia into reality. Thus it is that
the international community must now shoulder its
responsibility towards Liberia.

It is crucial that the Security Council extend the
mandate of UNOMIL significantly. But beyond this is the
Council's added duty to give support for any measures
proposed by the Secretary-General to obtain the necessary
resources for the tasks ahead. These tasks include the
augmentation of the troop strength of the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in a very significant way
to enable the force to fulfil its mandate to deploy
ECOMOG's forces throughout Liberia; seal all the
borders of Liberia; man all entry points by land, sea or air
in order to ensure that no arms or ammunition are brought
into Liberia; encamp and disarm combatants of all
factions; establish roadblocks to check the movement of
arms and assist in directing refugees and internally
displaced persons; carry out intensive patrols throughout
the country; and carry out confidence patrols to create an
atmosphere conducive to the holding of free and fair
elections.

The process of disarming the combatants is to be
carried out by ECOMOG in conjunction with UNOMIL
and in collaboration with the Transitional Government.
The deployment of ECOMOG and UNOMIL, which is to
take place from 2 October to 14 November 1995, is to be
preceded by the disengagement of the warring forces from
5 September to 26 September 1995. Combatants are to be
moved into assembly and encampment sites from 9
November to 31 December 1995, with disarmament
starting on 1 December 1995.

The estimated financial outlay required by
ECOMOG to fulfil this mandate is $90,588,960. The
details of that outlay have been previously submitted to
the United Nations. UNOMIL, for its part, would need
some $62,894,776 for this assignment. The total
requirements for Liberia will thus be about $153 million.
In order not to take the time of the Council, I am

 

annexing the details of these requirements to this statement,
which, I trust, will form part of the documents of the
Security Council on this issue.

President Rawlings, as Chairman of the ECOWAS,
has just communicated with the Secretary-General on this
matter. I quote part of his fervent appeal as follows:
"the Liberian peace process has now entered the most
sensitive stages of disengagement, encampment,
disarmament and reintegration of ex-combatants into
civilian life. The life and security of each Liberian
would be dependent on the successful implementation
of these programmes. These programmes would
demand the provision of material and financial
resources to, and logistical support for, ECOMOG and
Liberia. It is my ardent hope that you would come to
our aid by convincing the United Nations to assume a
more active role in pursuing peace in Liberia, by
urgently making available the resources I have just
mentioned The urgency surrounding these requests
is based on the need to preserve the positive
momentum for peace among Liberians generated by
the Abuja Peace Accord. Once that momentum is lost,
we would have an uphill task in protecting the peace
of Liberia."

With tenacity and consistency we are, in Liberia, on
the verge of achieving a great victory for the international
community and realizing the hope embodied in the Charter.
Ghana appeals to members of the Security Council to meet
their responsibility.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Wisseh (Liberia)
took a place at the Council table.

