Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
and we appreciate the work of the three Committees.
We are grateful to Ambassador Mayoral, Ambassador
Loj and Ambassador Burian for their well articulated
briefings.

My delegation is pleased to see a well
coordinated modus operandi and interconnectedness
and complementarities among the three Committees.

Sll'V.5446

 
We note in particular that the Monitoring Team of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the panel of experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) are pursuing a common approach on reporting
to Member States. The Committees have found ways to
minimize travel costs by arranging joint trips to Africa,
Asia and Europe and have been jointly considering the
sanctions regimes and effective measures for their
implementation. At the same time they have been
helping reporting and non-reporting States,
coordinating technical assistance to States and
addressing issues that Member States have identified as
important for their implementation efforts.

The visit to my country by the CTED delegation,
led by Mr. Javier Ruperez, from 13 to 17 February, is a
case in point. The delegation was composed of a 1267
Committee member and representatives from other
relevant international organizations, which included
Interpol, the International Civil Aviation Organization
and the International Maritime Organization. The
CTED had useful discussions with Tanzanian
stakeholders on how best to implement resolution 1373
(2001), including through enhanced reporting
obligations for other Committees and exchange of
information on international terrorism.

Tanzania is encouraged by the report on how the
Committees intend to work with relevant international
and regional organizations with a view to helping
Member States in discharging their responsibilities
under other resolutions, namely, resolutions 1455
(2003), 1540 (2004) and 1624 (2005).

We highly commend the CTC's comprehensive
technical assistance implementation plan, the 1267
Committee's partnership in sanctions implementation
and the decision by the 1540 Committee to publish on
its website a legislative database. We believe that the
efforts made by those Committees will improve the
capacity of Member States in the implementation of
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1540 (2004) and 1373 (2001).

Regarding the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
Committee, my delegation wishes to commend the
Committee for courageously embarking on the process
of addressing the thorny issue of listing and delisting
through the revision of the Committee's guidelines.

Of equal importance and concern is the lack of
adequate identifiers on the Consolidated List. There is
a need to expedite the ongoing exercise of refining the
list.

Tanzania is committed to implementing all
relevant resolutions, with the help of the partners and
friends of the United Nations. We fully recognize the
exemplary work and professionalism displayed by the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
which has developed a database for documents and
information.

We were gratified by the useful interventions
made by the Governments of Sweden, Germany and
Switzerland during the 1267 Committee meeting with a
view to improving the quality of the Committee's
Consolidated List. The Committee benefited as a result
of the combined efforts to make the targeted sanctions
more effective.

We recognize the important coordination role
played by the 1540 Committee in preventing the
acquisition by non-State actors of weapons of mass
destruction or related materials and their means of
delivery. The Committee's coordination with the CTC
and the 1267 Committee should be highly commended.

The Committee should be encouraged in its plan
to use its expertise and, in collaboration with the CTC
and the 1267 Committee, to act as a clearing house,
contacting Member States in need of information and
inviting States offering assistance and those needing it
to take a proactive approach, on a bilateral basis or
through international and regional organizations, in
order to contribute to capacity-building. In this context,
the Committee should strive to increase States'
awareness of the availability of such bilateral and
international assistance facilities, in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

