Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Since today
we are considering the suffering of civilians who have
been harmed or displaced by conflict, we take this
opportunity to emphasize the urgency need to help the
more than 20 million people who are currently facing
famine, in large part thanks to conflicts that have been
permitted to continue without consequences and to
restrictions imposed on humanitarian access. Canada
commends the Council for its adoption last year of
resolution 2286 (2016), which requires all parties to
armed conflicts to comply fully with their obligation
to ensure that all medical personnel are respected
and protected, and to facilitate safe and unimpeded
passage for them and their supplies. That sense of
initiative is vital, and the Council has received broad
support from the international community. More than
80 States, including Canada, sponsored the resolution,
demonstrating that this is an issue that resonates deeply.

Today, we are dealing with the grim fact that
attacks on medical facilities in some conflict areas
have become so commonplace that hospitals have to
be fortified to protect them from bombs and artillery
shells, while some have actually had to be moved
underground, even into caves, in order to protect them
from constant bombardments. Moreover, when civilians
are violently and even purposely deprived of the health
care that is crucial to their survival and that of their
communities, it undermines all of our efforts to protect
those under threat.

(spoke in English)

We also acknowledge that this constant violence
poses an additional global threat - that of complacency.
We run the risk that people will lose hope; indeed, we
have already seen the consequences ofthat in the global
refugee crisis. Reinforcing our well-established norms
requires determined leadership, and Canada is taking
the following steps in that regard.

First, together with Switzerland, we are proud
to be the co-Chair of an informal group of States,
based in Geneva, to promote the implementation of
resolution 2286 (2016), thereby providing States with
an opportunity to collaborate on advocacy and promote
best practices.

Secondly, we have continued to condemn attacks
targeting civilians, medical personnel and health-care
facilities. Canada worked in the General Assembly last
year to focus attention on the critical situation in Syria,
including by taking the lead on General Assembly
resolution 71/130, adopted on 9 December, which
condemned attacks on civilians and humanitarian and
medical personnel. We urge the Council to clearly
condemn direct and indiscriminate attacks and to
continue to demand that parties to conflicts comply
with their obligations.

Thirdly, Canada is fully committed to ensuring
that the perpetrators of such crimes, and those who
do not respect international law, are held accountable.
For instance, in the context of Syria, Canada is
supporting and funding evidence collection and
documentation efforts.

Fourthly, Canada's obligations under international
humanitarian law are embedded in Canadian Armed
Forces doctrine and predeployment training, which
we believe is a crucial step that States must undertake.
We urge countries to examine their national legislative
frameworks and consider signing the relevant
international treaties and guidelines for enhancing the
protection of civilians. Those include the Arms Trade
Treaty, to which Canada is currently in the process
of acceding. Canada has also recently endorsed the
Safe Schools Declaration, reaffirming our commitment
to protect children affected by armed conflict.

Member States and the Council must address
persistent violations of international humanitarian law
and end the pervasive climate of impunity. The Council
has important tools for ensuring accountability and
must use them more consistently. We encourage all
Member States to consider the Secretary-General's
positive recommendations. Canada will continue to
lead efforts to enhance the protection of civilians.

