Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses
its gratitude to the presidency of the Security Council
for convening this meeting and for the briefings we just
heard by Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Bintou Keita and the Special Envoy for
the Sudan of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), His Excellency Mr. Ismail Wais,
which have given us a clear picture of the situation in
South Sudan.

The Government of my country is closely following
with much concern the developing situation in South
Sudan since, according to the available reports, the
political and security situation continues to be delicate
and fragile, and the challenges facing the country remain
substantial. Equatorial Guinea is bound to South Sudan
by ties of particular affection. It was no coincidence
that the proclamation of the independence of South
Sudan coincided with His Excellency Mr. Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo's term as President of the African
Union. He personally participated in the historic event
in Juba on 9 July 2011 and made his contribution to
the process. Since that time, we have followed events
in that brotherly country, for which I want to reiterate
our support concerning the peace process and our
commitment to stability and prosperity of South Sudan.

Equatorial Guinea believes that support for the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations is key to continuing mediation efforts
among the opposing parties in South Sudan. The
international community as a whole must step up its
efforts to promote the political process in the country,
which, given recent events, is the only realistic way to
find a just and lasting resolution to the crisis facing a
nation with certain economic potential. It is important
that the parties to the conflict refrain from taking
actions that could worsen the situation, and that they
take measures to implement and honour the signed
Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, which entails the
cessation of hostilities, the protection of civilians,
access to humanitarian aid and an immediate return to
the negotiations table.

Accordingly, the joint statement on the situation
in South Sudan by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
12 January deserves the support of Equatorial Guinea.
Moreover, the outcome of the trilateral meeting among
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
the Chairperson of IGAD and the Secretary-General
on January 27 in Addis Ababa merit the support of
Equatorial Guinea. The Government of South Sudan
must assume a leadership role in the political process
in the country and continue its efforts to end clashes
together with all other actors. We are all aware that,
without the resolute support of the international
community, it will be difficult to overcome the impasse
in South Sudan.

To that end, we believe that the international
community must continue to support current mediation
efforts, especially those of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union, and
look for ways to ensure the success of the new phase of
the High-Level Revitalization Forum process.

The Security Council must speak with one voice
in situations like the that in South Sudan, as well as
in difficult situations in which people are critically
suffering. We must speak with one voice. We must
provide constructive assistance to South Sudan. The
members are convinced of the need to adopt harsh
measures, but, as I said in my statement in January
(see S/PV.8166), we must also pursue other parallel
actions, such as the trip to Juba in December initiated
by Ambassador Nikki Haley. Such actions must be
persistent and continuous. The data concerning the
humanitarian situation are worrying. It is therefore
extremely important that humanitarian aid reach those
who need it the most, and all parties to the conflict must
allow such access without restrictions. That situation,
combined with the massive number of internally
displaced persons fleeing to neighbouring countries,
presupposes the acute suffering of a vulnerable civilian
population who are enduring violations of all kinds.

Lastly, I would like to convey Equatorial Guinea's
support for and acknowledgment of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We highly appreciate its efforts
and contributions to bringing peace and stability in
South Sudan in very difficult and complex conditions,
in which its personnel's lives are put at risk as they are
exposed to potentially fatal attacks.

