Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming your duties as the
President of the Security Council for this month. I
assure you of our delegation's support and cooperation
for the remaining days of your presidency.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge and thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan and Head ofthe United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), and President Festus Mogae, Chair
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
for their service to the people of South Sudan.

I would like to begin by expressing my appreciation
to you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the
Security Council for giving me this opportunity to
share our views on the Secretary-General's letter of
15 September 2017 to the Security Council, and on
his report on the security and humanitarian situation
in South Sudan and the role of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (S/2017/784). Although there
are allegations in the report whose accuracy can be
debated, my intention is not to argue or contest those
allegations; rather, I want the Council and the parties
concerned to know that it is not the policy of the
Government of South Sudan either to interfere with the
UNMISS mandate or to hinder humanitarian access.

My delegation further acknowledges the fact that
many difficult circumstances and challenges remain for
UNMISS in the Republic of South Sudan. There are
also signs of improvement and some progress that we
hope to build upon. We hope to build upon the close
consultation, cooperation and manner with which the
Government and the leadership of UNMISS resolved
the issue of the Rwandan advance team of the Regional
Protection Force. We hope to build lasting trust so as
to improve working relations between the Government
and the United Nations.

Our delegation to the General Assembly conducted
a series ofmeetings on the situation in South Sudan with
the leadership of United Nations agencies and funds,
including the Secretary-General. We also held bilateral
meetings with many Member States. Our delegation
received several messages from the international
community during those meetings, including the
ministerial communique of the African Union Peace and
Security Council issued in New York on 20 September,
which my delegation acknowledges. Accordingly, the
Government will analyse and review those messages,
and we hope that the Government will come out with
more policies designed to enhance cooperation and
improve the day-to-day communications and interaction
between governmental agencies and UNMISS.

In conclusion, we hope that in his next quarterly
report the Secretary-General will note an improved
environment for UNMISS and humanitarian organizations
in the Republic of South Sudan.

