Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Council and to underscore our eagerness to work
closely with you in the month ahead. I also want to
thank Ambassador Heller for his truly exceptional
leadership of the Council last month during a
challenging period. We are very grateful.

I would like to begin by thanking Ms. Karin
Landgren, the Representative of the Secretary-General
in Nepal. We are pleased to welcome her here for the
first time in her new role and we are grateful for her
briefing. We also want to thank her and her staff for
their efforts to carry out the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) and to help the
people of Nepal move forward with the peace process.

The events that have shaken Nepal over the past
few days, leading to the 4 May resignation of the Prime
Minister, make it abundantly clear that Nepal's leaders
must re-commit themselves to implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We in the United
States urge all parties to abide by the Interim
Constitution and to use it as a basis for resolving the
current impasse. Political parties must engage in
dialogue to resolve their disputes and must, as
appropriate, resort to the courts. As Nepal's political
parties move to end the current stand-off, they should
ensure the continuity of legitimate and effective
government. The resignation of the Prime Minister
must not be allowed to create a political vacuum, and
the formation of a new Government must not drag on
for months.

We certainly remind all political parties of the
need to avoid tactics that might lead to bloodshed,
including large demonstrations, calls for general strikes
and provocative statements and actions. In particular,
we urge the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) to
remain involved in the political process. That includes
participating in the Constituent Assembly and in all
peace process-related bodies, including those related to
the effort to draft a constitution.

The continued misuse of political youth groups
also threatens the peace process. The United States
urges the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) to
renounce all violence committed by its militant Young
Communist League and to take concrete steps to
transform that group into an exclusively non-violent
one. Equally, we urge other parties to do the same with
their own youth wings and to ensure that their
activities are peaceful and constructive.

The Special Committee should now continue its
consultations, and the newly established Technical
Committee should move to implement its decisions. As
one step forward, we hope that the Government of
Nepal will move immediately to adopt the suggestions
of the Secretary-General's Representative, to
consolidate arms and soldiers into fewer cantonments
and to discharge minors.

We very much hope that the people of Nepal and
their leaders will not lose sight of the enormous
progress that they have made towards establishing
peace. They have peacefully ended a violent
insurgency and started a process of reconciliation that
holds the promise of long-term security, stability and
peace. Those accomplishments must not be threatened
by a failure to implement parts of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement that were fully agreed to by all
parties, but for now those achievements remain at risk
while so many important aspects of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement are still unfulfilled.

The Maoist-led Government and the Nepal Army
must recognize that lasting democracy is rooted in the
principle of civilian control of the military and depends
on the prudent exercise of that control. As the
Secretary-General's report notes, some progress has
been made towards integrating the People's Liberation
Army and the Nepal Army, but those advances are
threatened by infighting. Like the presidential
statement before the Council today, we call on Nepal's
Government and all political parties to recommit
themselves to working together in the spirit of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and under the terms
of the Interim Constitution. The parties should ensure
continuity of Government, strengthen multiparty
democracy and protect and promote human rights.

As the end of UNMIN's current mandate
approaches next month, we will look forward to
consulting with Nepal's leaders and our Council
colleagues on how best the Council can contribute to
lasting peace and stability in Nepal. The country has
come too far to let itself fall back.

