Ms. Power (United States of America): I, too,
would like to thank the Secretary-General for joining
us today and for briefing us on his recent trip to the
region.

We are living in a time of tremendous turmoil
in the Middle East, a time that demands brave and
decisive leadership by both regional leaders and the
international community. Across the region we see
the need for hard choices. In Syria, the international
community must summon the collective resolve to stop
the Al-Assad regime's monstrous atrocities as well as
the horrors of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and find a political solution to the conflict. In
Lebanon and Iraq, political leaders must strengthen
the institutions necessary to honour the aspirations
of their people and to defeat violent extremist threats.
And Israeli and Palestinian leaders must recognize that
there is no alternative to a negotiated peace and invest
the political will to build it. I will discuss each of those
critical issues today in turn.

We have seen how failures in leadership can help
foster the conditions in which extremist groups thrive.
By failing to make the hard choices necessary to address
the grievances of its Sunni population, Iraq's former
leaders helped to create conditions that ISIL exploited.
The consequences have been horrifying. To cite just
one example, earlier this month ISIL announced strict
rules on what can be taught in universities in Mosul,
one of the cities it now controls. When Iraqi university
professors rejected those restrictions and boycotted,
ISIL declared that any professor who did not return to
work would be executed.

More than three years ago, Bashar Al-Assad lost
the legitimacy to lead when he responded to peaceful
protests with brutal violence. Atrocities committed
by his regime - atrocities of the kind and scale the
world has rarely seen - played a key role in spurring
the emergence of ISIL and other terrorist groups, and
Al-Assad's indiscriminate attacks on his own people
continue to this day.

In September, the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) released its second
report, which found "compelling confirmation that a
toxic chemical was used as a weapon systematically
and repeatedly" in three opposition-held villages in
northern Syria. The OPCW concluded with confidence
that chlorine was used. Witnesses described the attacks
as being carried out by helicopters, which only the
Al-Assad regime possesses.

The consequences of Al-Assad's actions have
been staggering - more than 200,000 Syrians killed
and nearly 11 million Syrians in need of humanitarian
assistance. Yet despite the valiant efforts ofinternational
humanitarian groups, United Nations agencies and
others, the Al-Assad regime is deliberately obstructing
the delivery of crucial assistance to millions of people
in dire need. The regime declares itself the antidote to
the horrors of ISIL, but its chemical and barrel bomb
attacks and its use of starvation as a tool of war are
every bit as indifferent to the fate of innocents and
every bit as grotesque.

One community subjected to the Al-Assad regime's
merciless attacks has been that of the Palestinians in the
refugee camp of Yarmouk, which the regime has sealed
since July 2013. The 18,000 residents who remain there
have been relying on untreated ground water and a
single well for drinking water for nearly a month. Just
yesterday a spokesman for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNWRA) issued a statement that began "UNWRA
was not cleared to distribute humanitarian assistance
in Yarmouk today, 20 October". The day before,
UNWRA's statement began "UNWRA was not cleared
to distribute humanitarian assistance in Yarmouk
today, 19 October." UNWRA notes that, since July this
year, there has been a steady and significant decline in
the quantity of food and other essential items, such as
medicine, that the Agency has been able to offer to the
Palestinians in Yarmouk. That on any day - let alone
so many days i the Al-Assad regime is not allowing
aid to flow to the Palestinians suffering in Yarmouk
shows extreme cruelty. The international community
must be more vocal in its condemnation of those
unspeakable tactics. And when the Syrian Government
hails its leadership, on behalf of the Palestinian people,
they should be reminded by all of us of the people living
in Yarmouk.

There are 3 million Syrians who have fled to
neighbouring countries to escape the regime's and
extremist groups' violence, up to 80 per cent of them
women and children. The threat posed by ISIL is felt
across the region, but especially in Iraq and Syria.
Foreign fighters and Syrian nationals, who have
been recruited and trained to fight in ISIL and other
terrorist groups, pose a threat to countries far from
the battlefield. Among the countries most severely
impacted are Iraq and Lebanon. For example, 180,000
Iraqis fled the city of Heet, in Anbar province, as it fell
to ISIL in recent weeks. They are among an estimated
1.8 million Iraqis displaced just this year. Lebanon has
taken in 1.2 million Syrian refugees, over a quarter of
the country's population, placing immense pressure on
its already strained resources.

We know what we must do. We must defeat ISIL
and other terrorist groups; we must hold accountable
all those in the Al-Assad regime responsible for
its widespread attrocities and we must mitigate the
suffering of the Syrian people. But we wholeheartedly
agree with the Secretary-General that a political
solution is absolutely essential to address the root
causes of extremism in Syria and to address the
legitimate aspirations and grievances of its people. A
political solution is not an enshrinement of the status
quo. The majority of Syrians will not accept being
ruled by a regime that has used sarin and chlorine to
suppress its own people. We commend the efforts of
United Nations Special Envoy for Syria Staffan de
Mistura, who is working urgently to build support for
a political solution by engaging multiple stakeholders.
The Special Envoy met with a representative of Iran
over the weekend and is meeting with a representative
of Russia today - countries whose influence will be
critical to reaching a long-sought solution.

Given the massive suffering that Syria's crisis is
causing the threat it poses to our collective security,
leaders in the region must be part of the efforts to forge
a political solution. But regional leaders also must
address problems closer to home, which impact the
rights of their people and are a source of the suffering,
disenfranchisement and intolerance that feed groups
like ISIL. Yet some leaders still choose to put short-
term interests ahead of the tough decisions needed to
best serve their people. Others take devisive steps when
they could instead build consensus. The international
community stands ready to help address the regions
challenges, but we need partners to exert the political
will and courage to seek real solutions.

In Iraq, newly elected leaders must break from the
sectarian style of leadership that defined the tenure of
the Al-Maliki Government and build institutions that
represent the whole nation, rather than advancing one
groups interest at the expense of another's. In Lebanon,
the position of president has been vacant for nearly
five months during a time when the country faces
considerable security, economic and humanitarian
challenges. Lebanon's political leaders must come
together urgently to select a president.

We have seen leaders within those countries
willing to choose unity over division and to make great
sacrifices for their people. In August, the Lebanese
Armed Forces and internal security forces fought
bravely to defend the city of Arsal from extremists.
They served and died for their country, not for any
one religious sect. In Iraq, Prime Minister Al Abadi
is taking steps to form a more inclusive Government,
establishing the country's first complete cabinet since
2010. He is also moving towards decentralizing power
and granting greater authority to provinces.

Real leadership is also required to advance Israeli-
Palestinian peace. The most recent wave of violence,
was devastating - both in terms of its enormous
human toll and because it was avoidable. Preventing
another round of violence requires leaders who are
willing to make difficult choices and commit to the hard
work of negotiations. We commend Egypt for helping
broker a ceasefire agreement. The Gaza reconstruction
conference raised $5.4 billion and reaffirmed the
international community's commitment to rebuilding
the lives of Palestinians in Gaza, who have suffered
so much during and since the recent crisis. The United
States is providing $212 million in assistance to the
Palestinian people for relief and reconstruction, atop of
the $118 million announced in September. Of course, as
has been said, aid and assistance cannot produce peace
in the Middle East. Leadership and compromise are
needed. For reconstruction not to be required again in
the future there must be a real change on the ground.
Even the most durable of ceasefires is not a substitute
for real security for Israel or for an independent State
for the Palestinians.

That is only more difficult to achieve when both
sides continue to take actions that may be politically
popular with domestic constituencies, but that come
at the expense of advancing the cause of peace. We
continue to urge all parties to refrain from such actions,
including unilateral steps at the United Nations, Israeli
settlement activity and provocations at the Temple
Mount/Haram Al-Sharif, where we urge all sides to
respect the status quo of the holy site.

The United States remains fully committed to
achieving a negotiated final status agreement allowing
two States to live side by side in peace and security.
That is the only viable way forward and, if the parties
are willing to go down that path and are genuinely
dedicated to the hard work of peace, we stand ready to
support them. Together we can and must support those
taking the courageous steps to strengthen the Middle
East in these immensely troubling times. The cause of
peace in the region and the dignity of its people depend
on it.

