Mr. Ali (Pakistan): 1 take the floor to respond to
the statement made by the representative of India.

Much though some may believe it, repeating
groundless accusations and fabrications do not lend
them credibility. At best, they may satisfy a self-
delusional notion of reality, but a farce can go only so
far. It is unfortunate that the statement made by the
representative ofIndia is emblematic of the malaise that
the Indian State practises as a virtue. India cannot hide
behind false accusations and divert the attention of this
body from the real issue. The human rights violations
and atrocities committed by the Indian occupying
forces against innocent Kashmiri men, women and
children are well documented.

The recent report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
completely exposed the real face of India and the
human rights abuses it has been committing in the
occupied territory of Jammu and Kashmir. The report
is a scathing indictment of human rights abuses and
the illegal Indian occupation of Jammu and Kashmir.
India's brutal occupation of Kashmir has killed more
than 100,000 innocent Kashmiris. Today that campaign
of brutality continues, including the shooting and
blinding of innocent Kashmiri children with pellet
guns. Yet, every day, those Kashmiri children, women
and young people come out on the streets to demand
that India get out occupied Kashmir. We ask that the
Security Council act as the world's conscience to
ensure that no child is ever blinded again, that no child
is tortured and raped again, that no child is pushed to
the ground or killed.

Pakistan welcomes the proposal by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to establish a
commission of inquiry to conduct an international
investigation into human rights violations in Indian-
occupied Jammu and Kashmir. That proposal is
consistent with Pakistan's many calls to that effect since
2016, even as India has continued to ignore legitimate
demands for the probe and carry out systematic
violations, including the use of pellet guns, excessive
use of force, arbitrary arrests and detentions, including
of children, and continued sexual violence, under the
overall impunity enjoyed by the Indian security forces.

