Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): Serbia aligns itselfwith the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union (EU). Speaking in my national capacity, I would
like to make the following statement.

We have gathered together convinced that, in
addressing security challenges, concerted efforts are
needed by Governments, international organizations
and individuals to counter the challenges, reach
compromises, achieve reconciliation and ensure that,
in the twenty-first century, no people pay the price
of extremism as we strive to preserve what has been
build upon the ruins of two world wars. The First
World War left deep scars on the face of Europe and
its nations. In its fight for independence, freedom and
the idea of humanity, Serbia suffered a tremendous
loss - 1.2 million Serbs died, almost a third of the
country's population. Only Russia and France suffered
more. Yet in terms of numbers of people, the toll Serbia
paid in the Great War was higher than any other country.

Any isolated attempt at revising history is futile.
We are proud to have fought with the Allies and
achieved peace, opening the prospects for a just world
based on different foundational principles and relations
among nations, on greater respect for independence
and sovereignty. The League of Nations, established
in the wake of the Great War, was the first attempt to
inaugurate multilateralism in international relations
and bring about worldwide peace. The Kingdom of
Yugoslavia was in the front benches of the League.

Based on the lessons learned, the United Nations
was created on the wave of the ideals that united the
world in its fight against fascism in the Second World
War. Since its inception, the United Nations has had
as its goal the establishment and maintenance of stable
peace and collective security based on agreements
reached by consensus among nations. Over the decades,
the United Nations has been instrumental in building
the international security system, using its own
experiences and lessons learned in the process. It could
not have met the challenges before it and safeguarded
international peace were it not for the joint efforts of its
Member States, the shared setting of priorities and its
guiding principle that all nations are equal.

The principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations are the best foundations for establishing
peace, respect for equality and honouring differences.
Safeguarding peace and achieving justice in today's
complex world is not a simple exercise. In that context,
especially with regard to preserving the international
order, the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, has a unique and irreplaceable role to play.
Compliance with its resolutions is of paramount
importance.

United Nations peacekeeping missions not only
have a long history of keeping belligerents apart in
many parts of the world, but also, equally important,
they have been successful in promoting reconciliation,
establishing the rule of law and laying down the
foundations for long-term stability.

No society can expect to make progress unless it
invests in eradicating poverty and inequality. Global
stability is achievable only if we continue to invest,
even at a time when resources are scarce, in education,
health, sustainable economic development and the
environment.

Serbia is committed to multilateralism, which is
one of the pillars of its foreign policy, focusing on its
role in multilateral and regional organizations, such
as the United Nations, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We are confident that multilateral forums are the right
framework for the development of democracy, stability
and the achievement of lasting peace.

In recent decades, we have resumed our
contribution to peacekeeping under the United Nations
flag. Previously, Yugoslavia had been one of the first
countries to take part as a military in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, for example, in the United
Nations Emergency Force in Sinai. At the moment,
Serbia takes part in nine peacekeeping operations, seven
within the United Nations and two within the European
Union. We are ready to increase its participation in
2014.

The United Nations role as an honest broker has
enjoyed universal trust. Serbia, too, has had positive
experiences with the United Nations missions in
Kosovo and Metohija.
Serbia believes that the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, which it will chair in 2015 on
the basis ofajoint two-year work plan with Switzerland,
has a special role and place in the international security
system and in helping to build democracy and lasting
peace. The fact that Serbia had held two consecutive
chairmanships indicates its high degree of confidence
and openness to cooperate in dealing with the most
important security issues in Europe today.

Regional cooperation is an important constituent
part of contemporary multilateralism and, because it is
particularly important for South-East Europe, it is one
of Serbia's priorities. We are committed to intensifying
cooperation, in view ofthe fact that we consider stability
in South-East Europe to one of the basic preconditions
for the development of our country.

We believe that the Balkans region is set to join the
project of lasting peace that is embedded in the common
European future. It is right to remind the Security
Council that the European Union was created by
stamping out age-old feuds and altercations and uniting
positive energies that had dissipated for centuries.
Confident that it is possible to bring prosperity to the
entire Balkans region, Serbia has joined its neighbours
and other peoples of Europe in the process of European
integration. It is convinced that the process is of
paramount importance. The first intergovernmental
conference between Serbia and the European Union,
which will open negotiations for its accession to the
EU, is proof of Serbia's success on that road.

As a responsible member of the international
community, Serbia upholds the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations in its international
and regional activities. It is our belief that activities
within a multilateral framework help strengthen
regional capacities and meet the challenges to lasting
peace, stability and sustainable development.

