Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Khan for his
briefing and for the hard work he has been doing as
Special Adviser.

First, we would like to welcome the fact that, in
its initial development, preparation and investigation
phase, the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has worked
constructively and in joint coordination with the Iraqi
authorities, local communities, the various agencies
of the United Nations system and States where the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has expanded its
operational capacities and activities. We hope that
that cooperation will continue and be strengthened
as the Team reaches its operational phase. Similarly,
we welcome the implementation plan established by
the Special Adviser, which outlines the three initial
specific areas for investigation.

We would also like to highlight the readiness and
cooperation shown by the Iraqi authorities with the
Investigative Team in implementing the provisions set
out in resolution 2379 (2017) in order to hold members of
the Islamic State accountable for the crimes committed,
including war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, to which the populations of Iraq and other
States were subjected. It is therefore imperative that the
Investigative Team function effectively so that those
unspeakable crimes do not go unpunished.

In that regard, we are pleased to note that the Team
undertook the first set of excavations of mass graves
in the village of Kojo in March and April in order to
exhume the remains of victims of the Islamic State.
We applaud the fact that that process is being carried
out with due regard for the customs and respect for the
religious rites of the people.

We are also pleased that special attention is being
paid to survivors of crimes of sexual and gender-based
violence. In that regard, we would like to emphasize
that the investigations should focus on survivors,
prioritizing their rights and needs as victims of sexual
and gender-based Violence. It is therefore important to
ensure that the investigation processes ensure protection
and confidentiality for both survivors and witnesses.
For that reason, we consider the witness protection
strategy established by the witness protection team, in
the context of gathering evidence from testimonies, to
be an excellent measure.

We also urge the Iraqi authorities and the
Investigative Team to pay attention to persons with
family ties to members of the Islamic State, including
women and children, and to prevent them from being
prosecuted for crimes perpetrated by their relatives.
Likewise, their protection and physical integrity and
respect for their rights must be ensured, particularly in
the case of minors, who under no circumstances should
be treated as adults, including when they have allegedly
been part of or collaborators with the terrorist group.
They should be treated as victims, not perpetrators.

On another front, the Investigative Team must
maintain its independence and impartiality, working in
collaboration with the United Nations mechanisms and
the Iraqi authorities and respecting their sovereignty
and jurisdiction, in accordance with the mandate of
resolution 2379 (2017), the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law.

Finally, the dividends of justice will be determined
to a large extent by the regional and international
financial, legal and capacity-building support that Iraq
receives to strengthen its institutions, in particular
the judicial system. We therefore encourage the
international community to work together to that end.

