Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We appreciate Assistant Secretary-General
Alexander Zuev's first but nonetheless substantive and
multilingual briefing, and listened attentively to the
statement by Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Nifio, United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS) staffer in Colombia.

With the increasing numbers of hotbeds of
tension and local conflicts, it is not just the problem
of finding political settlements for them that is
becoming particularly acute, but also the importance
ofintensifying the international community's efforts to
deal with their most immediate consequences, such as
unexploded mines, improvised explosive devices and
explosive remnants of war. This is a global issue, one
of the most significant obstacles not only to returning
refugees and temporarily displaced persons to their
homes but also to restoring the overall infrastructure
and economy ofpost-conflict regions. It also represents
a serious threat to United Nations peacekeeping forces,
which just since 2014 have lost 21 personnel killed and
105 injured as a result of incidents involving explosive
objects. In that regard, we fully share the opinion of
Secretary-General Guterres that peace without mine
action is an inferior peace.

The Russian Federation considers coordinating role
of UNMAS in the United Nations system very important.
We intend to continue supporting its efforts to develop
standards, best practices and recommendations for
mine action and are ready to participate in the third
expert meeting on the development of standards for
the disposal of improvised explosive devices. Just as
important as the theoretical efforts of UNMAS is its
applied work, which is done within the framework of
existing United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. We also attach importance
to the help it provides to requesting States, on a
voluntary basis, in order to achieve qualitative
improvements in their national demining capacities.
It is ultimately Governments that have to bear the
primary responsibility for ensuring their peoples'
safety, including from terrorist attacks. In 2014, under
the auspices of its Ministry of Defence, the Russian
Federation created an international mine action centre
as its national contribution to international mine action.
Its work is guided by international United Nations
standards as well as national ones, on the basis ofwhich
it trains specialists in humanitarian mine clearance.

I would also like to draw attention to the urgent need
for the international community to step up demining
efforts in Syria, representing a pledge to return refugees
and temporarily displaced persons to their homes as
quickly as possible. The Russian Federation recently
initiated efforts to form a broad international coalition
for mine action in Syria, and Russian servicemen are
already working actively on demining the country's
territory. We hope that our partners will be able to
contribute to the best of their ability to solving this
humanitarian problem.

The Russian Federation is ready to work
productively on the draft resolution proposed by the
Bolivian delegation, which we believe has the potential
to provide UNMAS with practical help in fulfilling
its mandate.

