Mrs. Smith (Norway): A major obstacle to
strengthening the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a general lack of respect for international
humanitarian law and the way in which its rules are
interpreted and implemented. Another challenge is to
continue efforts to further strengthen international
humanitarian law.

There can be no doubt that the protection of
civilians must include conflict and post-conflict
situations alike. Increased accountability is key to
ensuring better compliance with fundamental
international norms to protect civilians. Let me address
three points that relate to situations where populations
remain vulnerable in the face of armed hostilities.
First, an indispensable building block for
accountability is data on the civilian harm being
experienced in conflict situations. Since the 2010
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians of civilians in armed conflict (S/2010/579),
we have seen further evidence of the pattern of harm
caused by explosive weapons used in populated areas
in a number of country contexts, such as Cote d'Ivoire,
Libya and Syria. Stronger data-gathering on the impact
of explosive violence on civilians would allow us to
better understand this pattern of harm and to strengthen
accountability. Norway would welcome discussions
with partners on this issue ahead of the next debate on
the protection of civilians.

In addition, we need to enhance the effectiveness
of accountability mechanisms. We welcome the
commitment of the Security Council to establishing a
stronger protection framework against sexual violence
in conflict and for children in armed conflict, most
recently through resolutions 1960 (2010) and 1998
(2011). We further encourage the Security Council to
strengthen its monitoring and oversight in the area of
the protection of civilians.

Secondly, the protection of civilians cannot be
seen in isolation from the principle of the
responsibility to protect. While it is the responsibility
of States to protect civilians by promoting and
protecting their human rights, the international
community has a responsibility to assist in ensuring
that civilians are protected from mass atrocities. The
United Nations must continue to expand its range of
tools for preventive capacities in order to avert mass
atrocities, including a focus on crisis response through
diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful means.

Thirdly, perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law must be brought to justice. It is
States that bear the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute breaches of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In cases where
national judicial systems fail, the International
Criminal Court (ICC) is an indispensable vehicle for
ensuring justice and accountability. In February of this
year, the Security Council for the second time used the
powers granted to it by the Rome Statute to
unanimously refer the situation in Libya to the Court.
That is yet another acknowledgement of the fact that
the ICC is a necessary tool for ensuring that
perpetrators of international crimes are brought to
justice. It follows that security sector reform must be
given a higher priority, with a particular emphasis on
the justice sector.

While respect for existing rules is of key
importance, the rules of international humanitarian law

11-5866]
also need to be continually reviewed and strengthened
in order to keep up with new developments in warfare
and new emerging humanitarian concerns.

Over the past 15 years, fundamental norms, such
as the Mine Ban Convention and the Convention on
Cluster Munitions, have been developed with a view to
outlawing conventional weapons that cause
unacceptable harm. We remain concerned about the
ongoing efforts within the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons to negotiate a new protocol on
cluster munitions. The current draft would in fact
perpetuate, rather than prevent, the civilian suffering
caused by cluster munitions. These concerns are widely
shared by other States, the International Committee of
the Red Cross, United Nations field organizations and
other humanitarian organizations. To ignore the advice
of those entities and the facts they have provided on
the humanitarian realities on the ground would be a
very negative signal.

We urge all States to work to strengthen
international humanitarian law and to keep our focus
on the humanitarian realities in the field.

