Mr. Plasai (Thailand): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Spain on its assumption of the presidency
and on organizing this debate.

As a hub of transport and commerce, the Kingdom
of Thailand is committed to addressing the threats to
our collective security posed by the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. There is a genuine risk
that these weapons may fall into the wrong hands.
Given the importance we attach to the issue, we have
decided to join other Member States in co-sponsoring
resolution 2325 (2016), adopted today.

In addition to the immediate havoc caused
by their use, the existence of these weapons fuels
mistrust, exacerbates conflicts and upsets the delicate
international security landscape. The Kingdom of
Thailand fiunly believes that in order to sustain peace
and security, States must step up both disarmament and

non-proliferation efforts. As such, we continue to exert
every effort to implement international measures and
obligations with rigour. We have the following practical
approaches to share today.

First, as an active participant in various initiatives,
including the Proliferation Security Initiative, the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the
Nuclear Security Summits, and as a State party to the
Chemical and Biological Weapons Conventions and the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
among others, we firmly believe that increased
coordination and collaboration among initiatives and
implementation efforts can benefit and optimize our
joint efforts. In this regard, we welcome enhancing
ongoing cooperation among the counter-terrorism-
related committees of the Security Council. To this
end, we also urge closer coordination between the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and other entities and initiatives, including the
International Atomic Energy Agency, to ensure that
gaps are filled and redundancies of efforts eliminated.

Secondly, as States are in different situations
regarding threats of weapons of mass destruction and
have different resources and capacities, international
cooperation and assistance, particularly for
developing countries, is essential to strengthening the
non-proliferation regime. We welcome the constructive
role of the 1540 Committee and the sharing of good-
practices, technical cooperation and assistance among
Member States.

Thirdly, Member States must ensure effective
national implementation, as no international cooperation
can bear fruit without robust implementation within
the country through an appropriate legal framework.
Also, each State has its own specificities with regard
to its national implementation, which must be taken
into account.

As for the Kingdom of Thailand, earlier in August
the Nuclear Energy for Peace Act was promulgated
and will enter into force on 1 February 2017. The new
Act focuses not only on nuclear security, including the
physical protection of nuclear material, but also on
nuclear safety and safeguards. In October this year, the
National Legislative Assembly of Thailand approved
the Counter-terrorism and Proliferation of Weapons
of Mass Destruction Financing Act, which will be
enacted in the near future. In September this year also,
the Thai Cabinet approved the draft Trade Controls on
WMD-related Items Act, which will regulate the export
of dual-use items in accordance with national and
international legal regimes. The National Legislative
Assembly of Thailand will soon consider the draft Act.

We also need inter-agency coordination and
engagement with civil society, industry, and academia.
The Ministry of Commerce of Thailand continually
organizes workshops and seminars to educate and
engage the private and academic sectors on the control
of dual-use items. Just yesterday, an memorandum of
understanding between the Ministry of Commerce's
Department of Foreign Trade and multiple academic
and research institutions was signed to support the
network of WMD-related entities. We believe that the
engagement of those stakeholders in the resolution
adopted today is a step in the right direction.

Lastly,wemustalso strengthenregionalcooperation,
as the effectiveness of the non-proliferation regime in
any State also depends on the effective implementation
in the neighbouring countries. To that end, Thailand is
a proponent of promoting regional cooperation in the
work ofthe 1540 regime. An example ofnote is thejoint
cross-border exercise between Thailand and Malaysia
on the detection of nuclear and other radioactive
materials out of regulatory control, held in October this
year, which aimed to combat smuggling or illicit cross-
border transport of such materials.

The ultimate goal of the Kingdom of Thailand is
to attain a world free of weapons of mass destruction.
In order to reach that goal, non-proliferation should
be pursued in parallel with disarmament efforts. The
international community should make their best efforts
to secure the world by prohibiting all kinds of weapons of
mass destruction, while ensuring that related materials
and technologies benefit society through their peaceful
uses. The long-term task towards that lofty goal will
require political will and the commitment of all States.
The Kingdom of Thailand is fully supportive of such
an endeavour.

