Mr. Kirn (Slovenia): It is my honour to make
this short statement on behalf of the States of the
Human Security Network, a cross-regional group of
States comprising Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, the Netherlands,
Norway, Switzerland, Thailand, Slovenia and, as an
observer, South Africa. Today's statement by the
Network supplements our statement of 24 July 2006
(see S/PV.5494) as well as our letter to the Chairman of
the Working Group of the Security Council on Children
and Armed Conflict.
Let me thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's open debate and the Secretary-General for
providing us with his report on children and armed
conflict (S/2006/826) pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005), covering the period of the past
year, as well as for the report of the independent
review of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
children and armed conflict, issued on 16 November
2006.

The Network wishes to encourage the Security
Council and the wider United Nations system to
continue efforts to prevent or end all violations
committed against children affected by armed conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General, while reflecting
progress made, also highlights new situations of great
concern that have arisen, such as situations involving
child victims of the recent violence in the Middle East,
including in Lebanon, Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory.

We welcome the detailed nature of the report,
which focuses both on situations of concern on the
Council's agenda and on those outside its formal
purview. Both lists, annexes I and II, are useful,
especially as they help to identify the parties involved,
including non-State actors. Only by understanding the
complexities and demands of each situation can we
begin to comprehend trends and effectively address
violations against children caught up, as victims, in
armed conflict.

It also enables us to understand better the
similarities between different situations, as well as the
interlinkages, such as the increasingly migratory nature
of the recruitment and use of child soldiers and other
grave violations within regions.

The States of the Network wish to highlight some
of the points relating to cross-thematic issues of
concern. First, the Network welcomes measures to
combat sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping
personnel, building on the work of the Secretary-
General's Adviser on the issue, Prince Zeid, the
Ambassador of Jordan. Yet as evidence of abuse
continues to be seen, we call on both peacekeeping
missions and troop-contributing States to continue and
intensify their endeavours for training and awareness-
raising on the one hand, and investigation and the
taking of disciplinary action against perpetrators on the
other.

Secondly, reliable, accurate and objective
monitoring is essential. The Network continues to be a
strong supporter of the work of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict. We welcome the progress made in
establishing the monitoring and reporting mechanism
and the resulting information transmitted through
reports to the Security Council on specific situations
and through the "horizontal" reports on situations of
concern to the Security Council's Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We commend the
Working Group for its excellent reports to date and
encourage it to continue its good work. We also wish to
emphasize the fact that, as the situation of children in
armed conflicts is of a grave concern to the
international community, the utmost care should be
exercised to ensure the full accuracy of the reports.

Thirdly, the inclusion of specific child protection
expertise within the United Nations system -
especially in the field - needs to be continued. We are
looking forward to the study currently being
undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations on the child protection experience in peace
operations, so as to help us to improve the efficiency of
the important work done by the Child Protection
Advisers and to strengthen their role in United Nations
missions.

Fourthly, we need to sharpen our sensitivity in
addressing gender-based violations, paying special
attention to girl combatants and girls associated with
armed groups.

Fifthly, the Secretary-General indicates a mixed
picture regarding progress in the area of action plans
by parties pursuant to resolution 1539 (2004). In some
cases, parties have offered cooperation in setting up
such action plans, while in others such cooperation is
still lacking. The setting up of concrete time-bound
action plans and their implementation by the parties
involved needs constant monitoring by the Security
Council in all situations that warrant such action plans.
The Security Council needs to respond effectively
against the parties that continue to commit grave
violations against children, in defiance of Security
Council resolutions.

In conclusion, the Network, based on its holistic
vision of human security, calls upon the Security
Council, in the words of paragraph 134 of the report
(A/2006/826), to

"consider expanding its focus and give equal care
and attention to children affected by armed
conflict in all situations of concern; and to give
equal weight to all categories of grave violations
beyond the recruitment and use of child soldiers
to include the killing and maiming of children,
rape and other grave sexual violence, abductions,
attacks against schools or hospitals, and denial of
humanitarian access for children."

Similarly, all parts of the world that give cause
for concern need to be encompassed. A case in point is
the Middle East. All violations, wherever and by
whomever committed, result in grave harm to a child's
physical and psychological security and well-being. All
such grave violations should be accorded the necessary
vigilance and commitment to their prevention and
eradication by the Security Council and the
international community as a whole.

