Mr. Pleuger (Germany): We welcome the
presence of the Foreign Ministers of Jamaica and the
Bahamas. We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely meeting of the Security
Council this afternoon to consider the political
impasse, the humanitarian crisis and human rights
violations in Haiti.

Germany fully aligns herself with the statement
to be given later in this debate by Ambassador Ryan of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union. I would also
like to state that Germany, as acting President of the
European Union in Haiti, is actively supporting the
joint efforts to reach a political solution to the crisis.

We call for continuous support to the
Organization of American States (OAS) and the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) in brokering a
political settlement. The political dialogue must be
conducted in a spirit of compromise on all sides. Not
confrontation, but reconciliation and confidence-
building among the Haitian parties are the objectives of
the international efforts to lay the foundations for
sustainable democratic development in Haiti.
It is the responsibility of all Haitian parties
concerned to reject violent means as a tool for
achieving political change. Killing and looting, anarchy
in the streets and organized human rights violations
cannot be the basis for Haiti's future. Rebel groups or
militias should not be tolerated as factors in what
would be an irresponsible political gamble, since this
would only add to the misery of the people of Haiti.
Those who calculate that violence might further their
cause should be aware that this violence might soon be
turned against them. There is no alternative, in our
view, to a political settlement that reconciles all parts
of the Haitian population within the legal framework of
their own constitution.

Such a settlement requires foreign assistance in
its implementation. The Security Council should be
ready to assist in the stabilization efforts in all possible
ways and in a short period of time.

In addition to the Haitian parties concerned, the
international community also has obligations in light of
the fact that law and order have disappeared in large
areas of a United Nations Member State. Time is
running short, in view of the increasing chaos, violence
and misery. We have to discuss ways and means of
assisting the Haitian population. Germany therefore
welcomes the Secretary-General's decision to appoint a
special advisor and looks forward to working with him.
We also welcome the initiative of the French
Government to invite representatives of both the
Government and the opposition to talks in Paris.

We deplore the loss of life in Haiti and we are
facing a worsening humanitarian situation which is, of
course, of great concern to us. Children are hindered
from attending school, energy shortages close down
hospitals and the distribution of food is interrupted. We
urge all parties involved in the conflict to grant free
access to the delivery of humanitarian assistance, to
respect human rights and to observe international
humanitarian law.

For the sake of the people of Haiti, violence and
confrontation must end immediately, and we expect the
Council to make this clear in an unambiguous
presidential statement at the end of this debate.

