Mr. Menkerios (Eritrea): I am honoured to address
the Security Council at this meeting to consider the

 

current draft resolution on the Eritrea-Ethiopia conflict.
Indeed, my Government appreciates the serious concern of
the Council over the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea
and the dangerous level to which it has been escalated by
the Ethiopian Government. Eritrea further welcomes the
Council's decision to be actively seized of the issue.

My Government has presented in writing its
considered reaction to the last resolution concerning the
conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia - resolution 1226
(1999) - and I need not repeat it here. Needless to say, the
concerns to which Eritrea tried to alert the Council in its
presentation have unfortunately come to pass. Ethiopia has
broken the de facto truce that had existed since June and
restarted an all-out offensive against Eritrea.

It is a fact known to members of the Council that
Eritrea has constantly and consistently called from the
outset of this conflict for a renouncement of the threat and
use of force, for a firm, irreversible commitment to a
peaceful and legal solution of the conflict and for a binding
ceasefire or cessation of hostilities so that an atmosphere
conducive to the continuation and success of the peace
process can be created. Such calls were repeated by the
international community, including the Council. Sadly,
these calls were adamantly rejected by Ethiopia.
Nonetheless, Eritrea continued to engage in good faith with
all peace endeavours by concerned parties, while
reaffirming that despite Ethiopia's constant threats and
declared preparations for war, it would never shoot unless
shot at.

My country has been shot at and has been forced to
defend itself in the current all-out offensive that the
Ethiopian regime has unleashed on it. Indeed, the fact that
Ethiopia intended and was preparing to do just that was
never hidden from the international community. Consistent
with its Parliament's standing declaration that unless Eritrea
unilaterally and unconditionally withdraws from its own
territory that Ethiopia claims, Ethiopia will make it do so
by force, the Ethiopian Government has - going from bad
to worse - escalated this conflict from a containable
border skirmish to an all-out war.

The fact that Ethiopia started this current offensive and
violated the United States-brokered moratorium on air
attacks has been ascertained by all those who have followed
and witnessed its final preparations and the actual launch
and conduct of the current offensive - contrary to its
useless but usual attempt to deny it. We are sure that this
fact cannot be unknown to members' Governments as well,
as representatives of the diplomatic community in either or
both countries, including those of Council members'
Governments, have followed or witnessed the facts for
themselves.

Summarizing the overwhelming independent
eyewitness reports of the developments on the ground,
Global Intelligence Update writes,

"Ethiopia launched an offensive against
neighbouring Eritrea on February 6, ostensibly
aimed at retaking the disputed border area of
Badme."
The Update goes on to warn,

"The problem for international organizations
attempting to broker a peace treaty between the two
countries is that the dispute is not that simple.
Ethiopia has not expended an estimated $300 million
on arms since last June simply to retake a desolate
patch of rocks."

Concerning the violation of the moratorium on air
strikes, none other than President Clinton, the broker and
thus custodian of that moratorium, has clearly indicated
that it is Ethiopia that did so. He said:

"I am particularly alarmed by the recent use of air
power, which escalates the conflict and violates the
agreed moratorium. I urge the Ethiopian Government
to refrain from further use of its aircraft as currently
employed along the border."

A myriad of independent on-site witnesses of the
Ethiopian air bombardment of towns and other civilian
centres, including camps set up for deportees from
Ethiopia, some 30 kilometres away from the war front,
have reported the death of innocent civilians and the
devastation of property such bombings are causing.

The danger that Ethiopia's all-out war poses for the
security of the entire region and beyond, in addition to its
immediate negative consequences on the process to
achieve a peaceful resolution of the border dispute, cannot
escape members of the Council. While these remain the
facts and consequences of the Ethiopian Government's
persistent recourse to force, it is indeed tragic and
regrettable that the Security Council, the very body
entrusted with ensuring international security, would gloss
over this danger and not condemn the Ethiopian regime
for its irresponsible resort to force to resolve what,
indeed, is a border conflict. Not to do so, to allow the

 

Ethiopian regime to continue to wage war with impunity in
violation of another country's sovereignty, would only
encourage Ethiopia, as it has done so far, to continue on its
warpath, with very grave consequences. The Security
Council will then have to share responsibility for those
consequences.

Ethiopia alone bears full responsibility for the start and
escalation of this conflict to a full-scale war, including by
starting the current offensive. Eritrea urges the Security
Council to take note of this fact and act appropriately.
