Mr. Ngo Duc Thang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam has
followed with deep concern the latest developments
surrounding Iraq, which lead to an assumption that war
is inevitable. Under these circumstances, we welcome
the convening of this open meeting for all Member
States to express their views on this crucial issue on the
agenda of the Security Council, which would have far-
reaching implications for our Organization and its
ability to promote the attainment of world peace and
security.

We would like to take this opportunity to express
our View that all peaceful means must be exhausted to
find a political solution to the Iraqi issue in conformity
with the United Nations Charter and international law.
Viet Nam strongly believes that war is not inevitable
and that there is still a chance for a peaceful solution to
the Iraq issue based on respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq and on the

preservation of the authority and credibility of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We advocate a peaceful solution instead of military
action also because we understand the consequences of
a war, especially in terms of untold human suffering
and material destruction for the ordinary people of the
parties concerned, as well as the multifaceted impact
on the region and in the world over.

The reports provided by the heads of two United
Nations inspection teams, Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei, at the Security Council briefing
on 14 February 2003 clarified a number of issues raised
at the previous meeting on Iraq. We have also learned
that the Government of Iraq has demonstrated a new
willingness to cooperate with the inspectors in a
number of areas, such as providing new documentation
on the outstanding issues, agreeing to aerial
reconnaissance over its territory and allowing Iraqi
scientists to be interviewed without witnesses.
Moreover, both inspectors said that they had found no
evidence indicating that Iraq has and was trying to hide
weapons of mass destruction or prohibited chemical
weapons.

We share the views of a large number of other
delegations that the inspections have made real
progress and have not been completed. Therefore
inspections should continue, and the inspectors should
be trusted and provided with all possible assistance to
carry out their work.

My delegation is particularly concerned about the
dire humanitarian consequences of a possible military
conflict for the civilian population of Iraq, who have
already suffered tremendously from the ongoing
sanctions. According to the assessment made by Mr.
Kenzo Oshima, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, at his briefing on 13 February
2003, under a "medium-case scenario" of a possible
war, up to 10 million people may require food
assistance during and after the start of the conflict,
while up to half of the Iraqi population may be without
access to potable water. And there is the potential that
2 million people could become internally displaced,
with 600,000 to 1.45 million refugees and asylum
seekers.

Another aspect that has also been brought to our
attention is the negative impact that an armed conflict
could have on the very fragile situation in the Middle
East. A military action would further complicate the
already difficult problems in the region. We also fear
that it would affect the global economy at the time
when many economies are struggling to recover from
recession.

Taking into consideration all these aspects, we
believe that, at present, constructive dialogue between
the concerned parties and uninterrupted work on the
part of the United Nations inspectors are still the most
effective means of achieving a peaceful settlement of
the Iraqi issue.

Let me conclude my statement by saying that we
are convinced that the Security Council members will
take into consideration all views expressed in this
meeting, discharge their responsibilities in an objective
manner, and facilitate a peaceful settlement which
enjoys the full support of the vast majority of the
people and countries of the world, so as to fulfil the
Council's important task of maintaining international
peace and security.

