Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia voted in favour of resolution 1984
(2011), which extends the mandate of the Panel of
Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) on sanctions against Iran.

The Panel is an important component of the
Iranian sanctions regime and does useful and practical
work in assisting the 1737 Committee. It collects and
verifies facts about possible violations of sanctions,
carries out analyses and prepares recommendations and
assessments. The results of the Panel of Experts' work
are reflected in its reports.

In that connection, it is most important for the
Panel to comply strictly with its mandate, act
impartially and independently, and use reliable sources
of information when preparing its conclusions and
recommendations. Unverified or politicized
information does not help to promote any initiative of
the Security Council or its committees. We note the
importance of the experts exercising sensible caution
with respect to the information they receive.

The goal of the procedure provided for in the
resolution adopted today - whereby the Panel of
Experts shall provide the 1737 Committee with a
preliminary programme of work, with subsequent
regular discussions between the Committee and the
Panel - is to further enhance the effectiveness of the
efforts of that monitoring mechanism. We believe that
these efforts can help to ensure useful leadership by the
Committee of the Panel's work.

The resolution also stipulates that midterm and
final reports of the Panel shall first be provided to the
Committee, where members of the Security Council
will be able to hold preliminary discussions of the
documents with the experts. Such interactive
cooperation between States members of the Council
with the Panel will enable the detailed consideration of
the Panel's conclusions and recommendations and
allow the members to receive, if necessary, more
specific information or explanations from the experts
on various provisions of the reports and to take into
account the national views that have been expressed.
11-36884

It is clear that, following such discussions, the
reports submitted by the Panel to the Council will raise
fewer questions among members of the Security
Council, be more useful and enable the Council to
develop an agreed position on the recommendations of
the experts.

The Russian Federation will continue to
cooperate fully with the Panel of Experts of the 1737
Committee.

