Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Slovakia fully associates
itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. My delegation wishes to add several
observations and comments in its national capacity.

My country has been playing an active role in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts in various parts
of the world for many years, and has thus assumed its
share of responsibility for the strengthening and
protection of values and principles that the United
Nations stands for.

Ample experience in peacekeeping has provided
us with a whole new dimension of understanding of the
depth and complexity of the challenges and threats to
global peace and security. Slovakia stands ready to
share all the expertise and experience it has gained
with its partners, States Members of the United
Nations.

Not a great deal of time has passed since Europe,
especially its eastern part, underwent major political
changes connected, at least in some cases, with
difficult security challenges. Although not all the
problematic issues have yet been entirely overcome,
the final outcomes, luckily, have been mostly positive.
That has been so. Thanks in large part to the positive
role played by regional formations and regional
organizations. In addition to the European Union and
NATO, I have in mind the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and its active role
in a wide range of areas, such as free elections, the
building of democratic institutions, the reform of
public administration, et cetera. We argue for the
further widening and strengthening of United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations such as the
European Union, NATO, the OSCE and the Council of
Europe in the area of building stability and peace.
Their ample expertise, experience and proven and
established best practices could be of great benefit
wherever necessary.

Also, I would like to particularly emphasize the
role of civil society and non-governmental
organizations in post-conflict peacebuilding. As our
own experience has well proven, they are the ones who
can ensure greater ownership and capacity-building at
the local level, and who can make a great contribution
to the implementation of strategies and to the proper
delivery of tasks.

In that regard, Slovakia has in recent years been
particularly active in the western Balkans. We have had
wide experience in providing good offices to the
countries of the western Balkans. Just this past
weekend, Bratislava hosted another international
conference on development in the western Balkans. In
his speech at the conference, His Excellency
Mr. Eduard Kukan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Slovak Republic and former Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Balkans, said, "The future of
the western Balkans region lies, above all else, in
deepening collaboration and building trust".

In that respect, we think it appropriate to point
out another positive role played by a regional
formation - the Visegrad Four, comprising the Czech
Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia. Throughout
the 19905 and in the first years of this century,
especially during the processes of the accession of its
four members into the European and transatlantic
structures, and to the present day, the Visegrad Four
has been tremendously helpful in enhancing political
dialogue and the atmosphere of mutual trust,
cooperation and good-neighbourly relations. That has
been the case in spite of the Visegrad Four being only
an informal formation, with no institutional framework
necessary. As our experience shows, the development
of this kind of regional cooperation can be an
important factor in peacebuilding and in strengthening
regional stability.

We have learned this lesson ourselves; that is why
we have been advising our friends, especially those
from the western Balkans, that areas such as the
intensification of political dialogue in the broadest
sense of the word, the development of economic
cooperation, exchanges of students and teachers and
cultural cooperation are the motive forces for further
democratic change in individual countries.

Still speaking of the western Balkans, we see the
greatest dangers to the building of a democratic society
in the region, including that of slipping back into
conflict, above all in the underdeveloped state of civil
society, the lack of development of the rule of law and
the difficult economic situation. The latter provides
fertile ground for corruption, extremism and organized
crime. Stability is an important prerequisite for the
building of a democratic society. Tomorrow the
Security Council will hold an open debate on the
situation in Kosovo. We believe that many of those
factors need to be taken into account in the peaceful
resolution of Kosovo's future status, too. Slovakia
stands ready to continue playing an active and
instructive role in this important process in whatever
way necessary.

As an added value, my country could now, among
other things, offer its experts and their recent
professional experience gained from the successful
reform of our armed and security forces and the rapid
re-establishment of the fundamental principles of the
rule of law. Also, we have recently invested a great
deal of financial resources and energy in enabling our
armed and security forces to better address areas such
as organized crime, the vulnerability of the information
and communication systems and the role of non-State
actors in possible acts of terrorism and in the threat of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We
regard the concept of the armed forces being an
integral part of democratic institutions and processes
and falling under proper civilian and parliamentary
control as a significant element of sustainable
peacebuilding efforts.

We are also making every effort to be able to
contribute further civilian and police capacities. We are
hopeful that such personnel will be able to live up to
the very positive reputation, earned in recent years,
especially by our military engineers, deminers and
paramedics. We are currently closely looking at ways
and means to widen or enhance our offer of expert and

training capacities - governmental as well as non-
governmental - in fields such as accountable and
transparent disarmament, demobilization and

reintegration (DDR) programmes, reform of public
administration, free elections, good governance,
building of democratic institutions, economic and
social reform, and so forth. We would welcome the
creation of a United Nations standing list of such
institutional and personnel capacities to be used
whenever and wherever there is a need. Slovakia is
ready to contribute appropriately to such a list.

Substantial and lasting progress in the overall
peace and security situation of any conflict can hardly
be achieved without tangible improvement of the
economic and social situation of ordinary people and
without their feeling the benefits of the rule of law. By
adopting effective measures in those areas, Slovakia
has gradually moved from being a recipient of
development assistance in the early 1990s into the
present situation of being an emerging donor country
now providing official development assistance to 14
partner countries in Europe, Asia and Africa. We have
been supporting those countries' institutional
capacities, infrastructure and living conditions and
sharing our own experience from the ongoing
transformation of our economic and social system.
That is undoubtedly an indispensable part of the entire
concept of peacebuilding.

As we have done on previous occasions, we wish to
express our strong support for the creation of a
Peacebuilding Commission and for its four main purposes
as proposed by the Secretary-General. We see that step as
a prerequisite for abolishing the existing institutional gap.
The urgent need to maintain peace and security in post-
conflict situations and achieve long-term sustainable

social and economic development must be addressed
appropriately.

In conclusion, let me thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate and for presenting us
with an excellent discussion paper (S/2005/316, annex). We would welcome it if this kind of valuable
discussion were to continue and if it were to be
followed up by further concrete, practical steps. In that
connection, we think it would be worthwhile to
consider, for instance, the organization of a United
Nations conference on peacebuilding, transformation
and stabilization to discuss best practices in the area of
building peace and stability. I wish to assure the
Council of my Government's keen support for all the
peacebuilding efforts and endeavours of the United
Nations. We are strongly committed to achieving the
best possible results in all their aspects.

