Ms. Mulamula: At the outset, allow me to express
my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for organizing
this extremely important debate on the centrality
of preventative diplomacy, conflict prevention and
resolution in addressing the agenda for peace and
security in Africa. I am so honoured and humbled to
be among the invited briefers and to have been given
the first opportunity to share with the Council my
experience and appeal with regard to the role of women
in peacebuilding and conflict resolution. Before I do
that, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over
the work of the Council during October, which is an
important month in the history of the United Nations.

The entire world is witnessing the erosion of
multilateralism and its contribution to making the
world a better place for all of us to live. The fact that
the Council is debating the primacy of preventive
diplomacy is a stark reminder that we have not lived
up to the raison d'etre of the United Nations, in which
we the peoples declared our determination to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. As
the Council deliberates on the important steps required
to strengthen preventative diplomacy, allow me to flag
some of the issues arising from my own experience and
the various peace processes I have been involved in, as
well as the women's platforms in which I have had the
privilege of participating.

I come from Tanzania, a country that has played
an extraordinary role in conflict resolution, preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding in the Great Lakes region
and beyond. Therefore, I wish to state here that my
career path has exposed me to conflict resolution,
managing conflicts and seeking negotiated solutions.
I had the privilege to serve as the first Executive
Secretary of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. The evolution of that organization can
be traced from the Rwandan genocide and the wars that
embroiled the Great Lakes region between 1994 and
2004. This regional framework constitutes regional
responses to the violent conflicts and genocide that
plagued the region.

Every single peace initiative, intervention,
mediation process, concept, framework and legal
instrument has been tried in the Great Lakes region.
The signing of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, which
established the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, was seen as a milestone that demonstrated
the strong political will of States of the region to build
the structures and expand the scope of responsibility
for prevention beyond Governments. This brought civil
society and women and youth groups on board. The
follow-up mechanisms that were established, including
the Summit of Heads of State, the Regional Ministerial
Council, the Secretariat and national coordination
mechanisms, were put in place to ensure appropriate
measures to prevent conflicts escalating to violence
and mass-atrocity levels.
The complexity of the issues involved in the
cyclical violence requires that any meaningful attempt
to address issues of peace and security in the region
and on the African continent be based on a regional
framework and approach, because the countries of the
region are likely to have a better understanding of the
situation on the ground than external actors. Although
over time the assessment of legitimacy and the role of
the countries in the region that share common interests
have been called into question - and scholars have
written a great deal about this - I want to emphasize
that despite the few politically unstable situations that
remain, as well as the many unresolved issues, at least
the guns have been silenced in that part of the region
for now.

I had the enormous responsibility of sustainably
transforming legacies and cycles of violent conflicts
and genocide into peaceful coexistence between the
communities and countries of the region. It was not an
easy task, but as the saying goes, if you want to get
something done, give it to a woman, and if you want
it well said, give it to a man. My task was to facilitate
dialogue to prevent, contain and manage situations
likely to affect peace and security, and to seek to identify
potential triggers of intra- and inter-State hostilities.

In reading one of the United Nations Conflict
Prevention and Preventive Diplomacy in Action
reports, I am sorry to see that the use of the Secretary-
General's good offices by deploying special envoys
and representatives in conflict areas is aimed more
at attempting to prevent conflicts or crises from
escalating than preventing them from occurring
altogether. There have been successful cases reported
in Mali, Burkina Faso, Colombia and elsewhere, but it
is usually a case of too little, too late. I want to remind
the Council that at the peak of the political crisis in
Burundi, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
country configuration was supposed to undertake a
mission there. On the ground, we were eagerly awaiting
reinforcement from the PBC. But the mission was
cancelled at the last minute because ofwhat was termed
the security situation in the country, while leaders from
the region were flowing into Burundi.

I will now to turn to the agenda on women and
peace and security, because in View of the briefers
around the table I assume that it will be one of the
focus areas of today's debate. At the 2005 World
Summit, world leaders reaffirmed the important role
of women in conflict prevention and resolution and in
peacebuilding. They called for the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and for the first time accepted
the existence of interlinkages between development,
peace, security and human rights. In addition, and
further to the obligations under resolution 1325 (2000),
in February 2013 the United Nations and the leaders of
the Great Lakes region - the one I know best - signed
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
and its Women's Platform. The Women's Platform for
that volatile region, of which I am an integral part,
provides a framework for promoting the important
role of women in the peace and political processes in
the region, and contributes to achieving much-desired
stability by participating in the creation of the requisite
conditions for peace and development in the region,
among other things.

The remarkable thing, worth reporting here, is
that although the platform was initiated and launched
by Mrs. Mary Robinson, then Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region, her
successors, Ambassador Djinnit and the current Special
Envoy, Ambassador Xia, who are both men, have made
this their flagship programme for preventive diplomacy
and peacebuilding in the region, with tremendous
success. The joint peace missions of the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations conducted in Burundi,
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Sudan would not have been
possible without their full support in terms ofresources
and political will. I want to salute them for being
outstanding models, in both words and deeds, in the
HeForShe campaign.

Despite the many instruments, national action plans
and implementation mechanisms, women do not yet
have equal representation or demonstrable influence on
policies relating to peace and security. Violence against
women remains perhaps the most pervasive human
rights violation in the African continent and the Great
Lakes region in particular. The lack of African women's
participation in formal mediation processes, and at
the negotiating table in peace processes in particular,
reflects an important area of the resolution 1325 (2000)

agenda that remains poorly implemented.

Moreover, women's significant contributions to
subnational and local mediation and conflict-prevention
initiatives, and their strong role in them, continue to
go largely unrecognized and weakly supported. It was
against that backdrop that the African Union took
landmark decisions leading to the establishment of the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, officially referred to as FemWise-Africa.
The modalities of its operations were endorsed by the
AU Peace and Security Council on 13 March 2017 and
by the Security Council on 27 March 2017, in an Arria
Formula meeting. With the Council's indulgence, I
would like to explain a bit more about FemWise-Africa,
which I View as directly relevant to the objectives of
this debate on preventive diplomacy and peace and
security in Africa.

FemWise, as its name suggests, aims to strengthen
the role of women in conflict prevention and mediation
efforts in the context of the African Peace and Security
Architecture. The Network provides a platform for
strategic advocacy, capacity-building and networking
aimed at enhancing the implementation of the
commitments on women's inclusion in peacemaking in
Africa. Among its priorities are professionalizing the
role of women in preventive diplomacy and mediation
on tracks 1, 2 and 3, and ensuring a channel for their
meaningful and effective participation in peace
processes. Overall, FemWise-Africa aims at bridging
the gaps between mediation efforts on tracks 1, 2 and
3 and synergizing efforts towards inclusive peace
processes with sustainable outcomes.

We were in Burundi in June on ajoint peace mission
of FemWise-Africa and the Office of the Special
Envoy to the Great Lakes Region, carried out under
the leadership of Ms. Catherine Samba-Panza, former
interim President of the Central African Republic,
and Ms. Speciosa Kazibwe, former Vice-President of
Uganda, now a member of the Panel of the Wise of the
African Union. The mission's objective was to engage
the authorities in Burundi, the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in involving
women, civil society and other stakeholders in dialogue.
We thought it was timely to engage all stakeholders in
such preventive diplomacy in Burundi in particular, as
the country heads towards general elections next year.

What struck us most is how the Barundi have been
receptive to FemWise-Africa and its localized efforts.
With the support of the Ministry of Gender, they
have formed mediation teams at the community level,
drawing inspiration from FemWise-Africa to mitigate
conflicts and tension among communities before they
escalate to crisis levels. This is an example of a good
practice of preventive diplomacy at the local and grass-
roots levels, which needs to be scaled up and supported
if we are to achieve sustained peace and development
in that country.

The AU involves women in its Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative. We met in Constantine, Algeria, to
see how to best we can play our role in ensuring that
the African Union meets those aspirations. Next year,
we will celebrate the anniversaries of those landmark
aspirations, including 20 years of resolution 1325
(2000); 25 years of the Beijing Platform for Action,
which is the model for the 30 per cent gender quota
for women representation; and, of course, Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020. The question is will the guns
be silent in Africa come 2020?

The African Women Leaders Network, launched
jointly in June 2017 by the African Union Commission
and the United Nations, in partnership with the
Federal Republic of Germany, here at United Nations
Headquarters, is aimed at bolstering the leadership of
women in governance, peace and security for Africa's
transformation, including by participating actively
in ensuring that women play a meaningful role in
silencing the guns through advocacy and sensitization
of communities. As a coordinator of the peace and
security pillar of the Network, I call on the Council to
recognize those efforts and support the Network with
the resources necessary to make a difference.

I am proud to report that the Network, under
the able leadership of Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women, and Ms. Bineta
Diop, AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and
Security, has set the goal of generating sustainable
and concrete actions for women in Africa, in line with
the African Union and United Nations commitments
to prevention and the delivery of tangible solutions
on the ground. Women do not need to prove their
substantive impact to find solutions to the drivers of
armed conflict and displacement. Instead they should
reinforce their proactive role in peacebuilding and
sustainable development.

I am encouraged by the Secretary-General's
initiative for making prevention the overarching
priority for achieving peace and development. Today's
meeting is a clear testament to the commitment of
States and the Council to take deliberate measures to
prevent conflicts and mass atrocities in Africa and
worldwide. My humble appeal to the Council is to
put our money where our mouth is, that is, to invest
in conflict prevention and efforts that target the root
causes and drivers of violence.

It is high time to see women not as victims, but
as agents of preventive diplomacy who are catalysts
for peacebuilding. I am again privileged to be a
member of the Secretary-General's Peacebuilding
Fund Advisory Group, where women empowerment
and youth programmes have been accorded priority.
Nevertheless, we are still unable to effectively and
meaningfully engage local women organizations, due
to the hamstrung financial regulations and criteria
that govern the Fund. Those need to be changed in
line with the Secretary-General's commitment to
ensuring that women play a meaning role in preventive
diplomacy, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
sustainable development.

Drawing from the aforementioned, let me conclude
with a few recommendations.

First and foremost, as the Council deliberates on
preventive diplomacy, there is no need to reinvent the
wheel as the necessary mechanisms, frameworks and
legal instruments already exist, including regional
mechanisms such as the national action plans under
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, which remain unimplemented due to lack of
resources and, perhaps, political will.

Secondly, I need to emphasize that a regional or
subregional approach is the most appropriate one
and should be the primary response mechanism for
preventive diplomacy in Africa.

Thirdly, we see that the annual costs ofmaintaining
peacekeeping forces - more than $1 billion, for
example, in the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - would go a long way towards implementing
national action plans that would translate commitments
on women, peace and security into the national policies
and programmes of many African countries.

Fourthly, I call on the Council to support and
enhance the capacity of African regional organizations
and women engaged in conflict prevention and
mediation through FemWise-Africa and other
platforms for women. The focus should be on proactive
conflict prevention, before conflict escalates, rather
than reactive conflict prevention, preventing conflict
that has occurred from escalating. The various
initiatives taken at the international and regional levels
will have no effect in ensuring local ownership for
sustainability if they work in isolation from the local
initiatives. As mentioned in the Secretary-General's
statement, regional blocs have assumed a vital role in
conflict resolution through mediation efforts despite
the challenges they face. They need to be capacitated
and supported.

Fifth1y, there is a need to develop a holistic and
inclusive approach that ensures that no one is left
behind. The African Union Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development have placed
women and youth at the centre of their aspirations. It
goes without saying that collaboration and cooperation
among various institutions and communities that are
active in this field is essential. I participate in various
preventative frameworks, including the Global Action
Against Mass Atrocity Crimes, which is mentioned in
the Secretary-General's report on the responsibility to
protect (S/2019/463). It is a global, inclusive, State-led
network of partners, with the support of the Swiss
Government, that is engaged in atrocity prevention. It
seeks to support States that wish to develop national
architectures for the prevention of atrocity crimes.
I invite the Security Council to work closely with
such institutions.

Finally, dialogue and mediation are vital soft-
power approaches that should be leveraged as the
Council reflects on the centrality and value of
preventative diplomacy.

As a woman peace activist and champion of
women leadership, the subject that I teach, let me
conclude here by quoting a famous saying in Burundi,
"Nothing about us without us." We are here and ready
and willing to be deployed in any peace mission,
mediation or peacekeeping forces. There is no need to
look far. The African Women Leaders Network and the
FemWise-Africa network are at the Secretary-General's
disposal if he needs able and qualified women to assist
him in his good offices and diplomatic efforts.

The legendary South African singer, Yvonne Chaka
Chaka, defined women as well-organized men. We are
all in this together.

