Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): As each
day passes, the Middle East is drawn deeper and deeper
into a tragic cycle of violence, terrorism and
destruction, the victims of which are the civilian
Palestinian and Israeli populations.

Given the extreme gravity of the situation, the
heads of State and Government of the European Union,
meeting in Laeken, will issue in a few hours a
statement that will clearly and forcefully underscore
the position of the 15 member States.

The Security Council, for its part, could not
remain silent. At the close of this debate, the Security
Council is called upon to decide on a draft resolution
wherein a solemn appeal is made to both parties to put
an end to violence and to resume the path of
negotiation.

The draft resolution that we are going to vote on
takes into account the concerns of France - a clear,
unequivocal condemnation of all acts of terrorism, in
particular those targeting civilians; a condemnation of
extrajudiciary killings and the excessive use of force;
an appeal for the immediate cessation of all acts of
violence, provocation and destruction; an appeal for the
immediate and full implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Mitchell report, and
in that framework an encouragement to the parties
concerned to establish a monitoring mechanism; and a
call for the resumption of negotiations with a View to
achieving a peace agreement based on resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

As far as France is concerned, this settlement
must be based, on the one hand, on the reaffirmation
and full recognition of Israel's irrevocable right to live
in peace and security within internationally recognized
borders, and, on the other hand, on the establishment of
a viable, independent and democratic Palestinian State,
and this means the end of the occupation of Palestinian
territories.

To negotiate such a political settlement, eradicate
terrorism and build peace, Israel needs the
indispensable partner, the Palestinian Authority. The
Palestinian Authority must be preserved. This is the
last point stressed, quite rightly so, in the draft
resolution before this Council.

Because this text indicates a clear road - the
only possible one, really - and because it is a
balanced text, France will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

