Mr. Tessema (Ethiopia): I wish to begin by
expressing my delegation's gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for convening today's open meeting to
review the situation in Somalia. I also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Sir Kieran Prendergast for his
comprehensive report on the situation in Somalia in
general, and the ongoing peace process in particular, on
which the Council was also briefed in detail this
morning by the Permanent Representative of Djibouti.

This open meeting of the Security Council indeed
comes at a crucial juncture in the Somali peace
process, marked by the Somalia National Peace
Conference currently under way in Djibouti. The peace
initiative put forward by President Ismail Omar
Guelleh of the Republic of Djibouti, which has been
endorsed by both the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), seeks to assist the Somalis in
achieving national reconciliation that would culminate
in the establishment of a central authority.

The Government of Ethiopia has on various
occasions expressed its full support for the initiative of
President Guelleh, and welcomes the progress made
thus far, including in the work of the second phase of
the Arta Conference, which began on 15 June.
Ethiopia, as an immediate neighbour with a particular
interest in peace and stability in Somalia, and as a
country with a mandate from both the OAU and IGAD,
continues to monitor closely the situation in Somalia
and to fully support the ongoing peace efforts.

The tragic situation in Somalia, and especially the
developments in the past two years, have clearly
demonstrated that the absence of peace and central
authority in Somalia not only constitutes a serious
threat to the very survival of Somalia as a nation, but
also poses a serious challenge to the peace and stability
of the Horn of Africa subregion in general and to that
of Somalia's immediate neighbours, including
Ethiopia, in particular.

It is with this in mind that the seventh summit of
heads of State and Government of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, held in
Djibouti on 26 November 1999, condemned the actions
of third parties that, in collaboration with terrorist
groups, sought to destabilize the situation in the region,
and emphasized that

"Somalia cannot be allowed to be a haven
for all sorts of criminals and terrorist groups that
have the intention of making the whole region
lawless and outside the rule of law."

In the past few years, efforts have been made by
the countries of our region, under the aegis of IGAD, to
promote peace and national reconciliation in Somalia.
However, these efforts have not yet brought the desired
result, mainly because of the lack of commitment on
the part of the leaders of Somalia and the failure of
external actors to coordinate their peace efforts and
initiatives.

The experience gained over the past several years
has shown that peace and stability in Somalia will
continue to elude us as long as some in the country
continue to resist the ideas of local accommodation,
power-sharing and a broad-based grass-roots
participation in the political life of Somali society.
Attempts by some to create a monopoly of power
without accommodating others have proved futile, and
have undermined the aspiration of the people of
Somalia for peace and national reconciliation. This
situation should not be allowed to continue, and the
time has now come for the international community to
send a clear message to all those concerned that the
people of Somalia cannot be held hostage to such
narrow and personal interests.

Needless to say, the primary responsibility for
peace and national reconciliation in Somalia rests with
its own people and leaders. The international
community at large, and countries involved in peace
efforts in Somalia, in particular, can make an important
contribution only if their efforts are undertaken in a
coordinated manner. Parallel initiatives should be
avoided. The international community, and the United
Nations in particular, should continue their support for
the ongoing peace process by providing political,
financial and material support. To this end, we once
again call upon the Security Council to establish a trust
fund, as recommended by the United Nations
Secretary-General, to support the commendable efforts
being made by the Republic of Djibouti.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Ethiopia's
continued commitment to the search for durable peace
and national reconciliation in Somalia, which is also
indispensable for the peace and security of Ethiopia
and the entire subregion of the Horn of Africa.

