Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to congratulate you warmly,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. We hope that under your
presidency the Council will take practical steps to give
a glimmer of hope to the peoples of the region so that
dialogue and coexistence can be resumed and the logic
of peace and cooperation will prevail over the logic of
confrontation and vengeance. I would also like to thank
you for having responded favourably to the request
submitted by the member countries of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference (OIC) to convene a special
meeting of the Council to take up the tragic situation in
the Palestinian territories. Finally, I would like warmly
to congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the People's Republic of China, for
his wisdom and clear-sightedness in guiding the work
of the Council last month.
Just a few months ago, the world looked forward
with optimism to the negotiations between the
Palestinians and the Israelis. At the time, there was
hope for possible progress as a first step towards
restoring real, just peace to the Middle East - a peace
that would enable all peoples in the region to finally be
able to enjoy their legitimate rights, security and
tranquillity. Commendable efforts were made at that
time, in particular by the two sponsors of the peace
process, as well as by the European Union and the
Arab States, to encourage the two parties - Israel and
the Palestinians - to move forward and resolve all
difficulties. That breakthrough, to which we had so
looked forward, was not forthcoming.

Thereafter the region found itself in a spiral of
violence. Israeli forces adopted a policy of
escalation - a policy of killing children and civilians,
restricting the freedom of movement of Palestinians,
reinforcing the economic blockade, confiscating land,
destroying houses, consolidating the settlements policy,
and balkanizing and desecrating Palestinian territory.
Because of the international community's hesitation to
put an end to these violations with sufficient
promptness and determination, the Israeli forces
continued to pursue their repressive policies with a
vengeance. They also continued their policy of
assassination, targeting Palestinian leaders and
threatening to kill the relatives and families of those
whom they suspected of participating in resisting the
occupation.

Israeli forces invaded the premises of Palestinian
institutions, in particular Orient House in Al-Quds Al-
Sharif. The Israeli Government itself had previously
recognized the legal status of Orient House. For over
three decades it had agreed to respect that status and
not attack it. It was then that the Chairman of the Al-
Quds Committee, His Majesty Mohammed VI, King of
Morocco, issued a statement condemning the
occupation of Orient House by Israeli forces. His
Majesty condemned all forms of violence and counter-
violence and called upon the sponsors of the peace
process - the United States and the Russian
Federation - and the United Nations to take the
necessary steps to halt the policy of occupation and of
violation of the Holy Places and of Palestinian and
Islamic institutions in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The
Chairman of the Committee appealed to the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and international and
regional organizations active on the question of peace
to act swiftly to apply the ceasefire agreement and
relaunch peace negotiations.
A people, like the Israelis, that wants to live in
security with its neighbours cannot allow its leaders to
humiliate and kill those who are its partners today and
who will be its partners in the future. The international
community and the Security Council cannot remain
bystanders in the light of the violations committed by
Israel. They cannot deny human values and ignore the
international conscience. They cannot allow the region
to become caught up in the cycle of attack and counter-
attack. If things continue as they are, the situation will
continue to get worse and the crisis will become
evermore acute. That will only feed feelings of hatred.
This policy cannot bring about any success in the
efforts to achieve a ceasefire, to say nothing of the
negotiations themselves. Nor can it lead to a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

We are absolutely convinced that things would
not have reached this dangerous point and that this
crisis would not have arisen had the Security Council
adopted a resolution in March to send international
observers to determine responsibility and to prevent
acts of violence. We express the hope today that the
Council will be able to live up to the aspirations of the
peoples of the region, as well as those of the
international community, by changing its policy and
ensuring that the situation does not get any worse. My
delegation appeals to the Council and to the Secretary-
General to act robustly and responsibly in the light of
the seriousness of the situation.

Measures must be adopted making it possible to
implement the recommendations contained in the
Mitchell report, to urge Israel to comply with its
commitments and with international humanitarian law,
in particular the Fourth Geneva Convention. We hope
that the Security Council will do everything possible to
provide the necessary international protection for the
Palestinian people, and that it will exert all necessary
pressure to break the vicious cycle of violence and to
encourage the Israeli Government to give up the policy
that it has been conducting for the last few months and
to agree to resume negotiations where they had been
left off.

My delegation asks the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities pursuant to the Charter. We
are convinced that peace and security in the Middle
East will continue to depend on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), within the context of the principle of land for
peace, so that the Palestinians can enjoy all their rights,
particularly their legitimate right to create their own
State, with Jerusalem as its capital, and so that Israel
will withdraw from the rest of the occupied Arab
territories, including the Golan Heights and the
Lebanese occupied territories.

