Mr. Richardson (United States of America): When
the Angolan parties came to their historic agreement in
Lusaka in 1994, the United States was cautiously
optimistic. Our optimism grew as the quartering camps
began to fill with former UNITA combatants. Our
optimism increased with the formation of the Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation last April. Since
then, however, the process has come to a halt.

We are gravely concerned that, because UNITA has
failed to fulfil some key commitments, the peace process
is not moving forward and the possibility of renewed
fighting again threatens the people of Angola. We cannot
sit idly by hoping that the parties will somehow put the
peace process back on track. There is too much at stake
for Angola and for peace in the southern African region.

The United States wishes that the Security Council
did not have to adopt the draft resolution before us today.
However, according to the Secretary-General's latest
report, UNITA has maintained its military force, brought
the extension of State administration to a virtual standstill

 
and kept up a stream of anti-Government propaganda
through its radio VORGAN. In short, UNITA has refused
to commit itself to peace and national reconciliation.

Nevertheless, we still hope that UNITA will return to
the path of peace. We urge UNITA to make use of the
period before 30 September to fulfil its obligations under
the Lusaka Protocol. We hope that the Secretary-General
will be able to report to the Council before that date that
UNITA is in compliance with its obligations.

If UNITA does not act now, the sanctions will take
effect. We believe that the sanctions are strong, practical
and enforceable. The United States stands ready to examine
further measures by the Council should UNITA fail to
respond.

We remind the Government of Angola that it, too,
must abide by its commitments under the Lusaka Protocol.
It must continue to exercise restraint and refrain from any
action that could lead to a resumption of the hostilities. We
would view any military offensives against UNITA as a
reason to propose that the Council discontinue sanctions
against UNITA. The Government must also make every
effort to bring the remainder of UNITA into the mainstream
of Angolan society, allowing it to play its legitimate role as
a democratic opposition party and giving full participation
to those UNITA officials in the Unity Government.

The United States calls on President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi to meet as soon as possible within Angola.
They must fulfil their obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol, they must settle the dispute over diamond
revenues and they must put Angola back on the path of
national reconciliation.

The United States agrees with the Secretary-Generals
recommendation that some United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA) military units remain in the
country to assist in the event that additional UNITA forces
are registered and can be demobilized. However, at their
reduced strength, these military units can no longer ensure
their own security should hostilities resume and would not
be able to separate warring factions. If UNITA does not
heed the call for complete demobilization, the withdrawal
of the remaining MONUA military units should resume.

We congratulate the personnel of MONUA for the
work they are doing under trying circumstances. There is
no doubt that MONUA is playing a key role in promoting
the peace process.

I would also like to add a note of thanks to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
unflagging efforts to promote a lasting peace in Angola.
