Archbishop Auza: At the beginning of December
1978, the leaders of Argentina and Chile concluded
that all possibilities had been exhausted with regard
to reaching an agreement that would end their age-old
dispute concerning the determination of their southern
borders. Pope John Paul II pleaded with them not to
close the door, while insisting that they consider the
problem calmly and responsibly. Forty years after the
peaceful settlement of their dispute, Argentina and
Chile remain deeply grateful that their mutual decision
to request the mediation of the Holy See spared their
peoples from the scourge of war. Argentina and Chile,
as well as Mozambique and, most recently, Colombia
have set an example of how it is always necessary to
leave open mediation avenues to settle disputes and
never abandon the process of patient dialogue and
negotiations so as to reach a just and worthy solution by
peaceful means proper to civilized peoples.

In contrast, there continue to be blatant cases in
which parties in dispute have made the fatal move of
resorting to arms without giving mediation the time to
mature towards a peaceful settlement. Indeed, as Pope
Francis affirmed during his 2017 visit to Colombia,
the quest for peace is an open-ended endeavour. The
more demanding the path that leads to peace and
understanding, the greater our efforts must be. The
focus of mediation and conflict resolution must be
founded on respecting and defending human dignity
and the common good. It is impossible to find a just
way out of situations that create violence without this
principle of recognizing and restoring the dignity of
those who suffer during conflicts.

A key issue in the international community's
mediation efforts in the settlement of disputes is fair,
impartial mediation. While we may lament the failure of
parties to resort to mediation, we must also ask whether
we have impartial, unselfish and persevering mediators
with whom the parties in dispute can have a relationship
of mutual trust. Trustworthiness is mediators' greatest
asset, the open secret in their capacity to build mutual
trust among the parties to a dispute. A trustworthy
mediator engenders trust by being able to objectively
identify the interests of the parties and, in spite of and
beyond those particular interests, by being able to lead
the parties to see their specific interests within the
dynamic of working together for the common purpose
of achieving a greater good that is mutually beneficial
to all the parties involved.

Another fundamental lesson that we have learned
in the experiences of the Catholic Church in its
mediation efforts is that authentic mediation requires
the participation of all the parties involved - not
just of those who exercise leadership, but the entire
community, particularly those who have suffered in the
conflict. In that sense, mediation involves listening and
being close to the victims of the injustices and violence
generated by conflict.

Participation in the peace process takes place at
various levels, from the negotiating table to grassroots
initiatives. What is important is that each level creates
mechanisms that ensure that everyone works around the
shared goal of building peace. The sustainability of the
process will be effective to the extent that there is broad
participation. Fostering inclusive social relationships
during the peace process is also key to the successful
implementation of any peaceful settlement of a dispute.
Conflicts leave very deep wounds, and an inclusive,
participatory process for the mediation and resolution
of disputes is essential to the process of healing and
reconciliation, which continues long after the ink is
dry. A good mediator, while working to settle disputes,
builds a future of peace. Mediators are artisans and
instruments of peace. We thank those who have done
such a precious service to humankind.

