Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation shares the View of
the members of the Security Council, and of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, regarding the
importance and timeliness of considering the broad
range of issues connected with the prevention of armed
conflicts. It is our belief that the legitimate legal
foundation for preventing disputes and conflicts
consists of the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, the resolutions of the Security Council and the
norms of international law. The decisive role in this
field is played by the Security Council - which under
the Charter bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
believe that the principles laid down by the Charter and
the processes for the peaceful settlement of disputes
and conflicts are also fully applicable in the area of
prevention.

A key role in preventive diplomacy properly
belongs to the United Nations, which in this regard has
available to it considerable possibilities and a wide
array of means to prevent the escalation of disputes and
military clashes. At the same time, we are convinced
that preventive services to Member States should be
granted on a purely voluntary basis while strictly
observing the principle of non-intervention in internal
affairs. Only the clearly expressed consent of the host
country for preventive action can serve as a legal and
political basis to adopt such steps, as well as a
guarantee for their effectiveness. In this connection, we
believe that any response by the United Nations-
including responses to situations having a humanitarian
component - must be conducted in strict accord with
the Charter of the United Nations and exclusively by
decision of the Security Council.

The evolution of world affairs makes it desirable
to develop the norms of international law and, likewise,
to adapt them to new realities. However, such work
must be carried out collectively and be firmly based on
the Charter of the United Nations. This will make it
possible to reach consensus solutions whose legitimacy
is not open to doubt.

Events in recent years have once again confirmed
the importance of the consistent and strict observance
of the principles on the non-use of force in
international affairs, apart from those instances covered
by the Charter. A positive example of such an
implementation of those Charter principles is that of
the events in East Timor a year ago, when precise and
timely action by the Security Council in the context of
generally accepted norms of international law made it
possible to avoid the escalation of the conflict.

We have frequently in the past had occasion to
speak about the fundamentally important role that
should be played by Security Council arms-supply
embargo regimes in the prevention of armed conflicts.
Unfortunately, the world community continues to get
confirmation of the fact that the effectiveness of those
regimes leaves a great deal to be desired. Among the
most obvious examples of this is Kosovo, where the
peacekeeping forces regularly discover new weapons
caches that nurture the seeds of violence in that area
and are one of the reasons for the absence of any
stability in that part of the world.

The Russian Federation attaches paramount
importance to improving such important means of
preventing armed conflicts as early warning systems,
using the potential of the Secretary-General,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, and making more effective use of
programmes in the demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration of ex-combatants into civilian life. The
role of civilian police is equally important in the
preventive action of the United Nations.

We believe that these elements should become
part and parcel of a comprehensive strategy for the
prevention of conflicts, the need for which is referred
to in the draft presidential statement of the Council
prepared on Jamaica's initiative. Such a strategy should
be developed while taking into account the opinions
and thinking of the Members States of the United
Nations. In this connection, we would like to reiterate
our readiness to make our contribution to collecting
information that can subsequently become raw material
for the preparation of a report of the Secretary-General
on this topic.

The Russian Federation is fully aware of its
responsibility as a permanent member of the Security
Council, and is prepared to continue to promote the
exploration of ways and means of enhancing the
effectiveness of the efforts of the Security Council to
prevent armed conflicts.

