This statement is submitted on behalf of the Group of Friends of Solidarity for Global Health Security, an informal network of 41 Member States and the European Union, co-chaired by Canada, Denmark, the Republic of Korea, Qatar and Sierra Leone. The Group welcomes this Security Council open debate on pandemics and security. As the Secretary-General has mentioned, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic poses a significant threat to the maintenance of international peace and security. It is a threat to global health security and has intensified other, existing public health threats. The pandemic has further hindered national, regional and international conflict resolution efforts and threatens to undermine hard-won peacebuilding gains. The socioeconomic fallout of the crisis has deepened existing inequalities, including gender inequality, and may exacerbate the root causes of conflict and undermine sustainable development gains. Considering the sweeping implications of the COVID-19 pandemic compared to previous health crises, the international community must respond with heightened resolve and determination. Against this troubling backdrop, the Group of Friends would like to highlight the following five points. First, we welcome the Security Council's resolution on COVID-19 (resolution 2532 (2020)), particularly with respect to supporting the Secretary-General's appeal for an immediate global ceasefire. Parties to conflict must silence the guns in order to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance and open up space for diplomacy. Any military threat or attempt to incite violence must stop. We count on the Security Council to ensure that the resolution is meaningfully implemented. Secondly, we emphasize the pressing need for a global response based on the guiding values of multilateralism and solidarity. COVID-19 is a global crisis that calls for a global solution. No matter how daunting the challenge, if we can respond in unity, the pandemic will serve as a valuable opportunity for, rather than a crisis of, multilateral cooperation. The Group of Friends stands ready to support the ongoing global efforts to respond to COVID-19, including international cooperation to ensure equitable, affordable and global access to medicine, diagnostics, vaccines and medical equipment. In that context, we fully share the Secretary-General's call for renewed urgency in support of global public goods and universal health coverage. Thirdly, we emphasize the importance of ensuring that the most vulnerable and marginalized populations, particularly those in situations of armed conflict, are protected and that their humanitarian needs and priorities are met. Special attention must be paid to the plight of women, children, older persons, persons with disabilities, indigenous persons, migrants in vulnerable situations, refugees, displaced persons and others who are disproportionately impacted. We condemn attacks, acts of violence and threats of violence intentionally directed against medical and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, hospitals and other medical facilities. We also urge for elevated action against stigmatization, discrimination and hate speech that engender division and violence. Further, international humanitarian and human rights law must be respected. Fourthly, we highlight the important role that United Nations peace operations play in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, in addition to delivering on their existing mandated objectives. We encourage heightened attention on the resource and capability requirements facing United Nations peace operations as resources are shifted towards supporting the COVID-19 response. Also, we underscore the importance of the safety and security of peacekeepers in the field. Fifth and lastly, the global nature of the pandemic highlights the central role of the United Nations, including the World Health Organization. Recognizing that COVID-19 has had a profound impact on all three pillars of the United Nations, namely, peace and security, development and human rights, we count on the United Nations to implement a coordinated multi-agency, multisectoral and gender- sensitive response to address the multifaceted impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We encourage all relevant stakeholders to actively engage with the United Nations in support of that effort. To conclude, the Group of Friends supports the efforts of the Security Council to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and help prepare for future global health security challenges. We encourage the Security Council to consider the issue of global health security in greater detail and stand ready to engage constructively in that effort.
