Ms. Adamson: Before I make my statement, let
me express my shock and heartfelt condolences to our
Russian colleagues on the murder of their Ambassador.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic Area;
as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2016/1049). I also thank
Special Representative Yamamoto, the Permanent
Representative of New Zealand and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

Afghanistan has made considerable political,
security, economic and development progress
over the past decade, for which the Government of
Afghanistan and the Afghan people deserve much
credit. But the gains are fragile and major challenges
remain. The international community's support was
confirmed in October at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan, which reiterated its ongoing commitment
to Afghanistan. As noted, the international community
pledged $15.2 billion in support of Afghanistan's
development priorities for the period 2017-2020.
Showcasing its sustained commitment to Afghanistan,
the European Union, as a whole, pledged $5.6 billion.
Those figures express the continued engagement of the
international community in Afghanistan, based on the
principle of mutual accountability between the Afghan
Government and international donors.

Furthermore, the Conference gave a clear sign of
support for the National Unity Government to continue
along its reform path, including electoral reforms and
reform of the Afghan public administration, economy
and governance, including human rights, the rights of
women and children and the fight against corruption.
As an integral part of the Conference, a high-level event
on women's empowerment was organized jointly by the
Government of Afghanistan and the EU, which focused
on the ways and means of empowering Afghan women
to build a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, as well
as reinforcing the political and human rights of Afghan
women and how to realize those rights in everyday life.

The EU welcomes the priority the Afghan
Government has placed on fighting corruption, which
remains a major obstacle to development and stability,
and stresses the need to further strengthen the efforts
in tackling corruption. Positive developments have
occurred, but more needs to be done, including at the
legislative level. The EU will continue its support in
view of achieving progress in that important fight.

The international community expects the Afghan
Government to do well on its Brussels commitments. It
is important to establish a well-functioning follow-up
and progress-tracking mechanism at the country level.
We look forward to a first round of high-level stock-
taking in about a year. The EU and its member States
welcome the appointments of new commissioners to
the Independent Election Commission of Afghanistan
and the Electoral Complaints Commission, which was
an important step to restore public trust in Afghan
democratic institutions. While early engagement
and assistance to the new electoral institutions are
paramount, the EU, together with other international
donors, will be attentive to ensuring that any support
to the electoral bodies is effectively and sustainably
managed. Meaningful electoral reform should lead to
an improved periodic electoral process.

We also welcome the recent launching of the
Citizens Charter, involving local communities in
development processes. We note that national priority
programmes on women's economic empowerment are
progressing. The European Union has made a clear
commitment to the request of the Governments of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan to its development
partners to shift assistance increasingly towards
country systems. In that endeavour, we have established
a State-building contract as our vehicle to provide
direct, on-budget assistance.

On behalf of the EU and its member States, I would
like to reiterate that joint State-building and development
efforts in Afghanistan can be sustained only if they are
built on reinforced regional cooperation. That is why
the EU believes that regional forums, such as the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process or the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, should be used
to facilitate cooperation among all regional actors. In
the margins of the Brussels Conference, the EU hosted
the a high-level political discussion on Afghanistan
with key regional actors. The exchange pointed to an
emerging regional consensus to support an Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned political process aimed at achieving a
negotiated peace settlement in Afghanistan.

Migration continues to represent an important
challenge for both the European Union and Afghanistan,
which reaffirm the common aim to work together within
the United Nations framework to shape a global answer
based on solidarity and shared responsibilities. The EU
and Afghanistan recently took a joint commitment to
stepping up cooperation on addressing and preventing
irregular migration, in full respect for international
law, including the principle of non-refoulement. The
effective and successful implementation of this joint
way forward is key. At the same time, the EU continues
to pay particular attention to developments regarding
the regional dimension of the issue of Afghan refugees.
The EU fully supports the principles contained in the
Sustainable Development Goals, which foresee the

promotion of safe, responsible and orderly migration on
the basis of well-managed migration policies.

The number of civilian casualties due to attacks
by all fighting parties has reached record numbers
again in 2016, with insurgency attacks very often
indiscriminately targeting the civilian population and
increasingly affecting women and children. The EU
condemns those insurgent group attacks, which threaten
the stability and progress of Afghanistan. More than
ever, we need to continue to protect the vital role of
humanitarian agencies and to respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs of the most vulnerable.

The EU welcomes the undeterred willingness
of the Afghan Government to engage with all armed
groups in a political process. The only way to a durable
end to the conflict in Afghanistan is through a lasting
political settlement. After the breakthrough of the
Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) peace agreement, for which
the Afghan Government deserves credit, it will now be
important to implement it and open the way for future
peace agreements. The EU remains fully committed
to supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process.

It is important that the international community
remain strongly committed to accompanying
Afghanistan towards long-term progress and stability.
The consequences of disengagement should not be
underestimated, and we value the critical role of
UNAMA in promoting peace and security for all
Afghans. From our side, the EU will continue to
support the transformation process so as to promote the
emergence of a fully self-reliant, peaceful, democratic
and prosperous society for the benefit of all Afghans.

