Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan voted in favour
of resolution 1500 (2003), on Iraq. It contains two
important elements: first, acknowledgement of the
Governing Council of Iraq and, secondly, the
establishment of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

At every stage of the Council's deliberations on
Iraq with regard to resolutions 1472 (2003), 1476
(2003) and especially 1483 (2003), Pakistan's position
was guided by the interests of the Iraqi people. The
resolution just adopted upholds the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq. Pakistan, of course, would
also wish to see the reaffirmation of other principles,
such as: the right of the Iraqi people to choose their
own political destiny and form of government and to
exercise their right of self-determination; non-
intervention and non-interference in the internal affairs
of Iraq; permanent sovereignty and control over the
natural resources of Iraq; respect for the religious and
cultural traditions of the people of Iraq and for the
sanctity of holy places; and, finally, the right of the
Iraqi nation to economic and social reconstruction.
Those principles, indeed, are the framework within
which the Security Council must take all decisions and
actions relating to Iraq.

Pakistan has also advocated a central role for the
United Nations in the restoration of peace and security
in Iraq, the provision of humanitarian relief, Iraq's
reconstruction and the restoration of its sovereignty
and independence. The resolution affirms the vital role
of the United Nations. Importantly, in paragraph 2, it
decides to establish UNAMI to help the Secretary-
General to fulfil his mandate, as set out in resolution
1483 (2003) and as envisaged in paragraph 98 of the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
24 of resolution 1483 (2003) (S/2003/715).

We welcome the creation of UNAMI. Pakistan
has no doubt that the tasks facing UNAMI will be
challenging; it should receive the resources necessary
for the purpose. We also have no doubt that the role of
UNAMI will continue to grow and to become more
important as the Iraqi people move towards recovering
their full sovereignty and creating a fully representative
Government.

The Secretary-General, in his report pursuant to
paragraph 24 of resolution 1483 (2003), stated that the
Governing Council "will provide a broadly
representative Iraqi partner with whom the United
Nations and the international community at large can
engage" (5/2003/715, para. 107). The Government of
Pakistan has also termed the establishment of the
Governing Council as a welcome first step in the
direction of returning governance and restoring
sovereignty to the people of Iraq as soon as possible.
On 22 July, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, said
that the Governing Council was "broadly representative
of the various constituencies existing in Iraq"
(S/PV.479], p. 8) and that it would need the full
support of the international community. He also
stressed the need to prepare a clear timetable for the
earliest possible restoration of Iraqi sovereignty. We
are glad that the views of my Government on the
Governing Council and the concept of an evolution
towards a fully representative Government, as reflected
in paragraph 1, have been approved.

At this stage, I should like to make one comment
of a general nature. Everyone recognizes the value of
consultations and consensus among the five permanent
members of the Security Council. However, we believe
that it is among the entire Council membership that the
Council's decisions should be finally discussed and
approved. We hope that, in future, we - as a non-
permanent member - will have more time to consider
draft resolutions, especially on issues as important as
Iraq.

We believe that the people of Iraq face
monumental challenges in the economic, social and
political fields. We hope that the adoption of this
resolution will enable the international community to
accelerate Iraq's progress towards full normalization of
conditions in the country. We look forward to the day
when that great nation - which shares strong bonds of
history, faith and culture with the people of Pakistan -
will recover its former glory in the international
community and emerge as a leading nation in the
Islamic world.

