Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the report on the human rights
situation in Ukraine. I am grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Simonovic' for presenting the
report today.

Today's meeting is being held with the following
fact on everyone's mind: it is only because ofthe Russian
military aggression, which should be unimaginable
in the twenty-first century yet is unfolding in plain
sight, that the situation in Ukraine has emerged on the
Council's agenda. Ukraine welcomes the publication of
the report, which reflects the situation in my country in
the field of human rights objectively enough.

Unlike the previous Administration, the new
Government in Ukraine is willing and ready to embrace
recommendations aimed at promoting human rights
and the rule of law in our country. At the same time,
we hope that the other Government mentioned in the
report will also take specific actions to stop and prevent
human rights violations.

The document strongly rejects the allegations of
violations of the rights of Russian minorities in Ukraine,
which were used as a reason for Russia's military
aggression against our country and the annexation of
Crimea, which was declared illegal by the General
Assembly.

My Russian colleague stated today that the Russian
language is in danger in Ukraine. Let me give the
Council some comparative figures on the situation
concerning the protection of the language rights of the
several million Ukrainians in the Russian Federation
and the Russians in Ukraine. These figures are based
on the report of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe's High Commissioner on
National Minorities, dated March-April 2009. I ask
members to please compare the figures.

On secondary schools, there are no Ukrainian
secondary schools in the Russian Federation for at least
2 million people. In Ukraine, there are 101,256 Russian
secondary schools.

On publications, seven Ukrainian newspapers are
published at the expense of the local authorities and
Ukrainian organizations of the Russian Federation.
Financial support at the federal level is not provided
to ensure the information needs of the Ukrainian
community in the Russian Federation. There are 1,176
newspapers published in the Russian language in
Ukraine.

On broadcasting, there is only one Ukrainian
broadcast radio programme in Russia. Russian language
television and radio programmes in Ukraine consists of
about 74 per cent of the total broadcasts in Ukraine.

The Russian Permanent Representative today
stated that there was growing anti-Semitism and
neo-Nazism in Ukraine. And the Russian side is
concerned about the fact that this is not reflected in
today's human rights report. Allow me to quote some
excerpts from the joint letter addressed not long ago
to Russian President Vladimir Putin by an association
made up of 266 Jewish organizations in Ukraine.

"The speculation about the violent
Ukrainization and the prohibition to speak in
Russian, which was always stressed in the Russian
media, should remain on these authors' conscience.
Mr. President, your confidence expressed on the
growth of anti-Semitism in Ukraine does not
meet the real facts. Perhaps you were confused,
indicating Ukraine instead of Russia, where Jewish
organizations have documented the growth of
anti-Semitism last year.

"We were and still we are being frightened
by the fact that Bandera followers and fascists
are rushing to power in Ukraine, and we should
expect the Jewish pogroms. Yes, we are aware
that political opposition and the social powers that
achieved positive changes in the executive branch
of the country are made up of different groups. The
nationalists are among them, but even the most
marginal of them do not allow themselves to express
anti-Semitism and other forms of xenophobia. And
what we know is that our nationalists are under the
control of civil society and the new Government
of Ukraine, which is not the case with the Russian
neo-Nazis, who are encouraged by your secret
services".

Today our Russian colleague also touched upon
the case concerning Mr. Tsarev and Mr. Dobkin as
candidates in the presidential election. I am authorized
to say that we condemn all forms ofviolence, especially
when it concerns opposition leaders and candidates
for President. In that context, work must be done
by the police, who are obliged to carry out a proper
investigation and to submit it to the court. Today, the
Ukrainian Parliament considered those cases, and we
expect that they will be assessed and that the Office of
the Prosecutor will then comment.

I would also like to note something interesting
in that situation. Coupled with the aggressive actions
against Ukraine, that situation cannot be excluded
as provocation from our opponents. I point out that
Mr. Tsarev was attacked by unknown assailants. Those
who rescued him were from the Right Sector - precisely
the forces that Russia has consistently accused
of demonstrating extreme intolerance towards it.
Mr. Tsarev openly thanked the representatives of that
group for rescuing him. This story was broadcast widely
by Ukraine's main news channels. Russian television
channels showed only part of that interview. We have
the full version on a disk and will give it to our Russian
colleagues.
We call on the States Members of the United
Nations to take close note of the human rights
violations detailed in the report before and during the
Crimea pseudo-referendum of 16 March. The include
harassment, arbitrary arrests, torture, violations of
the freedom of expression, media freedom, access to
information and the protection of journalists. Particular
attention is rightly given to violations of the rights of
the inhabitants of the peninsula under the Russian
occupation. The most vulnerable communities in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea are considered to
be the Crimean Tartars and Ukrainians, who were
intimidated and forced to leave their homes because
of the lack of a safe environment and the oppression
of their rights and freedoms. Tartar leaders consider
the situation as the third act of genocide against their
ethnic group in the past century.

Given the ongoing systematic violations of human
rights on the Crimean peninsula, the Ukrainian side
insists that the situation in the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea should remain under the radar of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and its mission and other international
monitoring mechanisms. In that respect, we welcome
the intention of the United Nations monitoring mission
to establish its sub-office in Simferopol.

Mindful of the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 68/262, entitled "Territorial integrity
of Ukraine", is is alarming that - along with an
analysis of recent developments and factors in the
eastern regions of Ukraine - the document reports on
external interference in the situation, in particular the
participation in the protests and clashes by individuals
who arrived from Russia. At the Security Council
meeting held on Sunday, 13 April (see S/PV.7154), we
gave some facts about such interference. One can find
much more evidence by visiting the official site of the
Ukrainian Secret Service.

Ukraine is surprised that the only criticism of the
peace enforcement operation in Ukraine comes from
the Russian Federation. The Council will recall that this
country is one of the most frequent users of counter-
terrorism tools against its citizens. I would like to draw
the Council's attention to the fact that Russia uses the
same strategy in all counter-terrorism operations: if
the enemy does not surrender, it is stormed at any cost.
Dozens of examples could be given. The enforcement
operation in Ukraine is being undertaken to protect
people and to restore law and order in some regions of
Ukraine. The operation is targeted exclusively at armed
groups who are committing acts of a criminal nature,
including the seizure of administrative buildings,
police and military facilities and airports. Those armed
groups are strongly supported by the Russian special
operations force units, illegally infiltrated into the
territory of Ukraine.

My Russian colleague mentioned today that the
the first blood has been spilled in eastern Ukraine,
that of five Ukrainian peace enforcement officers who
were killed in a well-prepared attack overseen by the
Russian officer Ihor Strielkov.The Council can find
detailed information on the website of the Ukrainian
Secret Service: www.sbu.gov.ua.

It is in that light that we look forward to the mission's
next report, which will focus on eastern Ukraine.

United Nations experts have stated clearly that a
number of human rights violations in other parts of
Ukraine were a legacy of the previous Government,
which became one of the main reasons that caused the
Ukrainian mass protests that took place from November
2013 to February 2014. The reasons posing a challenge
for decades to human rights in Ukraine generally,
and in its eastern and southern regions in particular,
are well known, that is, poverty, a high level of child
mortality, unemployment and dangerous working
conditions, especially in the coal-mining industry. As
a result, basic human rights and principles outlined in
the Constitution of Ukraine were not always respected
in my country.

The only way Ukraine can cope with those
problems is to dramatically change its inherited status
quo in order to build an open, democratic civil society.
The newly formed Parliament and Government of
Ukraine have repeatedly stated their commitment to
reforms designed to eliminate those vestiges of the
past, and we are grateful to the authors of the report for
noting positive trends in the new Ukrainian authorities'
activities that indicate their willingness to ensure a
break with past injustices and elaborate a new vision of
Ukraine's future. The action plan for the Government
presented by the new Cabinet covers the problems of
each and every region of Ukraine. It focuses on the
practical needs of the population, including ethnic
minorities. What we need, in order to achieve those
goals, is to be left in peace by Russia.

We greatly appreciate the role the United Nations
is playing in normalizing the situation in Ukraine, and
we are ready to enhance our cooperation with its human
rights bodies in order to give proper consideration to
human rights issues in implementing our wide-ranging
reforms. Those reforms are aimed at ensuring the
rule of law, developing a democratic, pluralistic
society, eliminating corruption, complying with social
standards and protecting the rights of minorities. The
real watershed in this process will be the presidential
elections to be held in Ukraine on 25 May. We are
determined to have them whatever the circumstances,
and to make them the most transparent elections in the
history of independent Ukraine.

I thank the Council for its support and understanding.

