Mr. Morris: On 11 May, I travelled to Baghdad
to review first-hand the progress of the operations of
the World Food Programme (WFP) in Iraq and to hold
meetings with senior members of the Office of
Reconstruction and Humanitarian Affairs, the Ministry
of Trade, which is overseeing the Iraqi food
distribution system, and United Nations colleagues. I
am pleased to report to the Council that tremendous
progress has been made. The WFP has already
delivered more than 200,000 metric tonnes of food -
3,800 truckloads - using five different logistics
corridors through Turkey, Jordan, Syria, Iran and
Kuwait. In addition, a shipment of WFP rice has
moved through the port of Umm Qasr. And once the
dredging by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and other work is completed, that
port will become a major entry point for the World
Food Programme.

All those deliveries are gearing up to WFP's
largest humanitarian operation ever. Our objective is to
ensure that 480,000 metric tonnes of food a month are
available to feed all 27 million Iraqis through their
existing public food distribution system for a period of
five months. At the conclusion of that five-month
period, we plan that an Iraqi authority will be able to
take over. During this operation, we will distribute 2.5
million tonnes of food - that is 48,000 truckloads -
at a total cost of $1.85 billion.

Resources for this operation so far have come
both from the donor community - in fact, we have
received support from more than 30 countries - and
from food supplies available under the oil for food
programme. WFP staff have been working hard to
renegotiate food contracts under the provisions of
Security Council resolutions 1472 (2003) and 1476
(2003). I am pleased to inform the Council that we
have now identified a total of $947 million worth of
food items from the oil for food programme, including
their transport and distribution costs, which will be
used towards this emergency operation. With those
resources and existing in-country stocks, distributions
have already begun to hospitals, social institutions and
those who had not received their complete advance
rations earlier. Full distributions to the entire
population will commence on 1 June through the
44,000 food agents placed all across Iraq. Advanced
rations provided by the Government before the conflict
supplied families with two months of provisions, and
with the restoration of the public distribution system
we are confident we can avoid any serious hunger
among Iraqis. Today, there is no food crisis in Iraq.

That being said, we still face a number of
immediate challenges. First and foremost is the issue of
security for staff, warehouses, silos, mills and offices. I
raised this issue in Baghdad and was pleased to hear
that it is considered to be the absolute, number-one top
priority. Other pressing issues include the payment of
salaries for Ministry of Trade staff implementing the
public distribution system, as well as the provision of
water, fuel and electricity supplies to mills in Iraq so
they can produce wheat flour.

Another pressing concern is the protection of
Iraq's cereal harvest, estimated this year at some 1.7
million tonnes of wheat and barley. The harvest began
last week and will continue into June. The Iraqi
Ministry of Trade has traditionally purchased the local
crop through a network of Grain Board buying centres
spread throughout the production areas. In previous
years, farmers have been offered a fixed price of some
$75 per tonne of wheat, taking into consideration that
they have also received subsidized seeds, fertilizers and
pesticides from the Government. By way of
comparison, the cost of importing wheat into Iraq is
over $200 per tonne.
The World Food Programme has set aside funds
from the 13 per cent account and is further developing
a project proposal to procure some 1 million tonnes of
wheat locally in Iraq using United Nations escrow
account funds, as provided for under resolution 1472
(2003). We will, in fact, pay the local farmers $105 per
tonne. For this project to be successful, we need the
immediate re-establishment of the administration of the
Grain Board. This will require payment of salaries and
replacement of looted weight scales, bagging
equipment and office equipment, as well as security
and currency arrangements for large-scale cash
disbursements, given the absence of banking facilities.

WFP has supported the procurement and delivery
of food commodities for public distribution during this
time of upheaval in Iraq, and we look forward to
handing over these responsibilities as a new
administration comes online. The importance of the
food ration provided under this system cannot be
overstated during this time of transition. The entire
population of Iraq depends on the rations to some
degree, and 60 per cent of Iraqis who are dependent on
the rations as their sole source of income sell part of
them to pay for other household needs. As such, until
there is political stability and broad economic recovery
which benefits all sections of Iraqi society, the food
rations will continue to provide basic household food
security and act as a stabilizing force in this volatile
period.

At the same time, Iraq is a nation of tremendous
potential wealth and resources. With the restoration of
a functioning economy, it will eventually be able to
make the transition from heavily subsidized food
rations towards a market food economy. As it does so,
it will be critical to maintain a safety net for the
vulnerable and food insecure, especially young
children, in areas where we have seen unusually high
malnutrition rates. The population requiring a safety
net would at the outset be very large. However, it
would shrink over time as more and more economic
opportunities became available. The World Food
Programme has developed considerable expertise in
supporting the development of a safety-net system.
Should it be called upon to do so, the World Food
Programme stands ready to provide its expertise and
capacity in this area to assist the Iraqi people.

