Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab J amahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I join previous speakers in welcoming President
J ose Ramos-Horta and in thanking him for his personal
participation in our debate today with a detailed and
candid presentation on the situation in his country. I
wish also to thank His Excellency the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2008/72) and
his valuable remarks.

My country welcomes the fact that the situation
in Timor-Leste - in particular the security situation -
has stabilized since the incidents of February 2008. We
commend the progress made in addressing the two
residual consequences of the 2006 crisis - the
petitioners and the internally displaced persons. We
hope that these efforts will continue with a view to
achieving lasting peace.

We also welcome the agreement between the
Government of Timor-Leste and the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) on the
resumption of policing responsibilities by the National
Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) in mid-2009, in
accordance with the criteria agreed by the two parties
in 2008. This development will lay the foundation for
the long-term development of the PNTL. In that
connection, we share the views expressed by the
Secretary-General on the need to agree on a detailed
and binding document defining the specific roles of
UNMIT police and the depth of the UNMIT-national
police engagement in this next phase, which must be
agreed and in place prior to the start of the handover
process. UNMIT should also continue its monitoring
and advisory role. In that regard, we welcome the
Government's agreement to a medium-term strategy
and terms of reference and support the Secretary-
General's proposal to maintain the current size of the
police mission.

Despite the achievements, we share the
Secretary-General's opinion that "inflammatory
rhetoric between some leaders has a negative impact on
all of society, hardening positions and increasing
tensions between followers" (S/2009/72, para. 8). We
therefore call on all parties to pursue constructive
political dialogue in the interests of their country. In
that connection, we welcome the memorandum of
understanding signed by the Office of the President on
19 November to achieve consensus on issues of
national importance and priority. We also commend the
efforts of President Ramos-Horta and his perseverance
in maintaining good relations with all local actors.

It is important to continue supporting and
improving the institutions of Timor-Leste, building
their capacities to assume their full responsibilities for
socio-economic and security conditions, respect for the
rule of law, human rights and the fight against
impunity, and to pursue a comprehensive approach to
identifying the external and internal responsibilities
and roles of the national police and the armed forces.
That will help to strengthen legal frameworks and
civilian oversight through constructive political
dialogue and respect for State institutions.

In conclusion, we support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his report, particularly
those in response to the request of the Timorese
Government for logistical support and assistance for
the local elections to be held this year, which we hope
will be crowned by success. We also support the efforts
of Special Representative Atul Khare and the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
mandate of UNMIT be extended to February 2010.

