Mr. Ibrahim (Somalia): Mr. President, allow me
to thank you once again for your dedication to this
issue, Somalia. I would also like to thank the other
members of the Security Council who also mentioned
everything that is in their hearts about Somalia. I
would also like to offer my heartfelt thanks to those
countries whose taxpayers' money has gone to
Somalia, in particular, the United States of America,
the United Kingdom, Japan and Norway, as well as the
European Union.

I am also pleased to mention here, on behalf of
my Government, and as stated in paragraph 25 of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/234), that
about $147.6 million in fulfilled pledges has already

been received, thanks to payments from Belgium and
the European Union. And, in paragraph 26, we see that
$340,000 was paid to the Central Bank of Somalia.
Council members can therefore see how much of the
money that has been pledged to the Somali people has
actually reached them. My Government would like to
ask the international community what it would like us
to show in the fight against terrorists who have a good
"father" - they get a lot of money - when we are not
getting anything at all. How can we fight against these
terrorists who are destroying our people and our
country, when Al-Shabaab and other groups are getting
their money from their own fathers or their uncles?

I thank Ahmedou Ould Abdallah and my brother
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union. They keep fighting and talking every
day, every single minute, about the situation in
Somalia. And they are trying their very best to say
whatever they can say about Somalia. But, to be frank
and honest, nothing of what they say or what other
friends of Somalia say has actually been perceived by
the Somali people. I am sorry about that.

As to the United Kingdom and the United States,
yes, the United Kingdom is the largest donor to
Somalia, having pledged $150 million to $180 million.
The representative of the United Kingdom earlier
mentioned $60 million as having been pledged to
Somalia. A lot of money has been spent in the name of
Somalia, but none has come to my Government. And I
am responsible for the Somali people. If nobody trusts
us, whom should they trust? The trust and
responsibility of the people of Somalia lies in us. We
should be trusted and held accountable for whatever is
given to us to be distributed to the Somali people. If
not, then we are not responsible parties.

I would also like to express my appreciation for
the reference to the Monitoring Group in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/234). I also thank the
Norwegian representative for mentioning it as well. My
Government has very seriously taken note of the
Group's report (S/2010/91). We have established a
commission to further investigate the allegations. The
findings will be shared with the members of the
sanctions Committee. In spite of the fact that I myself
have been falsely accused, I would like to assert to the
Security Council that the Commission established by
the Prime Minister will continue its investigations. The
findings will also be shared with the Council. Everyone
who has been accused will be accountable to the
Commission. But if persons have been accused falsely
or without basis, we would like the Security Council to
take action against those who actually collected false
reports.

Many Somalis are now dying because of the
report. The aid that is supposed to reach the Somali
people is not reaching them. All members of the
Council know that. The report has actually created
quite a mess in my Government and among my people.
Our enemies - Al-Shabaab and other groups - are
laughing at us. They are very happy with what is
coming from the report of the Security Council's
Monitoring Group. The enemies of Somalia are
actually being helped by the Group's report. Without
thinking thoroughly or understanding what they were
writing, the Group's members helped Al-Shabaab and
the terrorists. I would like for them to think carefully
before they act. As the Somali Government, we are
ready to take this issue seriously, to investigate and to
take thorough action.
28

I would like to thank every member of the
Council who has spoken from the heart about helping
the Somali people. In particular, we will never forget
what Ahmedou Ould Abdallah is doing for the Somali
people. I was one of the first to come from Asmara to
meet with him in Nairobi to say that we would like to
join the peace process. Here before the members of the
Council, I would also like to thank the armed forces of
Uganda and Burundi, whose members are paying with
their own blood to ensure that Somalia can once again
stand on its own feet. We and our children shall also
remember all those who are helping us to achieve that.

