Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to express its gratitude for the
briefings delivered by Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator Stephen O'Brien and Regional Director for
the Middle East, North Africa, Central Asia and Eastern
Europe of the World Food Programme Muhannad Hadi.
We thank the briefers for their testimonies.

Venezuela appreciates the commendable endeavours
and facilitation efforts carried out by Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed to try and seek a political solution to
the current armed conflict that has rocked Yemen for
almost two years. We reiterate to him our full support
for his work on the ground. Venezuela believes that
negotiations will produce positive results only insofar
as the parties show flexibility and commitment to
achieving lasting and sustainable peace in Yemen.

Yemen is one ofthose cases at the Security Council
that falls into the category of so-called 'silenced
conflicts'. The Yemeni people are the victims ofa brutal
violence that is the result of intense armed conflict,
in which schools, hospitals and housing are targets
of indiscriminate bombing with highly advanced and
expensive armaments known for their precision when
aimed at any given target. We do not believe that errors
are possible in that type of military attack. What does
seem possible is a deliberate attempt used to punish
the Yemeni civilian population - against whom even
cluster munitions have been used, in clear violation
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.

In that regard, as has been pointed out by other
speakers, our country resolutely condemns the aerial
attacks carried out by the coalition on a funeral
procession in Sana'a on 8 October, in which 140 people
were killed and 525 civilians were injured. We also
condemn the bombing of hospitals run by Me'decins
sans Frontieres, as well as the bombing of civilian
sanitation centres and services. We believe that such
illegal actions cannot go unpunished, for which it is
essential that there be investigations into the violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law that have been committed during the
conflict.

On that point our country would like to make it
very clear that we categorically reject any attack on the
civilian population, wherever such attacks may take
place - whether in Syria, Yemen, Iraq or Palestine.
The Security Council seems to remain passive when
faced with such an awful reality; it has given little or
no visibility to such a critical issue. We must remember
that, months ago, Under-Secretary-General O'Brien
described the humanitarian situation in Yemen as being
proportionately worse than that in Syria. There seems
to be a brutal competition taking place in terms of the
playing out of a culture of death, war and violence in
the region.

The exchange of opinions we are engaged in today
at this briefing meeting is a rare occurrence, as there are
very few opportunities in which the Security Council
discusses this issue in open format. We would therefore
like to thank the President for having facilitated today's
dialogue and for making it possible for us show this
problem to the rest of the United Nations membership.
We hope that the same will hold true with regard to
other issues that are confined to closed consultations.
For the sake of transparency, open meetings should
be the rule, not the exception - something that is one
of the shortcomings in the working methods of the
Security Council.

Since Venezuela became a member of the Security
Council - and just a couple of months from ending our
term in this organ - we have seen with great regret
how the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen
has worsened as a result of the armed conflict. It is
probably high time to review resolution 2216 (2015) and
adapt it to the situation on the ground. In that respect,
we support the road map that has been proposed by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, which seeks
to de-escalate and halt the conflict. Furthermore, the
Security Council should as soon as possible adopt a
draft resolution on the humanitarian situation that
includes the establishment of humanitarian pauses
and the cessation of all armed attacks, including aerial
bombing. In line with its primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, the Council
cannot continue to remain indifferent in the face of
the gravity of the events taking place in Yemen every
day, and must stop seeing them as routine occurrences:
business-as-usual. It is fundamental to achieve a
sustained cessation of hostilities in order to provide an
opportunity for humanitarian agencies on the ground
to do their work. Any solution to the conflict must
include, as a basic principle, respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Yemen.

Moreover, such a solution must also proscribe and
condemn attacks against the territory of Saudi Arabia
as well as on maritime traffic in the Red Sea. Our
country express its absolute rejection of attacks against
the territory of Saudi Arabia and against navigation in
the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait.

The Council must move forward constructively
in addressing the political and humanitarian crisis
affecting the brotherly people of Yemen. Members
of the Security Council must address the subject
objectively, with determination and commitment,
putting aside national expediency and the positions of
its members. We are concerned that the geopolitical
agendas of certain regional actors, and some outside
the region - some of them Council members - are
hampering any possibility of reaching an agreement
that would put an end to the current armed clashes,
and are undermining diplomatic efforts led by the
Special Envoy.

Although the people of Yemen are the main losers
in this war, countries that manufacture and export
weapons have profited outrageously by providing
highly sophisticated weapons to one of the parties, in
amounts that total billions of dollars. It is therefore
paradoxical that countries that emphatically promoted
the Arms Trade Treaty are now the ones that are stoking
the armed conflict by providing sophisticated weapons
for financial gain, which are then used by one the
parties to intentionally violate the population's rights
and international human rights law.

Venezuela reiterates that the solution to the
armed conflict in Yemen lies with its citizens - its
people - along with the support of the international
community, as they exercise their right to self-
determination. Our country will support all peaceful
political attempts aimed at safeguarding the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of this brotherly
nation, pursuant to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Armed clashes have plunged the country into a
very grave and deplorable humanitarian crisis, as has
been pointed out by all the relevant agencies of the
United Nations - and revealed today in stark relief.
This devastating scenario serves to highlight the urgent
need to urgently respond to a problem that is having
a negative impact on the humanitarian situation when
it comes to providing food, medicine, water, nutrition
supplements for children, psychosocial services and
other basic services. We therefore call upon the parties
to allow humanitarian agencies and other organizations
to reach the entire population in order to allow the
delivery of assistance, so as to address the most pressing
needs of the Yemeni population.

It is vital to reach a political solution to the conflict
as soon as possible. The institutional collapse and the
current sectarian rhetoric in Yemen have benefited
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in furthering their terrorist activities, which are a threat
to regional and international peace and security. We are
concerned by the fact that fighters from both terrorist
organizations are prepared to cooperate tactically to
achieve their destabilizing aims in Yemen and the rest
of the region.

Once again, we encourage the parties to make
a decisive commitment to inclusive dialogue, with a
View to achieving a settlement that puts an end to the
hostilities and thereby achieves a solid, lasting peace
in Yemen. We believe it particularly important that
there be an atmosphere of mutual confidence and that
confidence between the parties be re-established, in a
way that tensions can be decreased and that negotiations
can take place successfully. Countries with any
influence on the parties must continue to work to make
progress in this process.

The tragic situation and prolonged crisis in Yemen
require that we not relent in our efforts to help the parties
turn the tide on the atmosphere of violence that prevails
in this Arab nation. We trust that the stakeholders will
once again assume their commitments to find political
solutions that put an end to the war and allow the
people of Yemen to regain hope for peace. Our brothers
and sisters in Yemen deserve to live in peace. Public
discussion of these matters in the Security Council will
serve to ensure that all parties are aware of the need to
find a political solution together.

In conclusion, our delegation would like to
acknowledge once again the efforts made by all
volunteers and humanitarian personnel on the ground
in Yemen who are making a contribution to helping
the Yemeni people. We also appreciate the work of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and of its staff deployed on the ground, who are involved
in the noble task of supporting the affected population
under very adverse circumstances. Venezuela would
like to reiterate its support for the initiative and
political efforts championed by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed.

