The President: I thank Ms. Appio for her briefing.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/445, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by Albania, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chad, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Monaco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2225 (2015).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.

Let me start by thanking Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his special remarks. I also wish to express
my sincere appreciation to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
Leila Zerrougui and to Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their briefings and
valuable insights. Malaysia fully acknowledges and
commends the vital and indispensable work of the United
Nations in advocating for and providing assistance to
children affected by armed conflict around the world.
I furthermore wish to thank Ms. Eunice Apio of the
Facilitation for Peace and Development of Uganda for
her testimony on the consequences of child abduction,
the effects of which are far-reaching and are felt long
after conflict has ended.

Graca Machel, in her seminal 1996 report on
the impact of armed conflict on children (A/51/306),
advocated forcefully that the protection of children
in armed conflict is the joint responsibility of all
actors - Member States, international and regional
organizations, civil society and even the lone
individual, each playing their respective roles. It is that
sense of shared responsibility that Malaysia appeals to
when calling for concerted action to end and alleviate
the suffering of children harmed by warfare. This is
especially so if we are to address challenges that require
sustained attention and close collaboration.

The challenges are manifold. In Yemen, Iraq and
Palestine, children are losing their lives as the result
of air strikes and the use of explosive weapons in
densely populated settings. Children in South Sudan
and Somalia continue to be recruited in large numbers
by armed groups and militias. Children abducted by
violent extremist groups, such as Boko Haram and
Daesh, are forced into sexual slavery and are coerced or
brainwashed to inflict bloodshed, including as suicide
bombers, combatants and executioners.

Those continued violations against children shock
our collective consciousness and demand a concerted,
collective response. The increasing incidence of
abductions perpetrated primarily by non-State
armed groups is grave and disturbing. Children who
are abducted can be subjected to myriad further
violations - they can be harmed multiple times. The
use of abductions by Violent extremist groups as a terror
tactic against local communities and minorities is an
acute concern that cannot be easily addressed using
the available tools and mechanisms. That is why, in our
View, the unanimous adoption of resolution 2225 (2015)
today is important, as it underscores our unified stance
in denouncing the abduction of children. Strengthening
the monitoring and reporting on abductions, as well
as identifying perpetrators, will further contribute to
ensuring accountability. At the same time, we must also
ensure that security forces and peacekeeping missions
are trained and equipped to proactively respond to
situations where children are at risk of abduction and
other grave violations.

Ms. Apio illustrated in poignant detail the long-term
consequences experiencedbychildren,particularly girls,
and communities impacted by abduction, underscoring
the importance of ensuring that mechanisms and
programmes are in place to facilitate the reintegration
and rehabilitation of children victimized by armed
groups back into their communities. We must also
recognize that reintegration is a long-term effort that
requires the collective responsibility of all stakeholders,
including the international community. In that regard,
community-based reintegration programmes that foster
a spirit of unity and reconciliation among communities
ravaged by war deserve to be fully supported.

We are equally alarmed by the increasing instances
of attacks on schools and hospitals, as well as the
military use of schools by both State and non-State
armed groups, thereby depriving thousands of children
of access to education and health care. Building on the
Security Council's call, in resolutions 1998 (2011) and
2143 (2014), for the protection of schools from attack
and military use, I am pleased to announce Malaysia's
endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted
on 29 May in Oslo. We encourage all member States to
consider endorsing that declaration, which aims, inter
alia, to raise awareness on good practices that would
deter the military use of educational facilities in armed
conflict and preserve schools as mainstays of learning,
not bloodshed.

The question ofaccountability cannot go unaddressed
and is a vital component of a comprehensive approach to
child protection. We urge for actions to be taken under
national or international justice mechanisms, where
appropriate, against parties that commit violations and
abuses against children. We reaffirm the importance of
the Security Council framework for children and armed
conflict and the various tools that have been developed
to ensure the accountability and compliance of parties
to conflict, including through the listing mechanism of
the annual report of the Secretary-General. We believe
that facts should be the determining factor that guides
our actions under this framework.

We are also dismayed that the credibility and
integrity of the mechanism was questioned this year.
During last year's 50-day war in Gaza, over 500
Palestinian children were killed and over 1,000 children
suffered serious injuries causing permanent disabilities
as a direct result of the Israeli attacks. Despite the fact
that the number of Palestinian children killed was the
third highest in the world, and the number of schools
damaged or destroyed was the highest in the world in
2014, we have failed to ensure that the perpetrators are
brought to account.

Impunity will only further embolden the
perpetrators. When we start applying different
standards to perpetrators and when we discriminate
against those who deserve justice and accountability,
we are in fact perpetuating grave violations, not only
of children's rights but those of humankind in general.

On behalf of my delegation, I wish to express
our heartfelt appreciation to all Council members
and Member States that supported the resolution just
adopted, including by sponsoring the text. We fervently
hope that the adoption of this resolution will serve to
further strengthen our collective resolve to continue
developing effective strategies and responses for the
protection of children in armed conflict, even in the
face of unprecedented challenges. The future of our
nations and of the world rests upon the shoulders of the
children that we secure, protect and nurture today.

As a non-permanent member of the Council
and Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, as well as a responsible member of
the international community, Malaysia reaffirms its
commitment to ensuring that children affected by
armed conflict are given the attention and consideration
that they truly deserve.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.


