Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): The resolution the Council
has just adopted is the culmination of the strenuous efforts
of the international community in the search for lasting
peace and stability in Kosovo. This resolution seeks to seal
the various peace plans that appear in its annexes. While
not wishing to downplay the many potential pitfalls of these
plans - as many aspects of their full implementation still
remain to be anticipated - my delegation recognizes that
they offer real and realistic prospects for an early end to the
cataclysmic crisis in and around Kosovo. If the plans are to
work - and they must - they require the full and genuine
cooperation of all the parties concerned, in particular the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's full
implementation of and compliance with the provisions of
the peace plans and the demands set out in the resolution
just adopted. At the same time, there should be strong and
unqualified support on the part of the international
community to ensure the success of the peace plans.

My delegation is also gratified that the issue has
come back to the Council, where it rightly belonged and
where it could have been appropriately dealt with had
there been a greater sense of unity and common purpose
among its members, particularly the permanent members.
We hope that the lessons learned from this experience
will not be lost and will serve to guide the Council in the
conduct of its future work.

My delegation is satisfied that the resolution contains
the necessary elements that provide a viable basis for
lasting peace and stability in Kosovo and therefore
supported it. One of the centrepieces of the resolution
pertains to the establishment of the international security
and civil presences in Kosovo. The resolution specifies
the necessary and critical tasks to be undertaken by the
international security and civil presences. My delegation
fervently hopes that this collective international mission
will be able to discharge its mandates fully, effectively
and in a well-coordinated manner. In ensuring the success
of this international mission in Kosovo, the international
community must be vigilant to any attempt to undermine
what has been agreed. Any such attempt must be
resolutely resisted.

It is now time for the international community to
focus its efforts on dealing with the disastrous
consequences of the use of violence and repression in
Kosovo, the very reason that prompted the recourse to
military action against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. We have to come to grips with some very
urgent questions, including the guarantee for the safe and
unimpeded return of all refugees and displaced persons
who have been forcibly expelled from their homes and
villages in the wake of the heinous policy of ethnic
cleansing that has been carried out by the Yugoslav
military, police and paramilitary forces in Kosovo at the
behest of the leadership in Belgrade. There should be
immediate efforts to provide a secure environment for
those refugees and displaced persons to return to their
homes in safety and in dignity.

The return and resettlement process will be one of
the most challenging tasks of the international community,

 

given the enormity of the refugee exodus resulting from
Belgrade's systematic attempt not only to evict the ethnic
Albanians from Kosovo, but to render them stateless as
well. At the same time, there should be massive
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts to rebuild Kosovo
virtually from scratch, given the systematic torching and
destruction of its inhabitants' homes and properties and the
uprooting of their lives and livelihoods.

As we take these tenuous and necessary steps towards
a lasting peace in Kosovo, the atrocities and horrors that
have been carried out in pursuance of the policy of ethnic
cleansing must be addressed as part of any consolidated
effort in the implementation of the peace plans. Ethnic
cleansing, which reared its ugly head once again in the
Balkans, is a crime against humanity and should not be
brushed aside out of political expediency. Those responsible
for such acts should not be allowed to go unpunished, nor
should the victims be denied justice. It is important,
therefore, that the work of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, whose jurisdiction and mandate are
reaffirmed in this resolution, be fully recognized and
strongly supported. The work of the Tribunal should, in
fact, form part and parcel of the proposed international civil
presence in Kosovo. In this regard, the Council's decision,
as contained in paragraph 14 of the resolution - which
demands full cooperation by all concerned, including the
international security presence, with the Tribunal - should
be fully implemented. My delegation would have preferred
an unequivocal language in this paragraph that would grant
the necessary support of this Council to the Tribunal.

Enormous work has already been done by the Tribunal
in relation to gross violations of human rights and
humanitarian law in Kosovo. Indictments have been made
and perhaps more will follow. It is of vital importance for
the international community to maintain the credibility of
the Tribunal, as well as of this Council, which created it.
The arrest and prosecution of indicted war criminals is not
only an issue of justice, but one that will have important
and long-lasting effects on the process of re-establishing the
rule of law and accomplishing reconciliation in Kosovo. It
should also serve as a stern warning to would-be
perpetrators of crimes against humanity, who should not be
allowed to get away with impunity. We strongly believe
that, had the international conununity been more resolute in
apprehending the leading indicted war criminals who were
responsible for the atrocities in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo could have been averted.

Peace in Kosovo and the Balkans as a whole should
be viewed as a long-term process and not as a quick-exit
strategy from the Balkans by the international community.
As part of the international endeavours to nurture peace
and to restore normality in Kosovo, efforts towards
infrastructure rehabilitation and economic reconstruction
must be given immediate and priority attention. In this
connection, my delegation is gratified that serious efforts
are being made in this direction, particularly by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and other United Nations agencies, as well as
by the proposed Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe,
which aims at carrying out economic assistance and long-
term development in Kosovo and other parts of the
southern Balkans. Given the immensity of the
humanitarian and reconstruction tasks, there is an obvious
need for effective coordination and cooperation between
those aid agencies and the members of the international
community to avoid unnecessary competition, duplication
and wastage of resources.

With regard to the responsibility of the international
civil presence, my delegation underscores the paramount
importance of the proposed interim administration for
Kosovo, which should pave the way for an early
settlement of the future status of Kosovo, taking fully into
account the political framework proposed in the
Rambouillet accords. The root cause of the crisis is clear.
The Secretary-General himself stated, in his address to the
High-Level Meeting on the crisis in the Balkans, held in
Geneva on 14 May 1999:

"Before there was a humanitarian catastrophe in
Kosovo, there was a human rights catastrophe.
Before there was a human rights catastrophe, there
was a political catastrophe: the deliberate, systematic
and violent disenfranchisement of the Kosovar
Albanian people."

This clearly demonstrates the need to ensure one very
fundamental element in the peace settlement: the
fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations and expectations of
the Kosovar Albanian people, the majority inhabitants of
Kosovo. Any departure from this fundamental point will
risk unravelling the entire exercise which is being
painstakingly put together.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to commend
all the efforts of the members of the international
community that have been actively engaged in the search
for peace in Kosovo, which have brought us to where we
are today. We would also like to take this opportunity to
express our profound thanks and appreciation to all
United Nations agencies and other international and relief

 

organizations, as well as to several Governments, for their
role in alleviating the plight of the refugees and displaced
persons.

