The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those countries
inscribed on the list of speakers to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the following countries took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Czech Republic, Egypt,
Finland, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Liechtenstein, Morocco, Myanmar, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Qatar, Sudan, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay and
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The President (spoke in French): I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Archbishop Celestino Migliore, Apostolic Nuncio,
Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the United
Nations.

There being no objections, it is so decided.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting, as
requested in a letter dated 13 January 2009, the text of
which is contained in document S/2009/3l, and in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objections, it is so decided.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
2
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

The Council will now begin its consideration of
the item before it.

At this meeting, we will hear a briefing by
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator.

I now give the floor to Mr. Holmes.


