Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at the
outset to congratulate you and your country on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and to extend my thanks to the previous President of the
Security Council, the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Korea, for his efforts during the month of
February. I also would like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Iraq, and his team in Baghdad and New York for their
commitment, dedication and tireless efforts to assist
the Government and the people of Iraq.

Since we are celebrating the day of Nawrooz, I
would like to congratulate our Kurdish people in Iraq,
who are celebrating the year 2713, and the Assyrian
Christian Iraqis, who are celebrating the year 6763.
I convey my best wishes to all nations that celebrate
Nawrooz. As Mr. Kobler mentioned, we have a very
ancient culture, which is obvious from the year being
celebrated by the Assyrian community - around 7,000
years.

Having reviewed the report of the Secretary-
General on the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2013/154), I would like to
make the following comments.
At the political and security levels, Iraq is witnessing
a political stalemate and an exchange of accusations
among some of the political blocs, while protests
are continuing in a number of cities that are making
a number of legitimate demands. The most notable
demands are for the adoption of the general amnesty
law, the abolition of the Justice and Accountability
Law, which replaced the de-baathification law, and the
release of detainees, especially women. Other demands
were added later, such as abolishing the Constitution
and toppling the Government. The preliminary
objectives of the demonstrations deviated from the
path of popular demand when the demonstrators were
infiltrated by certain extremist groups aiming to stir up
sectarian tensions and foment civil war.

The foreign and regional players that hijacked the
legitimate demands of citizens were exposed when the
flag of the Free Syrian Army and portraits of foreign
officers were displayed during the demonstrations.
Proof of that is the support of Al-Qaida terrorist groups
and the leadership of the Baath party. Izzat al-Douri,
who was Vice-President during the Saddam regime,
appeared on television for the first time since 2003 to
announce his support for the demonstrations.

The Iraqi Government declared that the demands
of the protesters should be considered and that it
differentiates between legitimate and illegitimate
demands based on the Constitution. Continuous
governmental and parliamentarian efforts are therefore
under way to respond to those demands.

On 9 January 2013, the Iraqi Council of Ministers
decided to form a ministerial-level committee chaired
by the Deputy Prime Minister, Hussein Al-Shahristani,
and the membership of the ministries of justice, defence,
human rights, municipalities and water resources, as
well as the State Minister for Parliamentarian Affairs
and the Secretary-General of the Council of Ministers,
in addition to the Deputy Minister of the Interior, to
receive the legitimate demands of the demonstrators
through delegations representing them.

The committee was commissioned to study the
demands and to make its recommendations to the
Council of Ministers. Upon the recommendations
of the committee, the Council of Ministers approved
the following actions: extending the deadline for
those subject to the Justice and Accountability Law to
submit requests for a return to service or retirement;
processing pension applications for all persons subjects
to the Justice and Accountability Law, except Fedayeen
Saddam, Saddam commandos and members of the
highest two ranks of the Baath party; authorizing
the real estate registration department to accept
applications to lift the freeze on the properties of
officials of the former regime; activating item 12 of
the Justice and Accountability Law by giving orders to
ministries to accept applications for exemptions to that
law in order to submit them to the Council of Ministers
and the Council of Representatives for approval;
requesting the High Judicial Council to authorize
judges to activate the legal process for detained women
in order to facilitate their release, except in cases where
prohibited by law; requesting the Ministry of Justice to
immediately implement release orders, and not to wait
for the approval of any other authority.

On 29 January, the Council of Ministers approved
the increase in the salaries of the members of the
Awakening Councils, who are mostly in the western
part of Iraq, to at least 500,000 Iraqi dinars a month,
authorizing the Ministry of Defence to give bonuses
to interrogation officers to speed up the process of
releasing the detainees. Those executive procedures
led to the realization of the legitimate demands of the
demonstrators, including the release of around 5,500
detainees - though I would note that Mr. Kobler said
3,500 - including most of the women; the return to
service of hundreds of officers from the former Iraqi
army; the completion of more than 91,000 pension
applications; and the lifting of the ban on 1,800
properties that belong to members of the former Baath
regime.

With regard to sectarian slogans and calls to cancel
the Constitution, the Ministry of the Interior has warned
that the language of sectarian incitement is considered a
direct threat to the security of the nation and its people.
Such language lays the foundation for a culture of hatred
and the rejection of others and promotes sectarianism
under the pretext of defending the rights of a certain
sect. Such language, together with sectarian motives,
is also responsible for the indiscriminate Violence.
The Ministry has pointed out that it is condemned by
the Iraqi Constitution and completely contradicts the
current regulations and laws. It has warned citizens
not to listen to the advocates of sectarian strife. The
Ministry has also said that, on the basis of its executive
responsibility, it will decisively address such attempts
to destroy the unity of the county and act against such
voices, in line with its mandate under the law and the
Constitution, regardless of their title, social, religious
or political positions.

Despite that worrying situation, most demonstrations
are still peaceful, as witnessed by UNAMI during its
visit to Al-Anbar province in February. Like many
countries that have emerged from a dictatorship, Iraq
is going through a democratic transition phase that will
be characterized by instability until the democratic
institutions gain strength and competitive political work
runs smoothly and peacefully within the framework of
the Constitution.

Over the past years, Iraq suffered several crises that
finally led to a peaceful solution and positive results,
such as the adoption of the Constitution, the holding
of elections, the formation of the Government and the
adoption of budgets. Such crises and other examples
polarized the Iraqi political currents and led to long-
lasting tensions. However, they ultimately followed
their course and did not hinder the political process
indefinitely. In other words, the struggle in Iraq moved
from an armed conflict to gain power to a peaceful
conflict within the framework of the Constitution and
the law, as I have described in the past by saying that
Iraqis have learned to shout rather than to shoot at each
other.

The Prime Minister has explained his view of
current events in the region and their impact on the
internal situation in Iraq by stressing the adherence
of Iraqis to their unity and their rejection of violence,
extremism and sectarianism. We have warned several
times against the spillover of the Syrian conflict, which
could cause instability in the whole region. That has been
echoed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, when, on several
occasions, he has warned about the repercussions of the
Syrian conflict on neighbouring countries.

The killing of Syrian soldiers after they had
surrendered to the Iraqi authorities by armed terrorists,
who crossed from Syria to Al-Anbar province on
4 March, is the best proof of a link between the armed
groups across the border and the impact of the Syrian
conflict on the stability of the region. The Al-Qaida
terrorist group announced its responsibility for the
murder of those soldiers in collaboration with the
Al-Nusra Front terrorist group in Syria.

Some areas inside Iraq are still witnessing acts
of Violence, while others are enjoying a good level
of security. Iraqi citizens are still subject to violence
from terrorism, but less so than in 2011 and certainly
less than the peak of sectarian violence in 2006 and
2007. There is a fear of the possibility of an increase
in violence in the next few months as a result of the
regional situation and if the current political crisis is
not resolved.

Although the Iraqi security forces are combating
terrorist activities, many rebel groups, including
Al-Qaida, are still active in parts of Iraq. The situation
is still critical in Baghdad, Kirkuk, Ninewa, Salah
ad-Din, Al-Anbar and other provinces. The Iraqi
Government, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
condemned the attack on Camp Liberty on 9 February.
It immediately launched an investigation to find out the
perpetrators and bring them to justice and to reaffirm
its resolve to take the necessary measurements to ensure
the security and safety of the inhabitants of the camp.

Other committees, including the Al-Ja'afari
committee, which was responsible for some political
dialogue, are still conducting talks with all political
groups in order to try and solve the problems between
all factions and to reach a consensus among Iraqi
political groups and the coalition. One positive point
in the political process is that the Independent High
Electoral Commission has affirmed that it is moving
forward with its timetable to hold the provincial
council elections, which are scheduled for 20 April.
The Commission is working despite the challenges to
complete a special programme for the elections, in line
with international standards, in collaboration with the
International Electoral Assistance Team and UNAMI.
The Commission finalized the approval of political
entities and coalitions and has received the names
of candidates in the provinces. The Commission is
working on the last stage of completing the procedures
for hiring polling-station employees and is finalizing
all logistical matters and the printing of ballot papers.

At the economic level, Iraq has succeeded in
curbing inflation, achieving economic growth and
increasing its oil exports. Iraq has achieved significant
progress in development, according to the recent World
Bank report, entitled Country Partnership Strategy for
Iraq 2013-2016.

In 2013, the Iraqi Government has focused on
policies to support the private sector, to create job
opportunities for its citizens and to stimulate economic
development. As a result of Iraq's plan to increase its
oil production, at the end of 2012, the country reached
second place among oil-exporting countries of the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, after
Saudi Arabia, and now stands at its highest average in
the past 30 years.
In 2012, the Iraqi economy grew by about 10 per
cent for the second consecutive year. The International
Monetary Fund expects the Iraqi economy to grow
by 13.5 per cent in 2013, which would make it one of
the fastest growing economies in the world. The Iraq
Government is trying to diversify the economy and to
create new job opportunities for Iraq's workforce.

The Government budget for 2013 amounts to
approximately $118.3 billion, with an increase of 18 per
cent compared to 2012. That makes it the largest budget
in Iraq's history. The budget allocates 29.5 per cent to
energy, 19.7 per cent to security, 17.7 per cent to social
services, 12.8 per cent to education and 6.8 per cent
to health care. The investment portion of this year's
budget is approximately 40 per cent, which is larger
than in any previous budget.

The thirty-ninth Baghdad International Fair was
opened by the Prime Minister of Iraq in November
2012, with the participation of 1,440 foreign companies
from all over the world. Bilateral agreements were
signed with participating countries and companies
aimed at expanding trade relations. In December
2012, Iraq ratified a framework agreement for trade
and investment with the United States as a first step
towards expanding trade and investment between the
two countries.

The European Parliament has ratified a partnership
and cooperation agreement between the Republic of Iraq
and the European Union. In addition, Iraq's membership
was accepted by the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative on 12 December 2012 after it had completed
all the necessary requirements and procedures. That
step was part of Iraq's efforts to enhance the company
working environment in the extractive industries.

Iraq is working to attract investment for
reconstruction after years of neglect due to years of
wars and sanctions. According to a report published in
May 2012, foreign companies have invested more than
$55 billion in investment projects, service contracts
and other activities throughout Iraq. Direct foreign
investment reached about $2 billion from being almost
nothing a decade ago. Such amounts do not include the
tens of billions of dollars of investment in the energy
sector.

Within the framework of infrastructure projects,
$5 billion were allocated to building housing projects in
all parts of Iraq according to the population percentage.
Several projects have been inaugurated, including the
Al Saedia project in Baghdad in late November 2012.
The foundation was laid for the third Khaldon housing
project for families ofmartyrs in Basra in mid-February.
In Najaf, another project is under construction that
contains 1,100 apartments. It will be supplied by clean
electricity through solar panels and will include a
medical clinic, schools and kindergartens.

With regard to adopting communication solutions
and technology to support social and economic
development, the percentage of cell phone users in Iraq
has now reached 80 per cent, and will rise to 93 per
cent in 2015. According to statements made available
by four Internet and telephone service providers, more
than 5 million Iraqis use the Internet, and Iraq has more
than 25 million cell phone users.

At the regional and international levels, Iraq is
continuing to develop its relations with all countries
of the region, especially the State of Kuwait. Iraq is
making efforts to support the moderate current in the
region, encouraging dialogue and steering the region
away from the danger of regional interventions.

With regared to the Kuwaiti issue, the dispute was
ended and a final settlement reached on the matter of
Iraqi Airways versus the State of Kuwait through the
signing of an agreement between the two sides and
Iraq's payment of $500 million. On 29 January, the
Iraqi Council of Ministers ratified the draft law on the
agreement concerning navigation in the Khor Abdallah
waterway. Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoyshar Zebari
visited the State of Kuwait on 27 February aboard
the first Iraqi Airways aeroplane to fly to Kuwait in
23 years. A joint technical team is currently working
on the border pillars maintenance project. It expects to
finish its work by the end of this month, bringing to a
close one of the most important issues between the two
countries. That would pave the way to bilateral relations
based on mutual respect and common interests, as well
as for Iraq's exit from its Chapter VII status.

In the context of Iraq's regaining its international
status, with a View to building on the successful holding
of several conferences in 2012, Prime Minister Nouri
al-Maliki opened the twenty-ninth session of the Arab
Council of Ministers of Housing and Construction in
Baghdad on 18 December 2012.

That same month, Baghdad hosted a conference
on Palestinian and Arab prisoners in Israeli
prisons, with the participation of 70 countries. The
conference concluded with the Baghdad declaration
and recommended the acceptance of Iraq's proposal
to establish a fund to support Palestinian and Arab
prisoners and their families. The Government of Iraq
made an initial $2 million contribution to the fund.
During its presidency of the League of Arab
States Summit, Iraq proposed holding the first Arab
conference on legal and national awareness, which
was opened in Baghdad on 10 March. The aim was to
develop and consolidate legal and national awareness of
the concept of citizenship and an awareness that human
rights will generate affiliation, interdependence and
integration into the melting pot of society. Citizenship
is a right of every citizen in society, regardless ofracial,
religious or sectarian affiliation. Violations of human
rights open the door to wars.

At the international level, Iraq participated in the
seventeenth Conference of the States Parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention, which was held in The
Hague from 26 to 30 December 2012. Iraq was elected
as a Vice-President of the Conference, as well as a
member of the credentials committee. That affirmed
Iraq's commitment to supporting international efforts
to achieve a world free from chemical weapons and to
ensure international peace and security.

Foreign Minister Zebari participated in the Munich
Security Conference that opened on 1 February. The
Conference discussed the most important international
policy issues and security and economic problems at
the regional and international levels, including their
implications and ways to face them.

The Foreign Minister also participated in the
ministerial-level meeting of the Russian-Arab
Cooperation Forum, held in Moscow on 20 February.

The Prime Minister chaired the Iraqi delegation
participating in the twelfth Summit of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, held in Cairo on 8 February.
Building on Iraq's role in efforts to resolve the Syrian
problem peacefully and to support the humanitarian
situation in that country, Iraq participated in the donors
conference held in Kuwait. It is worth mentioning
that Iraq is sheltering approximately 100,000 Syrian
refugees, as Mr. Kobler mentioned, spread over the
cities of Iraqi Kurdistan, Anbar province and other
provinces. During her visit to New York, I asked
Christine McNab, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, about the status of Syrian
refugee camps in Iraq, and she answered that she had
visited them and that they were good.

On 26 February, our Foreign Minister welcomed
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium to discuss the improvement of
bilateral relations and cooperation in combating
extremism and terrorism. The visit resulted in the
signing of a memorandum of understanding on political
and diplomatic cooperation between the ministries for
foreign affairs of the our countries.

On 4 March, the Prime Minister welcomed his
counterpart from the Arab Republic of Egypt. Both
sides held talks to coordinate political positions and
discussed cooperation and trade relations between the
two countries at the regional level.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of the support of the members of the
Security Council in assisting Iraq in emerging from
its Chapter VII status and from the sanctions that
were imposed on it due to Saddam's crime of invading
Kuwait, which forced the Security Council to adopt
sanctions resolutions and to consider Iraq a threat to
international peace and security. Iraq today is different
from Iraq before 2003, as the Secretary-General stated
in his report to the Security Council (S/2013/154). Iraq
must regain the status it enjoyed before 1990.

Before I conclude my speech, I would like to
mention a few points that Mr. Kobler addressed in
his statement. I think that resuming relations with
Saudi Arabia is a very important step forward, and the
exchange of prisoners between Iraq and Saudi Arabia
is opening the door to that, as is the opening of the
borders, which is also a good step forward.

With regard to reopening the border checkpoints
between Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, we have
had several problems in the past. The most recent one
was when Syrian soldiers closed the borders after a
fight started between the Syrian regular army and
the Syrian Free Army, and Iraq wanted to send those
soldiers back from a different checkpoint. So they took
them from Mosul to Anbar to send them back to Syria,
when they were ambushed and killed. All of them,
almost 40 Syrian soldiers and 20 Iraqi soldiers, were
killed.

On torture, the Constitution and the law in Iraq
forbid torture. However, we do not deny that there are
some police officers who are guilty of misconduct, as
in any other country in the world. But many officers
have been dismissed, and some of them were brought
to justice and legal action was taken against them when
cases of torture were proved.

I commend Mr. Kobler for his tireless efforts to
resettle the inhabitants of Camp Ashraf and Camp
Hurriya. I personally commend him for his efforts to
convince Albania to accept 210 of them. That is a good
start. I encourage other members of the Security Council
to accept more camp residents. The only solution to the
problem is to resettle these people in other countries.

With respect to the youth problem, I think that the
Government realizes how important the problem in
Iraq. I encourage the Government to have a plan. By
way of example, the Iraqi Mission to the United Nations
has trained Iraqi youth. We have Iraqis who have come
from different parts of the world, some from as far
away as Australia. I have also given internships to other
students in order to encourage youth and provide them
an opportunity for internships in order to have a better
future. They are from different nationalities and from
all over the world, but the majority of them are studying
in American universities.

