Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I of course associate myself
fully with the statement made by our Portuguese colleague
on behalf of the European Union. I have asked for the floor
to make some additional remarks because the German
Government has initiated a process that should lead to
concrete suggestions on how to enhance the role of arms
embargoes and travel sanctions. If that is called the Bonn-
Berlin process, as was done this morning by the Permanent
Representative of Russia, we would certainly not object.

What are our terms of reference? The Secretary-
General has often stressed the value of sanctions under the
Charter as a tool in exerting pressure on offenders without
the use of force. He has, however, also expressed concern
about their negative effects on the civilian population, as
well as on third States. He has therefore encouraged the
Security Council, the General Assembly and Member States
to consider possible ways to render sanctions a less blunt
and more effective instrument. He has specifically
welcomed the fact that the concept of "smart" sanctions
seeks to exert pressure on regimes rather than on people,
thus reducing humanitarian costs. He has also welcomed the
fact that this concept has been gaining support among
Member States.

Encouraged by the remarks of the Secretary-General,
the German Government accepted the challenge to assist in
exploring ways to make arms embargoes and travel
sanctions "smarter" by targeting them. A first experts
seminar was held in Bonn in November of last year, with
more than 60 participants from 21 countries. Among the
participants invited by my Government were representatives
from a number of countries currently serving on the
Security Council, officials from other United Nations
Member States, representatives of regional and
non-governmental organizations - which, in our view,
are very important - scholars, experts from the private
sector and, last but not least, officials from the
Secretariat. That first conference provided an excellent
opportunity for the participants to review the current
successes, but also the shortcomings, of arms embargoes
and travel sanctions.

This year, four working groups are going to meet in
order to develop concrete recommendations on how to
improve the implementation and monitoring of these
sanctions. We are working towards the holding of a
second seminar to present the findings of the working
groups in Berlin in November this year. We will be
happy to provide the results to the working group of the
Security Council, in the hope that the results will help to
provide the Council with an improved set of tools if and
when there is the need to impose sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter.

Germany is strongly committed to the process of
targeting sanctions in order to minimize the impact on
civilian populations and third countries. When this goal is
achieved, sanctions imposed under the Charter will find
wider acceptance among Member States of the
Organization, which in our view is a very important
aspect. We hope that our initiative will be a valuable
contribution towards improving sanctions. As the
Canadian Foreign Minister said a couple of minutes ago,
it should be recognized that targeted sanctions are not an
end in themselves, but rather elements of a
comprehensive political strategy designed to achieve the
peaceful resolution of conflicts.

