Mr. White (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Council today. I particularly thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis and
Ambassador Tanin for their remarks earlier.

Australia welcomes the opportunity to reaffirm
our commitment to international efforts in Afghanistan,
and strongly supports a renewal of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) mandate
for another year.
The foundations of the international community's
long-term commitment to Afghanistan, which must
extend well past 2014, will need to be further
consolidated this year through strong and clearly
defined outcomes on security transition at the
forthcoming NATO summit in Chicago, as well as on
support for Afghanistan's sustainable development at
the Tokyo conference later in the year.

When we last gathered to discuss the UNAMA
mandate, the international community was looking
forward to President Karzai's announcement on the
first tranche of provinces to begin transition to full
Afghan security leadership. Now, one year later, more
than 50 per cent of the Afghan population lives in a
province or district that is undergoing the transition to
full Afghan security leadership.

Australia commends the efforts of President
Karzai, the Afghan Government and the people of
Afghanistan as they work towards the goal of full
Afghan leadership of the security sector, as well as the
vital pillars of governance and development. Australia
joins the international community in fully supporting
the goal of Afghan leadership. We encourage the
Council to ensure that this message is given
prominence in the revised UNAMA mandate.

Australia welcomes the continued presence of
UNAMA and other United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan's provinces and underlines the importance
of United Nations agencies working in close
coordination with the Afghan Government. The United
Nations physical presence is an appropriate reflection
of the Organization's leadership of the civilian effort
on the ground in Afghanistan and the Security Council
mandate that underpins the international presence.

Australia supports a continuing role for UNAMA
in supporting electoral capacity-building in
Afghanistan. The ongoing development of democratic
institutions based on the rule of law and the separation
of powers is crucial to a stable Afghanistan.
Democratic, transparent and credible elections will be
crucial to shoring up sustainable transition in
Afghanistan.

Now is the time for the international community
to support Afghanistan as it prepares for presidential
and parliamentary elections in 2014 and 2015.
Australia has provided extensive assistance in the past
to support Afghan electoral institutions, civic education
and election monitoring, and will continue to do so.
Without the strong and constructive support of its
neighbours and regional partners, Afghanistan's
prospects for a secure and stable future are much
diminished. Australia commends the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
promote regional engagement in accordance with
UNAMA's mandate. Australia particularly welcomes
the Istanbul Heart of Asia process as an important step
towards building stronger regional engagement,
including improved economic ties across the Central
Asian region. We look forward to concrete progress,
including on confidence-building measures, at the
ministerial meeting in Kabul in June.

In terms of Australia's own engagement in
Afghanistan, Prime Minister Gillard announced in
November 2011 that Australia would conclude a long-
term bilateral partnership with Afghanistan. This will
underpin our long-term relationship, extending well
beyond 2014, and cover a broad range of bilateral
activities, including development assistance. I am
pleased to say that we anticipate that the agreement
will be concluded shortly.

Australia's substantial and growing aid
programme will be an important part of our long-term
commitment. Australia will deliver $165 million in
development assistance to Afghanistan in 2011-2012.
The main goal of our aid is to build the Afghan
Government's capacity to deliver services and
economic opportunities for its people.

To conclude, over the past decade we have seen
remarkable progress in Afghanistan, including strong
gains in vital sectors such as health and education. This
progress has been achieved with the strong support of
the international community, including UNAMA. Our
continuing priority must be to maintain and build on
these achievements and to continue to support
Afghanistan's trajectory from transition to
transformation.

