Mr. Pompeo (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Ribeiro Viotti for her briefing. I also thank
our Polish friends for using their Security Council
presidency to confront the complex challenges in the
Middle East.

As I argued in January in Cairo, the Trump
Administration is reviving America's leadership role
in the region by building and supporting coalitions to
tackle regional challenges. These are not talkfests; we
care about outcomes, not gestures. We should consider
what has been accomplished in just seven months. We
helped dismantle the physical caliphate of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), and we continue to
work with 79 partners in the Global Coalition to Defeat
ISIS to help the region recover from that menace. We
are working closely with United Nations Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths to help bring peace to Yemen.

We are facilitating new links between Israel and its
Arab neighbours through the Warsaw Ministerial and
follow-up meetings, which the President just discussed.
We organized the Bahrain workshop in June to bring
together Government, the private sector and civilian
leaders to help improve the lives of the Palestinians. We
hosted the second-ever ministerial to advance religious
freedom last month; protecting religious minorities in
the Middle East was the centrepiece of that event.

Most recently, the United States launched our
effort to protect international shipping in the Strait of
Hormuz. We have welcomed the United Kingdom and
Bahrain as partners and look forward to other nations
joining that mission to protect the freedom of the seas.

Those are precisely the kinds of multilateral efforts
that the United States supports. They are meaningful
and effective, and they reflect the values of freedom-
loving societies, which the Council should be working
to uphold.

But now is our opportunity to do more. Just look
at the challenges facing the region. Conflict in Libya
still rages. More than 5.5 million Syrian refugees and
nearly 6 million internally displaced Syrians have yet
to return to their homes because of continuing violence.
The Gulf Cooperation Council rift has not fully healed.
Many countries fail to honour their people's basic
human rights, and radical Islamist terrorists and their
financial benefactors are looking for new weaknesses
to exploit.

Of course, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
its proxies continue to foment terror and unrest in
Iraq, Lebanon, Syria and Yemen, with devastating
humanitarian consequences. Since the United States
declared our intention to bring all Iranian oil purchases
to zero in April, the Ayatollah has gone all in on a
campaign of extortion diplomacy. Here is just a short
list of what the regime has done since July.
On 1 July, Iran surpassed its 300-kilogramme limit
on its low-enriched uranium stockpile, in defiance of
its nuclear commitments. On 2 July, the Iran-backed
Houthis attacked Abha airport in Saudi Arabia, and
they have continued to do so since that time. On 8 July,
Iran reached levels of enrichment of about 4.5 per
cent, breaching its nuclear commitments, which cap
enrichment at 3.67 per cent. Iran continues to threaten
further expansions of its nuclear programme, in
defiance of its international commitments.

On 10 July, the Navy of the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps unsuccessfully attempted to seize a
United Kingdom tanker as it passed through the
Strait of Hormuz. On 14 July, the Navy of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps seized a Panamanian-
flagged, United Arab Emirates-owned, tanker in the
Strait of Hormuz. On 19 July, the Navy of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps seized a British tanker,
the Stena Impero, in the Strait of Hormuz, and Iran
continues to detain that ship and its crew. On 19 July,
the Navy of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps also
seized the Liberian-flagged, British-owned, tanker,
Mesdar. On 25 July, Iran test-fired a ballistic missile,
in defiance of resolution 2231 (2015).

On another Iran-related note, we are already
tracking very closely the provisions of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action that are expiring in
October 2020, namely, the United Nations arms embargo
and the travel restrictions on Qasem Soleimani. The
whole world is able to track them, too. We now have a
countdown clock on the State Department's Iran web
page. Time is drawing short to continue the activity of
restricting Iran's capacity to foment its terror regime.
The international community will have plenty of time
to see how long it has until Iran is unshackled to create
new turmoil and figure out what it must do to prevent
that from happening.

Clearly, from Aleppo to Aden and Tripoli to Tehran,
greater cooperation in the Middle East is needed more
than ever. We need fresh thinking to solve old problems.
That is why Poland and the United States have created
the Warsaw process and its working groups, which were
recently announced. The Warsaw process is the product
of this year's Warsaw Ministerial to promote a future of
peace and security in the Middle East.

The creation of the working groups is another
iteration of the United States mission to take on
Middle East challenges with our friends, allies and
partners. The seven new working groups will focus
on cybersecurity, human rights, maritime and aviation
security, energy security, missile proliferation, counter-
terrorism and humanitarian issues and refugees. We
call for all nations, which have been invited, to attend
the initial meetings of the first five of those groups this
fall, and we express our gratitude to Bahrain, Romania
and South Korea for joining Poland and the United
States in hosting them.

No one country will be the subject of those
discussions. All nations will be heard and all voices
will be respected. As we continue to work through the
Warsaw process, we will look to reconvene nations in
2020 for a follow-up to the Warsaw Ministerial. I hope
that those present will all be there.

