Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have listened carefully to the assessment
of the current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
Mr. Haris Silajdzie, Chairman of the Presidency of that
country. Unfortunately, that assessment was unilateral
and unconstructive.

We thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
introduction to the Council of the report on
developments in that country (S/2010/235, annex, enclosure). We cannot recognize that document as
objective and balanced. Consistent with the negative
practices used in preparing it, the report suffers from
overt anti-Serbian excesses.

Republika Srpska is being held responsible for
the difficult pre-election political atmosphere in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, while the destructive role of
Federation politicians is being hushed up. Nor has
there been proper focus on Federation politicians who
have blocked the consideration of Republika Srpska's
compromise constitutional amendments, which were
designed to alleviate the concerns expressed by the
European Court of Human Rights in its 2009 verdict.
The report's criticism of the law on referendum
recently adopted in Republika Srpska sidesteps the fact
that its sphere of application is limited to the
jurisdiction of that entity.

In spite of a certain increase in the temperature of
political rhetoric in the unfolding campaign leading up
to the general election scheduled for 3 October, the
overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina could be
deemed satisfactory. In a number of areas, local
authorities have been able to achieve decent results.

With regard to the report's defence of
constitutional changes in Bosnia, we should take the
position that the major role in such processes belongs
to local political figures and that these reforms should
be implemented solely with the consent of all Bosnian
parties, as called for in the Dayton Constitution. We
agree with colleagues who have today noted how
important it is for Bosnian parties to achieve that type
of agreement. The role of the international community
is to assist in reaching compromise, not to impose
quick fixes.

We believe it important to make further efforts to
promptly attain the goals and conditions agreed upon
by the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board,
which are designed to bring about conditions for
drawing down the Office of the High Representative
and converting it into a mission of the European Union
Special Representative.

With regard to the final unresolved question of
the division of State property among various levels of
authority, it is essential to rely on the Steering Board's
agreed territorial and functional approach, which
provides for transfer to the pan-Bosnian level of sites
for State agencies. Entity bodies would then exercise
all remaining relevant powers.

With regard to the High Representative's
emergency mechanisms, especially the so-called Bonn
powers, we believe that the sphere of their application
is limited to the areas of ensuring the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of
compliance with the Dayton Peace Agreement - and
here I might observe that the question of violations of
Dayton has not been noted for a number of years. In
our view, it is unacceptable to use those tools for short-
term political purposes, especially to resolve economic
disputes.

Russia is prepared to work together with partners
to continue to provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with all
possible support in building a modern democratic State
on the basis of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We
believe that the upcoming elections will be an
important step in that direction, confirming Bosnia's
ability to address the challenges before it. For our part,
we will continue to interact constructively with the
delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Security
Council.

