Ms. Patten: I appreciate this opportunity to brief
the Council on the situation in South Sudan.

The harrowing reports in November of the brutal
mass rapes of women and girls in Bentiu while on their
way to a food distribution site have sent shock waves
around the world. The facts and details of the perpetrators
and those who bear command responsibility for this
latest incident are still being investigated by the United
Nations team on the ground. National authorities have

also opened investigations headed by the Minister for
Gender, Child and Social Welfare, deployed to Bentiu
since 15 December. In the course of the investigations,
it is crucial that the Government ensure that victims
and witnesses are fully protected and do not face any
reprisal for coming forward.

Although the investigations are still ongoing, what
is clear is that this latest attack in Bentiu is part of a
systematic trend and pattern of sexual violence that
has escalated dramatically in 2018, despite recent
recommitments by South Sudan's leaders to a cessation
of hostilities and a revitalized peace agreement.

Since 2013 in particular, we have witnessed
systematic patterns of sexual Violence, primarily
against women and girls, as well as reported incidents
against men and boys. Sexual Violence remains rampant
in the country, and it is used as part of a strategy to
degrade, shame and humiliate both the victims and
communities, often along ethnic and/or political lines.
Sexual violence has also been used as a driver of forced
displacement and as a tactic and weapon of war by all
the parties to the conflict.

In 2018, there has been a clear and alarming
increase in the documented number of cases and
Victims of conflict-related sexual violence. The number
of victims in 2018 has already reached 1,157, making
it the highest number recorded in the past three years.
By comparison, in 2017 the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) documented 196 cases of
conflict-related sexual violence, affecting 128 women
and 68 girls.

In July, I heard the first-hand testimony of
survivors and witnesses during my mission to South
Sudan. I visited protection of civilians sites in Juba
and Malakal and spoke with women who had survived
sexual Violence and continue to live in situations of
acute vulnerability, both inside and outside the camps.
Their accounts indicate clearly that rape was used
by the attackers to exercise power over their victims,
impose extreme humiliation, destroy their dignity and
fracture families and the community.

In a protection of civilians site in Juba, I met with
a group of deeply traumatized women and men who
had recently arrived from Unity state, displaced as a
result of the military offensives of April and May. The
survivors recounted brutal and shocking patterns of
conflict-related sexual Violence occurring alongside
other atrocity crimes. Their horrific testimonies were
fully consistent with the report released on 10 July by
UNMISS and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, on the indiscriminate
attacks against civilians in southern Unity state, which
found that at least 120 women and girls, including
pregnant and lactating mothers, and girls as young
as four years old, had been raped and gangraped. For
example, a six-year-old girl was gang raped by eight
soldiers who continued to violate her even as she
became unconscious. Some victims were raped to
death, not surviving the sexual Violence to which they
were subjected. Additionally, the report documented
the abduction of 132 women and girls for purposes of
sexual slavery.

In October, in the Western Equatoria region,
43 cases of rape and gang rape and the abduction of
505 women and 63 girls for the purpose of sexual
slavery were documented. Survivors were reportedly
tied to trees and gang raped until they passed out. In
SPLA-in-Opposition (Machar) transit points or bases,
women and girls as young as 12 were lined up for the
commanders to choose as "wives". Those who were
not picked were left for other fighters and subjected to
repeated rapes. Sexual violence stopped only after the
abducted women agreed to become fighters, which is
consistent with information that part of the objective
of the SPLA-in-Opposition (Machar) was to forcibly
recruit fighters to bolster its ranks.

Sexual Violence leaves deep physical, psychological
and social scars. All the survivors I met desperately
asked for greater support to restore their physical
and psychological well-being. They face enormous
challenges to receiving appropriate medical treatment.
The humanitarian facilities that provide treatment are
often inaccessible. Given the collapse of health-care
systems due to the conflict, those living in rural areas
often have nowhere to go. The total breakdown of State
public and service-provision infrastructure means that
women and girls are at a greater risk of unplanned
pregnancy and severe sexual and reproductive injuries.
They are also prone to contracting sexually transmitted
infections, including HIV/AIDS.

In addition to the physical effects, feelings of
shame and stigma and rejection by spouses and family
members add to their distress. I met several women
with their babies born of rape and saw how they are set
on a trajectory of poverty, discrimination and violence.
All the survivors demanded that the perpetrators be
brought to justice and punished. They all felt that this

was the only way to break the cycle of violence and
secure a peaceful future for South Sudan.

During my Visit, I met with the Minister ofDefence,
the Minister in the Office of the President and other
senior Government officials, all of whom acknowledged
the high prevalence of sexual violence and reiterated
that these Violations are unacceptable and shameful.
However, this sense of outrage must be translated into
concrete action. A zero-tolerance policy cannot be
underpinned by a zero-consequence reality. The fact is
that rape in South Sudan is still largely cost free for the
perpetrator. Until we raise the cost and consequences for
committing, commanding or condoning these crimes,
we will not end the prevailing impunity that is a driver
of sexual violence. Therefore, consistent prosecution
and accountability of perpetrators is central to the
prevention of sexual violence in South Sudan.

At the same time, the international community
must be prepared to use all the compliance tools at its
disposal to send the signal of our zero tolerance for
these crimes. We cannot underestimate the importance
of sanctions and other targeted measures as a potential
deterrent for perpetrators and would-be perpetrators.

On 24 October 2018, I briefed the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan. In terms of those who
are believed to bear command responsibility for sexual
violence in the southern Unity offensives of July 2018,
verified reports of the United Nations mainly attribute
responsibility for violations to the national army - the
SPLA - and SPLA-in-Opposition (Deng) and youth
militia. It is believed that three senior officials are
among those who bear command responsibility.
Regarding the Western Equatoria offensives of October
2018, three commanders of the SPLA-in-Opposition
(Machar) identified by victims and witnesses are
believed to bear command responsibility.

In follow up to my briefing to the Sanctions
Committee, yesterday my Office, together with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner on
Human rights, submitted a confidential joint letter to
the Chair of the South Sudan Sanctions Committee that
includes the names of the three alleged perpetrators
from southern Unity state, for the Committee's
consideration. I wish to conclude with the following
recommendations.

First, I urge the Government of South Sudan to
rigorously and expeditiously investigate all incidents
of sexual violence, share the results with the United
Nations, and hold all perpetrators accountable
regardless of rank or seniority. Furthermore, I urge
the Government to establish the Hybrid Court of South
Sudan without delay and to ensure that it prosecutes
all cases of sexual violence. My Office stands ready
to provide support to the Government of South Sudan,
pursuant to the joint communique signed with President
Salva Kiir in 2014.
Secondly, I urge the Security Council to consistently
apply sanctions for crimes of sexual violence as a
critical aspect of deterrence and prevention, utilizing
the stand-alone designation criteria on sexual violence
that are articulated in resolution 2428 (2018).

Thirdly, comprehensive services must be provided
to survivors, especially medical and psychosocial care.
I urge all parties to the conflict to grant unhindered
access to humanitarian organizations and UNMISS
to reach victims and displaced civilians. I also call on
the international community to maintain resources for
life-saving services.

Finally, given the scale and consequences of these
violations, conflict-related sexual violence should
be addressed as a central aspect of the revitalized
peace agreement of 2018. This includes ensuring that
crimes of sexual violence are not amnestied and that
victims receive the reparations and livelihood support
that they need to rebuild their lives. Sexual violence
considerations should be part of any peacebuilding,
reconstruction, transitional-justice and truth-and-
reconciliation arrangements.

