Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to express our appreciation for the convening of
this meeting and for the informative statements made
by the Secretary-General, Anto'nio Guterres, and
today's briefers. Their briefings have underscored
the critical importance of the primary goal enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, that is, the
maintenance of international peace and security, and of
the commitments we have undertaken to take collective
measures to prevent and eradicate, in a just manner,
threats to the peace.

This is particularly relevant in a context in
which these challenges are ever more complex and
multidimensional, requiring a necessary shift towards
preventive diplomacy at both the global and the regional
levels, based on timely risk assessments, early warning
and management plans.

Against that backdrop, we believe that it is vital
to promote greater involvement on the part of regional
and subregional organizations, from the preventive
perspective and when it comes to the promotion of
peaceful means for the resolution of disputes.

For that reason, we note with interest that in
the framework of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, mechanisms have been set up that
are aimed at preventing conflicts from escalating,
including a continental early-warning system, as well
as mechanisms aimed at preventing structural conflict,
which seek to focus on the root causes thereof and
the promotion of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union's Agenda 2063, in
coordination with the United Nations.

It would be very useful to analyse the experience
gained through these mechanisms, including on any
potential logistical difficulties in obtaining sufficient
information to undertake prevention work; the need for
predictable and sustainable financing; and the need for
a greater involvement by the private sector or global
or subregional bodies that can bring to the table a
better understanding of the realities on the ground, in
particular in border areas.

To that end, we deem necessary the establishment
of innovative mechanisms aimed at overcoming
potential difficulties on the part of some States in
taking a preventive approach to crisis situations or
to improve their policies in certain sensitive areas.
We believe that this work is particularly relevant in
terms of electoral processes, peacebuilding efforts and
transition processes, with a view to preventing a relapse
into instability. It would also be important to twin this
approach with the setting up of national early-warning
systems or bodies aimed at promoting options for the
easing of tensions through an inclusive approach.

We acknowledge also the importance of harnessing
mediation as a way of resolving disputes in the
framework of preventive action. This useful tool enjoys
has a real capacity to provide positive alternatives for
action before and during conflict, and, as it responds to
a mandate of the parties, is helpful in taking account
those parties' sensitivities.

Here we would note the role played by the United
Nations Political Offices in this respect, as well as
their use as a timely source of early warning. It is key
that such mediation activities have increased in many
countries of the region in recent years, on the basis of
successful experiences, and that the African Union has
established a Mediation Support Unit. In that regard,
we believe that it is crucial to develop multidisciplinary
mediation teams in which women and young people
are represented, as the briefers, Ms. Mulamula,
Ms. Maite and Ms. Vilakazi, have just reminded us.
Such teams should also have the necessary logistical
and financial support.

We would like to conclude by emphasizing that
investment in developing and strengthening regional
preventive capacities is currently one of the most
important priorities for the efficient and effective
exercise of our shared responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

