The Secretary-General: It is exactly a week
since I last had the honour to address this Council.
During that week we have all been watching hour by
hour, on our television screens, the terrifying impact of
modern weaponry on Iraq and its people.

We not only mourn the dead. We must also feel
anguish for the living, and especially for the children.
We can only imagine the physical and emotional scars
that they will bear, perhaps for the rest of their lives.

All of us must regret that our intense efforts to
achieve a peaceful solution, through this Council, did
not succeed.

Many people ask why the Iraqi Government did
not take full advantage of the last chance they were
given by the Council, by cooperating actively,
wholeheartedly - in substance as well as procedure
with the inspectors that the Council sent to ensure that
Iraq was disarmed of weapons of mass destruction. But
at the same time, many people around the world are
seriously questioning whether it was legitimate for
some Member States to proceed to such a fateful action
now - an action that has far-reaching consequences
well beyond the immediate military dimensions -
without first reaching a collective decision of this
Council.

The inability of the Council to agree earlier on a
collective course of action places an even greater
burden on it today.

 
The Council, which has now had Iraq on its
agenda for 12 long years, must rediscover its unity of
purpose. We all want to see this war brought to an end
as soon as possible. But while it continues, it is
essential that everything be done to protect the civilian
population, as well as the wounded and the prisoners of
war, on both sides, and to bring relief to the victims.

This obligation is binding on all the belligerents.
The Geneva Conventions and all other instruments of
international humanitarian law must be scrupulously
respected. I would recall in particular the provisions of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, under which those in
effective control of any territory are responsible for
meeting the humanitarian needs of its population and
are required to maintain dialogue and cooperation with
international organizations engaged in humanitarian
relief. No one, on either side, must obstruct that relief.

Last week I drew the Council's attention to the
dire plight of the Iraqi people, even before these latest
hostilities, and the extent of their dependence on the oil
for food programme for medical supplies and food
distributed under that programme.

The programme has now come to a halt, with
some $2.4 billion of supplies, mainly food, in the
pipeline. The Council needs to determine how it will
adjust the programme to make it possible for those
supplies to reach the Iraqi people under the present
circumstances and to ensure that food, medicine and
other essential, life-sustaining supplies continue to be
provided. I am aware that a concerted effort is being
made to reach agreement, and I hope that it will soon
succeed.

But the conflict is also now creating new
humanitarian needs, which the oil for food programme
is not expected to cover. We do not yet know how
many people will be injured, displaced from their
homes or deprived of food, water, sanitation and other
essential services. But we fear that the numbers may be
high.

As I said, the primary responsibility for meeting
these needs falls on the belligerents who control the
territory. But the humanitarian agencies of the United
Nations are ready to help. Indeed, they have been
preparing actively to do so. Even though their
international staff had to be temporarily withdrawn
from Iraq, most of them have national staff who even
now are at work, bringing what limited relief they can
to their fellow citizens. Those brave and devoted Iraqis
deserve our profound respect.
I fear that the humanitarian effort required in the
coming weeks and months is going to be very costly.
We are about to launch a "flash appeal" to donors. I
urge Member States to respond swiftly and generously,
and not to do so at the expense of victims of other
emergencies in other parts of the world, which may be
less newsworthy but are no less devastating for the
people caught up in them.

This Council has other heavy responsibilities
related to this crisis. It needs to determine how it will
address the many needs of the Iraqi people, whatever
the outcome of the war, and what the United Nations
itself may be asked to undertake. For anything beyond
strictly humanitarian relief, we need a mandate from
the Security Council.

Needless to say, the Council's responsibilities
also extend far beyond Iraq. There are many other
conflicts that urgently need its attention - not least the
conflict that inflames passions throughout the Middle
East and colours so many people's attitudes to the Iraqi
issue. I mean, of course, the tragic conflict between
Israelis and Palestinians, for whom the noble vision of
two States living side by side in peace and security,
which the Security Council laid out just one year ago,
is still far from being realized.

In the last few months the peoples of the world
have shown how much they expect of the United
Nations, and of the Security Council in particular.
Many of them are now bitterly disappointed. Their
faith in the United Nations can be restored only if the
Council is able to identify and work constructively
towards specific goals. I urge the five permanent
members, in particular, to show leadership by making a
concerted effort to overcome their differences.

For my part, I would emphasize two guiding
principles, on which I believe there is no disagreement,
and which should underpin all your efforts or your
future decisions on Iraq. The first principle is respect
for Iraq's sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence. The second, which flows logically from
the first, is respect for the right of the Iraqi people to
determine their own political future and control their
own natural resources.

Let me conclude by saying that we are living
through a moment of deep divisions, which, if not
healed, can have grave consequences for the
international system and relations between States. By
your interventions this afternoon in this debate you
have it in your power to deepen those divisions, or to
begin to heal them. I appeal to all of you to choose the
latter course, and to reunite around a new resolve to
uphold the principles of the Charter. This is essential if
the Security Council is to recover its rightful role,
entrusted to it by the Charter, as the body with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

For my part, I am prepared to work with the
Security Council, on this crisis as in others, and to
assist in any way deemed helpful.

