Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his presence and his briefing. I also welcome Minister
Jeremie and Minister Hyseni and thank them for their
statements.

Costa Rica acknowledges the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/300). It contains important
recommendations on the functions that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) should continue to fulfil in its role as
mediator between the parties and in promoting rules to
benefit both communities. That was also made clear in
the reports of June and November 2008 (S/2008/354 and S/2008/692). We urge the authorities of Pristina to
continue working with the United Nations.

Costa Rica recognizes the efforts of UNMIK and
the deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) as positive measures to
strengthen political stability and the implementation
and consolidation of the rule of law to intervene to
protect and ensure respect for human rights, and to
preserve the rich cultural and religious heritage of
Kosovo.

In fully supporting the role of the United Nations
in promoting the political momentum in Kosovo, my
delegation also commends the cooperation between the
United Nations and other regional bodies. We welcome
the efforts of the European Union to advance the
European dimension in the entire Balkan region and
support the efforts to reconfigure UNMIK and
strengthen the functions of EULEX, in particular in the
consolidation of the rule of law. However, Costa Rica
is also aware of the need to adopt preventive measures
and provide the necessary guarantees to ensure that the
process will contribute to lasting regional peace and
political stability.

Costa Rica reiterates its conviction that the
civilian international presence should oversee the
transfer of authority from the provisional to the
permanent institutions of Government. My country
supports the efforts of the Kosovar State, which we
have recognized. We welcome steps to normalize
political, legal and economic relations that will
gradually promote Kosovo's emergence as a State on
the international stage living in peaceful coexistence
with its neighbours.

In that regard, we urge all parties to cooperate in
implementing practical measures to overcome the
isolation of specific groups caused by ethnic tensions
or other reasons. As it executes its mandate, the
European Union should ensure equal rights for all the
communities of Kosovo, a process in which the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
has an important role to play in the protection of
minorities, in particular the Serbs of Kosovo.

Above and beyond the complex international
financial crisis, Kosovo is facing important challenges.
It must strengthen its young institutions, practise even-
handedness, moderation and integrity in the application
of the rule of law, in particular - as I said before ~
with regard to protecting minority. It must establish the
necessary equilibrium with its neighbours and move
towards the future with the continuing support of
Europe in order to ensure its sustainability as a State.
The European Union, with its presence in the region
and its political vision, should contribute to ensuring
common security and work to ensure commitment to
and acceptance of the new political realities on the part
of all players with direct interests in the region.

Costa Rica urges the European Union and other
international organizations to continue to support the
socio-economic development of Kosovo in order to
facilitate its national consolidation, regional integration
and full participation in the concert of nations.

