Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein): The formal
recognition in the World Summit Outcome of the
responsibility of the international community to protect
civilian populations when their Governments fail to do
so constitutes a major breakthrough in our common
endeavour to prevent genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

The main obligation for its implementation
naturally falls on the Security Council. Diplomatic
means such as targeted sanctions and embargoes, used
in an effective way, should be employed at an early
stage when violations against civilians prevail to signal
the concern of the international community and to
serve as a first step to protect. Collective action to
prevent and respond to genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes must not be made impossible
by a non-concurring vote of one of the permanent
members of the Council. That principle was first
proposed by the High-Level Panel established in
preparation of the World Summit of 2005 and has been
taken up in the proposals on the working methods of
the Security Council presented to the General
Assembly last year that were prepared by the group of
five small nations, to which we belong.

The rest of the United Nations membership also
has a role to play in making the responsibility to
protect operational, in that they can bring situations to
the attention of the Security Council in open debates
and through other means, such as consideration in the
General Assembly. Furthermore, article 8 of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide allows any contracting party to call
upon the competent organs of the United Nations to
take appropriate action.

The decision of the 2005 Summit is
complementary to earlier resolutions of the General
Assembly, such as Assembly resolution 46/ 182, which
stresses the primary, although not exclusive,
responsibility of national authorities to protect their
own populations. The principle of the responsibility to
protect reaffirms that primary responsibility and
complements it with the role of the international
community when that responsibility is not met. That
resolution also calls upon all States whose populations
are in need of humanitarian assistance to facilitate the
safe access of humanitarian actors to such people. All
too often, that fundamental principle is neglected.
Humanitarian access to the vulnerable is a vital
stepping stone to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Where national authorities are unable or
unwilling to ensure that such access is granted and
respected, the Security Council must step in to create
and maintain the operational space needed by
humanitarian actors to provide assistance. In many
situations, security is so precarious that humanitarian
workers remain at considerable risk of violence. That is
where the role of the Security Council in defining and
facilitating the tasks and capacity of peacekeepers is
crucial. At the same time, wider acceptance of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, which
provides for substantial expansion of the scope of legal
protection for such personnel, is urgently needed.

International protection for civilians, whether by
peacekeepers or humanitarian workers, can only be an
interim response. Without political solutions, civilians
continue to suffer and humanitarian workers are faced
with open-ended displacement. Liechtenstein supports
the idea of strengthening the mediation capacities of
the Department of Political Affairs. The early use of
the Secretary-General's good offices can be an
important tool for a comprehensive preventive
approach to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We consider mediation to be a core activity of
the United Nations, in accordance with its purposes
and principles.

An unequivocal and firm stance by the Security
Council that there will be no impunity for the
deliberate targeting of civilian populations would have
a strong deterrent effect in any situation, and thus also
serve as a very useful prevention tool. Prevention is
indeed a key aspect of the protection of civilians.
Preventive action can, however, be effective only if it
is made clear that abuses against civilian populations,
which are often carried out against their most

vulnerable members, in particular women and children,
are violations of international law that will not go
unpunished.

In that context, Liechtenstein wholeheartedly
welcomes the first convictions for the recruitment and
use of child soldiers rendered by the Special Court for
Sierra Leone. That constitutes another significant step
in the area of international criminal justice, which has
expanded very rapidly, and is one of the most
important developments in international relations over
the past two decades. That historic judgement also
strengthens the role of the Security Council its fight
against impunity. We believe that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) must play the central role in the
efforts of the international community to end impunity
and hope that the Security Council will give its full
support to the ICC in that respect.

