The Secretary-General: I am pleased to have this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on my Visit to
Burundi late last month, which came on the heels of the
Council's own travel to the country. After a devastating
civil war that claimed the lives ofhundreds ofthousands
of people, the signing of the Arusha Agreement in
August 2000 put Burundi on the path towards peace
and reconciliation. The effort that ended the civil
war hinged on the willingness of former battlefield
adversaries to sit at the same table and become partners
in Burundi's common future. During my recent visit
to the country, I urged all Burundian stakeholders to
remember that lesson from their past and show genuine
commitment to an inclusive political dialogue as the
only means to peacefully resolve the crisis.

In order to promote confidence-building, the
Government announced, prior to my visit, the annulment
ofthe arrest warrants against 15 opposition figures. The
Government also decided to reopen two media outlets
that had previously been banned. Following my meeting
with him in Bujumbura, President Nkurunziza agreed
to release up to 2,000 detainees. We now look forward
to the full implementation of those measures and expect
further steps in the same direction, including the release
of all political prisoners and an end to restrictions on
civil society and media organizations. At my invitation,
key political actors from the Government, the ruling
party and opposition parties sat together with me to
discuss the future of the country. Nothing prevents
Burundian political actors from continuing on that
essential course.

Burundi's political leaders must summon the
necessary courage and confidence to launch a
credible political process and build a future where
the people of Burundi can once again live in peace
and enjoy their fundamental rights. As I reiterated to
President Nkurunziza, the international community
stands ready to support Burundi in advancing a
credible and inclusive dialogue process. The East
African Community, the African Union and the United
Nations must work together to provide the dedicated
and professional mediation support that Burundi
needs and deserves during this challenging time. The
appointment of former President of Tanzania Benjamin
Mkapa as East African Community facilitator is an
encouraging development.

During my visit, I underlined my deep concern
about the volatile situation in the country. I expressed
my profound worry at the potential for the violence
spiralling outward, ending in civil war. I urged the
Government to take measures to address the continued
violence and the impunity that fuels it. The Government
sought to assure me that the situation was gradually
stabilizing. However, in my meetings with civil-society
organizations and opposition parties, I was presented
with a very different picture. I heard deeply disturbing
allegations of continuing Violence and human rights
violations, including acts targeting women and
children. Clearly, that is an unacceptable situation, one
that requires the utmost attention to ensure that those
responsible are held accountable for their acts. The
High Commissioner for Human Rights will provide a
more detailed briefing on the human rights situation.

I cannot stress enough the profound humanitarian
consequences that political unrest, violence and
impunity carry for the population. Recent humanitarian
assessments suggest that harvests in crisis-affected
areas have fallen short, and that nearly 700,000 people
now suffer from severe food insecurity in Burundi.
Since the beginning of the crisis, more than a quarter
of a million people have fled Burundi and sought
refuge in neighbouring countries, which have shown
commendable hospitality and solidarity. Despite
the assurances provided by Burundian officials that
refugees are eager to return and that some have already
started doing so, the current number of refugees is
indicative of the distress felt by Burundians over the
continuation of violence and intimidation in their
country. During my meeting, President Nkurunziza
asked for United Nations assistance in securing the safe
and unhindered return of the refugees.

Pursuant to resolution 2248 (2015), my Special
Adviser, Mr. Jamal Benomar, has deployed a team
to Burundi. I would like to thank the Burundian
authorities for the cooperation and access extended to
my Special Adviser and his team. I also welcome the
letter of President Nkurunziza to the Security Council
of 24 January, expressing the willingness of the
Government to work closer with my Special Adviser and
his team on issues of dialogue, security, disarmament,
human rights and development. This is a complex set
of issues and challenges, one on which we stand ready
to fully support Burundi and for which we will require
adequate capacities. The United Nations will continue
to work with the Government to ensure that more
concrete steps are taken to improve the human rights
situation and that all stakeholders are willing to engage
in a genuine and inclusive dialogue in good faith.

There is no alternative to a political settlement of
the Burundian crisis. The international community
must shift its approach from a focus on crisis response
to a culture of early action and prevention. That can
be achieved only if regional and international actors
jointly focus their energy, attention and resources, and
work together without delay to support a nationally
owned inclusive political process in Burundi.

