I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. China is paying close attention to the humanitarian situation in Syria, in particular the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on economic and social development in Syria. We take note of the fact that the Syrian Government has taken a series of active measures in the areas of health care, education, transportation, food production and many others to prevent and contain the spread of the virus. We appreciate those efforts. Years of conflict have undermined Syria's capacity to cope with the pandemic, and the international community must not stand by idly. China is actively cooperating with Syria to combat the virus. The first batch of medical assistance arrived two weeks ago in Damascus. Last week, a renowned Chinese hospital held a video meeting with the Syrian Ministry of Health during which Chinese medical experts shared their first-hand experiences in combating COVID-19. We are willing to continue providing assistance within our capacity to Syria and call on other countries to do the same. We also encourage the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and other international humanitarian agencies to make greater efforts to support Syria in responding to the pandemic in various forms. The humanitarian issue in Syria is interlinked with political, economic and security issues and must be managed in an integrated and impartial way. The role of the Syrian Government should be brought into full play. It should be acknowledged that the Syrian Government has demonstrated political will to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance, and there have been positive developments in cross-line operations. With regard to the issue of cross-border humanitarian assistance, full respect must be given to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. We call for continued coordination and cooperation between OCHA and the Syrian Government to jointly find a sustainable solution. With regard to the board of inquiry, China has reservations and concerns over the manner of its establishment and working methods. Unilateral sanctions undermine Syria's capacity to combat COVID-19 and destroy the livelihood of civilians. There are no grounds to justify unilateral sanctions, and we are firmly against them. China reiterates its support for the appeals made by the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to lift the sanctions. We urge the relevant countries to respect the legitimate rights and lives of all the people affected by the pandemic and to immediately lift unilateral sanctions against the countries concerned. It must be pointed out that the humanitarian issues in Syria are closely related to the political process. China calls on all parties to fully implement resolution 2254 (2015) and push forward a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process. We support the United Nations and the good offices of the Special Envoy in the hope that we can jointly promote peace and stability in Syria and in the region. China is also seriously concerned over the civilian casualties caused by yesterday's tragic event and extends its deep condolences to the families of the victims. We call on the parties to respond actively to Secretary-General Guterres' appeal for a ceasefire.
