Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to start byjoining
others in thanking Special Representative Tanin for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council today. I would
also like to thank President Nikolie and Ambassador
Citaku for their statements to the Council.

Much progress has been made since the end
of the conflict in Kosovo, in June 1999; however,
building peaceful and prosperous societies requires
constant vigilance and an unwavering commitment by
political leaders from both parties as well as from the
international community that stands with them. We
are therefore concerned over the recent rise in tensions
between Kosovo and Serbia, and we call on both sides
to redouble their efforts for peace by showing restraint
and refraining from inflammatory rhetoric and
provocative actions.

The experience of the European Union has shown
us that lasting stability can be built through dynamic
European Union (EU) integration processes. The
peoples of Serbia and Kosovo are looking towards a
future, together, within the European Union, rather
than to the divisions of the past. The focus of all
efforts should be on the normalization of relations
between Serbia and Kosovo within the context of
the EU accession process. Therefore, we encourage
Pristina and Belgrade to engage constructively in the
EU-facilitated dialogue. By realizing their European
perspective, Kosovo and Serbia can cement a stable,
democratic and prosperous future for their populations.
It is essential that the status issue does not hinder
Kosovo on its European path or prevent its membership
in international organizations. The goal of the Security
Council should also be to support the normalization
of relations and a smooth transfer of responsibility to
the peoples living in Kosovo. In that regard, we are
ready to engage in discussions concerning the future
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo.

We call on all Kosovar politicians from both the
Government and the opposition to overcome their
disagreements through dialogue and refrain from
disruptive behaviour in order to implement the crucial
reforms needed to benefit the people in Kosovo and the
wider region.

Sweden is ready to play its part. We look forward
to continuing our bilateral development cooperation
as well as our political support to Kosovo's progress
in the areas of democracy, human rights, the rule of
law, gender equality and sustainable and inclusive
economic development.

