Mrs. Alvear Valenzuela (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I too would like to start by congratulating
Guinea on its assumption of the presidency for this
month, at a time when very important decisions are
going to be made. I would also like to congratulate
Germany on its brilliant handling of our affairs last
month.

Chile is attending this Council meeting to hear
once again reports of the inspectors of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Committee (UNMOVIC) and of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We do so with a
positive mindset, despite the critical nature of the
moment. We are convinced that we must arrive at an
agreement in this body on how to demand Iraq's
effective disarmament. We are all united by the
common will to responsibly apply the principles that
the Charter requires this body to safeguard.

I should like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
for their presentations on the inspections carried out by
UNMOVIC and IAEA. Their reports contain detailed
accounts of the work of inspection and verification
undertaken in various areas. We value their
contributions highly in today's task of assessing Iraq's
degree of compliance with resolution 1441 (2002).

The two reports allow us to infer that Iraq's
attitude of cooperation, even at this late stage in the
multilateral process, is inadequate. If we compare it to
the categorical language of resolution 1441 (2002) and
the sense of urgency underlying it, we can only
conclude that this cooperation is not full. That fact is of
deep concern to my country. While they may be
important steps, the signs of progress in specific areas
that have been indicated in recent reports, such as the
destruction of the Al Samoud 2 missiles, do not detract
from the general conclusion.

Chile reaffirms the need to achieve the
immediate, full and effective disarmament of Iraq. In
that context, we reiterate our urgent appeal to Iraq to
actively and unconditionally cooperate with the
inspectors, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Council.

At this stage of our deliberations, I wish to
reiterate the guiding principles of our foreign policy, on
which the position of Chile in respect of the crisis in
Iraq is based.

Multilateralism is a permanent interest of Chile's.
Multilateral diplomacy prevails, as has been pointed
out here, and this Council is the competent body to
address matters of international peace and security. We
reaffirm the centrality of the United Nations and the
Security Council in that process. Their resolutions must
be complied with fully. Such compliance is
indispensable to the credibility of the United Nations
and to the prevalence of the decisions of this main
organ.

We support a solution in keeping with
international law and with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter. This is the only source
of legitimacy for our collective agreements and
decisions. We emphasize the need to adopt collective
measures to prevent and eliminate threats to peace. We
actively search for every way to reach a peaceful
solution. This is a principle that we have historically
upheld and we are determined to continue working to
achieve it.

We, as those responsible for putting an agreement
together, are at a critical moment. In recent months,
Chile has made every effort to contribute to an agreed
decision leading to the peaceful disarmament of Iraq.
That is why we have appealed to the five permanent
members and, on that basis, endeavoured to find a
point of convergence among widely divergent
positions.

To that end, we have advocated the continuation
of rigorous inspections subject to a time limit. That
would respond to the urgency underlying resolution
1441 (2002). We have also pointed out that the use of
force contemplated in Chapter VII can be invoked only
when all peaceful means of disarming Iraq have been
exhausted.

In recent days, we have noted a greater degree of
flexibility that has attenuated the rigidity observed
early in this process in the Council, which was
characterized by an insufficient readiness to engage in
dialogue, reconcile differences and open avenues of
understanding and negotiation. Chile has repeatedly
affirmed in this forum, as well as in its consultations
with permanent and elected members of the Council,
its conviction that, through unity and collective
responsibility, we can reach an agreement.

The statements we have heard lead us to believe
that a solution which reconciles the yearning for peace
with disarmament remains possible. We are convinced
that this last opportunity for peace must embrace a
strengthening of inspections with Iraq, with clear
deadlines and concrete demands, in keeping with the
sense of urgency expressed in resolution 1441 (2002).
The Iraqi regime, which has exposed its own people to
great suffering, has the political and moral
responsibility to achieve total disarmament.

Chile wishes to reiterate its vocation for peace.
The Government and people of my country aspire to
finding a solution to this crisis consonant with that
vocation and in the framework of the United Nations,
an Organization that we helped to found in 1945. We
hope that every single member of this Council will do
everything within its power to reach the agreement that
humankind expects from us.

