Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
at the outset to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for her briefing on the situation of
Libya with respect to the Court, pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), in which she provided in particular
information concerning the issues of cooperation, the
admissibility of the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi, torture and other crimes. Our
observations will be limited to these issues.

Togo welcomes the healthy development of
cooperation of States and non-State institutions with
the ICC. Togo thanks the Prosecutor for sounding the
alarm concerning the ongoing climate of insecurity
in the country, to the detriment of investigations. It
fervently urges the adoption of innovative solutions
with the Libyan authorities, other States and concerned
non-State institutions to ensure the safety and security
of the population.

My country welcomes in that regard the signing
this month of a memorandum of understanding
between the Prosecutor's Office and Libya on the
sharing of responsibilities in future investigations.
We hope that the memorandum does not endorse the
amnesty laws adopted to ensure impunity for certain
acts, on the grounds that they were committed to
protect the revolution. With that condition, we seek
a quick agreement between the Libyan authorities
and the Prosecutor's Office on how to implement this
memorandum.

Concerning the admissibility of the cases of Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi, Togo
urges all parties concerned to respect the decision of
the competent Chamber, which has ruled, on the one
hand, that the Saif Al -Islam Al-Qadhafi is admissible
before the ICC, but that, on the other, that of Abdullah
Al-Senussi is inadmissible before the Court and may
be tried in Libya. Togo hopes that the process will be
respected and that the competent Chamber shall decide
without delay on the appeal of Al-Senussi against the
decision to dismiss before the ICC so as to allow a
quick resolution of the case. My country calls on the
players to carry out those decisions and those that will
follow in the spirit of effective cooperation and in the
utmost respect of the principle of complementarity and
the relevant provisions of the Rome Statute governing
the work and mandate of the ICC.

Regarding torture and other crimes, we express our
deep concern about the difficulties facing the Libyan
national authorities in taking control of all detention
centres and in preventing the mistreatment of prisoners
in the hands of armed groups and people with no
respect for human rights in judicial proceedings and
the administration of justice. We express the hope that,
for the sake of sustainable national reconciliation, the
new law on transitional justice will be promptly and
properly implemented in order to ensure a fair trial for
those involved. We hardly need recall that the role of
justice must be not to keep victims and perpetrators
at odds indefinitely, but rather to serve as an interface
between them so as to bring them together and allow
them to follow the psychosocial treatment necessary for
lasting reconciliation.

While stressing that the Libyan national authorities
bear the primary responsibility for protecting the
Libyan people, Togo urges them to take the measures
necessary to halt the deterioration of the security
situation in Libya, and calls on the international
community to provide the assistance, as required.

In conclusion, Togo insists that any assistance to
the Libyan authorities to protect the population should
be undertaken in strict compliance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.

