Mr. Maurer (Switzerland): Thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Council today. Like others, I would like to thank
Ambassador Mufioz for his well-informed and well-
crafted report, contained in document S/2009/444.

Switzerland's experience in peacebuilding and
our recent experience as Chair of the country-specific
configuration on Burundi of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) leads me to make the following
points.

First, the principle of mutual accountability, as
substantiated in the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding in Burundi and its biannual reviews and
similar documents, has proven to be a most useful tool
for responsible partnership. In our view, such a
partnership implies not only mutual understanding on
objectives, priorities and means to achieve them, but
also a commitment to seek solutions through
constructive cooperation. That goes for the relationship
between the country on the agenda and the
international community, as well as for the national
actors themselves. National ownership in
peacebuilding is essential, but national ownership, in
our understanding, cannot be the exclusive prerogative
of the Government alone.

Second, we see much merit in our close
relationship with the actors on the ground. Our actions
are guided by the principle of subsidiarity between the
Commission and those actors. It is not in New York
that our efforts will bear the best fruit. Peace is built on
the ground.

Third, in every peacebuilding process, elections
are a crucial phase. Several elections are planned in the
next months, including in Burundi. Elections raise two
particular challenges. One is the challenge to
support - and adequately fund - the electoral
process. The other is to balance the inherent tensions of
electoral competition with a basic understanding and
willingness between the parties to cooperate in order to
stabilize societies.

In post-conflict situations particularly, elections
should not become winner-take-all events. Rather, they
are essential for democratizing the peace process and
building national ownership for peace. It is thus
important for all political parties to have access to the
political space at hand, which is a key element in
ensuring a sincere and sustained dialogue. The
Peacebuilding Commission, along with the Council,
have a role to play in getting this message across.

Fourth, one of the tasks of the Peacebuilding
Commission is to provide advice to the Council. In that
regard, I would like to recall and support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General's report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304), like other speakers have done before me,
namely, first, to consider more proactively the potential
contributions of the Commission, and second, to foster
the complementarity between the Security Council and
the Commission.

Like troop-contributing countries, members of the
Commission and its country-specific configurations
should be involved as early as possible in the Council's
deliberations on countries on the PBC agenda.

Fifth, we have to share more systematically
experiences and lessons learned. While all
peacebuilding situations are unique, in most of them
the same key issues need to be addressed, such as
security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, job creation, return and reintegration
of displaced persons and the future of restless young
people.

Six, aware that peace cannot be achieved unless
all efforts concur to that end, the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture was created for the purpose
of overcoming institutional barriers between
humanitarian, development, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping activities. Those challenges remain. We
still act too often in institutional silos within the United
Nations, competing for scarce human and financial
resources. We must increase efforts to build bridges.

Seventh, as an all-stakeholder forum, the
Commission is well qualified to identify gaps,
overcome blockages, muster resources and focus the
spotlight of international attention on the process of
peacebuilding. It has done well for the four countries
on its agenda. However, we all know that there are
more than those four situations where societies are
struggling to avoid falling into armed conflict or trying
to escape from it.

We should ask ourselves these two questions: are
we doing all we can do to make the best use of the
United Nations peacebuilding instruments where peace
can be built? And are those tools fit to be applied to all
situations where peace is to be built?

Finally, the 2010 review of the peacebuilding
architecture is a good opportunity to take stock and
reflect on ways to foster its potential in the new
prevailing international environment. There are
numerous initiatives under way, and we welcome them
all. Nevertheless, we also believe that there is merit in
conducting a more structured and inclusive dialogue
between all stakeholders, and that the review process
deserves authoritative guidance.

We therefore call upon the Secretary-General to
present, by the end of April 2010, a forward-looking
report with specific recommendations. Such a report
could take stock of challenges to peace, it could
highlight the complementarity of mediation and
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, operational
activities for development for peacebuilding and it
could also reflect on the reform processes in those
fields.

A report by the Secretary-General would provide
a sound basis for adopting a new consensus on the
Peacebuilding Commission at the highest political
level at the high-level plenary meeting in September
2010. One or two high-level personalities could,
following the model established with the Prodi report
on the relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union, give stature and authority to that kind
of response and thus facilitate a clearer focus for our
debate.
