Mr. Brown (Liberia): Since I have the special
privilege of being the last speaker today, I would like,
if I may, to thank everyone here for their patience
and time throughout what has been a truly long day.
My delegation would also like to thank the Polish
presidency for convening today's open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/462) and thank
the other speakers and contributors for their insights.

Reflecting on what we have gleaned from those
important contributions, we are compelled to confront
an uncomfortable truth. Even as we debate, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict around the
world is anything but ensured, with increasing acts
of violence and brutality being perpetrated against
civilians and causing unimaginable human suffering,
deprivation and carnage. The Secretary-General is
right. This is unconscionable. So too is our continued
inability to act.

When here in the Security Council we fail to
equitably and fairly apply the applicable, agreed-on
tools of international humanitarian law, not because
they do not adequately address the problem of
protecting civilians in armed conflict, but because we
have vested interests in one side or the other; when we
are unable to set our sights high enough to see how such
conflicts lower the standards of our humanity; when
we cannot move beyond our narrow self-interests to
agree to help those who need our help the most, the
victims and unwilling participants in these conflicts,
not only do we fail the innocent women and children,
doctors, nurses and other health-care and humanitarian
workers, we also fail the United Nations and all that it
should truly represent. We fail the common values of
our humanity. And yes, we fail ourselves.

Of course, we have adopted numerous resolutions
calling for the protection of civilians and humanitarian
and health personnel, as well as for compliance
with the obligation to distinguish between civilian
populations and combatants. Yet the atrocities that
shock our collective consciences have continued. Are
the resolutions so ineffective? Or might it be that we
who are adopting them are not really committed to
their implementation? Where a State's institutions have
clearly collapsed under the weight of the destruction
attendant on armed conflict, is it still reasonable to lay
the burden of the protection of civilians on such a State
and those crumbled institutions? Should we perhaps
also extend the duty to protect civilians in an armed
conflict to the region of the conflict, as well as to other
external supporters who have a vested interest in the
continuation of the conflict? Is it really too difficult for
us to commit to a code of conduct governing how we
wield the enormous powers of the Security Council to
better protect civilians in armed conflicts?

Liberia could not agree more with the Secretary-
General that the most effective way to protect civilians
is to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and
recurrence of armed conflicts. That is why we support
the new paradigm of preventing conflict and sustaining
peace. However, we must also commit to working
creatively, selflessly and aggressively to end ongoing
conflicts. We can do this. We must do it, for the wailing
mothers and dying children for whom there may be
no tomorrow, and for the humanitarian and health-
care workers who, despite the rising risks to their own
lives, continue to offer hope in desolation, surrounded
by a rising tide of hopelessness. We know that for all
of these people - whose faces we may never see and
voices we may never hear and yet to whom we are all
inextricably connected by the common thread of our
humanity - we could stop the endless debates and
laudable speeches and, instead, collectively recommit
to acting as we know we should.

Of course, we cannot be all things to all people.
But this, too, is who we are - humankind's best chance
to afford all a right to life, to care for their families,
and to live in peace, security and human decency. In its
purest and most exalted form, that is why our United
Nations exists. We know that we are a confluence of
competing interests and power, but even as we compete
we must never forget that the essence of the United
Nations is that we will be united for peace, security and
human development.

The meeting rose at 7.50 pm.
