Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Ijoin
Ambassador Negroponte in expressing horror and
outrage at the events of Tuesday. Above all, we share
the sadness at the loss of Sergio Vieira de Mello and
other United Nations officials and Iraqi staff. As with
all our friends and colleagues among the United
Nations staff in New York and worldwide, Sergio and
his team won our admiration and respect for their
unflinching commitment to improving the situation of
the people of Iraq and carrying forward the ideals of
the United Nations.

The progress that Ambassador Negroponte and I
are outlining today is almost across the board, the
result of the coalition and the United Nations working
together. The challenges that remain we will face
together. But because today our resolve is even
stronger to help the Iraqi people win the prosperous,
stable future that they deserve, we cannot allow a small
minority to hijack their future. Our goals in Iraq are
clear and have been set out repeatedly by the Security
Council: the achievement of a free, sovereign Iraq run
by the people of Iraq for the people of Iraq and
achieved as quickly as possible.

But we have to recognize the difficulties that any
State faces in moving from conflict to a stable,
peaceful and law-abiding democracy. Experience in the
Balkans and in Africa underlines the common
difficulties that always exist. The transition to justice,
dealing with the crimes of the past, developing law and
a legal system and having effective policing and a
judiciary and a penal system are all essential but hard
won necessities to civic society.

The United Nations has much experience in
helping to organize elections, but the task is difficult,
painstaking and time-consuming. But representative
government is much more than elections. You need
electoral laws and political parties. How are manifestos
to be communicated? How do people campaign freely?
How do you embed democratic practice? And do you
have the political will to deliver that and work together
for those aims?

I could go on to enumerate a lot of other areas,
not least economic. But my essential point is that the
challenge of construction is always great, and Iraq, of
course, is more difficult in many ways, because we are
starting from over 30 years of Saddam's repression and
abuse of Iraq and its people. I suspect that the
international community as a whole underestimated
how much fundamental damage had been caused to the
fabric of Iraq and its society by such a pernicious
regime.

Ambassador Negroponte touched on security and
the economy. I will aim to cover humanitarian
activities, the contribution made by the Coalition
Provisional Authority to Iraqi efforts to establish local
institutions for representative governance and the
commitment to ensuring human rights, and legal and
judicial reform.

Turning to the first of those - humanitarian
activities and the provision of basic services - food
distribution systems are fully restored. But, to move
on, we need to look beyond the end of the oil-for-food
programme. We are conducting poverty and
vulnerability surveys in order to identify where
continued support will be needed.

In the field of health care, all 240 hospitals in
Iraq are now functioning. With the help of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), over 22 million
doses of vaccines for measles, tuberculosis, hepatitis B,
diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus and polio have
been provided, enough to vaccinate 4.2 million
children. The cholera season is now over. Prompt
action kept the number of confirmed cases this year
down to 65, well below the average.

We are reinvigorating the education system
countrywide, distributing 1.2 million student kits and
3,900 school kits. By the end of June, most schools
were open. We have launched an upgrade of school
facilities, and we are reviewing all textbooks and their
availability. By the end of December, 70 million
revised textbooks will have been printed.

The water sector continues to be a priority. We
have repaired more than 130 critical breaks in the
network. However, as we have seen spectacularly, the
network has been badly hit by highly organized
sabotage, exacerbated by a shortage of parts and
chemicals. But projects are in hand, in Baghdad and
elsewhere, to upgrade existing treatment plants and to
build new ones to the benefit of 11.5 million people.
I could turn to representative governance. We
have already noted the establishment of the Governing
Council to lead the country to elections and to appoint
a representative government. The Council is our
partner in many decisions concerning the
administration of Iraq. The Governing Council has set
up a constitutional preparatory committee, which is
now meeting to organize countrywide consultations on
a future constitution. It has worked up a strategy for
consulting and involving civil society in that work. It
will be reporting back to the Governing Council by
mid-September.

We are also working to ensure representative
Iraqi institutions at the local level, where many of the
decisions most affecting individuals are, of course,
made. Every major Iraqi city now has a local
government. We are in the process of deploying teams
to help build up Iraqi provincial government, and the
Coalition is committed to including women in all
phases and at all levels in the reconstruction of Iraq.

On human rights and legal and judicial reform,
we are working to support the creation of a culture in
which human rights are respected. Human rights and
the rule of law must be central to the building of
representative, democratic institutions in Iraq.

We are working to ensure transitional justice.
International forensic teams have conducted initial
assessments of more than 60 of the 150 reported mass
graves. A team is collecting witness testimonies and
documents. We are working on the preservation of
evidence, and we hope shortly to begin to develop a
national Iraqi bureau of missing persons. Nothing
could be a harsher indictment than us having to do that.

We are supporting efforts to strengthen civil
society and human rights education in Iraq. We have
disseminated information and training on basic human
rights entitlements and protections guaranteed by
international law.

The restoration of law and order rests in part on
the development of a fully functioning and effective
justice system. We have repaired more than 450 court
premises and scores of prison facilities countrywide. A
Judicial Review Committee comprising equal numbers
of Coalition and Iraqi members is in the process of
screening judges and prosecutors. A central criminal
court for some of the most highly regarded jurists in
Iraq has been established as a model of judicial
integrity and fairness to handle cases of special
importance or with national significance.
If I may move to the conclusion, no member of
the Council should underestimate the difficulty or the
importance of the undertaking in which we are
engaged. Saddam repressed Iraq for more than three
decades. He squandered the wealth of Iraq. The State-
run economy is in desperate need of reform, with 60
per cent unemployment and no serious investment in
infrastructure for decades. Iraq's people are still
coming to terms with the fact that hundreds of
thousands of their countrymen were killed by their own
Government.

While no one should underestimate the challenge,
neither should they underestimate our sustained
commitment, working alongside the United Nations,
with the people of Iraq. We cannot afford to fail. The
international community owes it to Iraq. A prosperous
and stable Iraq, a prominent member of the
international community, will be a success and a tribute
to Sergio Vieira de Mello and the staff who lost their
lives. We share the goals for Iraq, and our views on
means of delivery are converging. We have rightly
responded to the terrible events of this week by
reaffirming our determination to act together to build a
better future for Iraq.

The United Kingdom believes that it is right to
respond by stepping up international involvement in all
elements of assistance to the Iraqi people, to coping
with the security problems and to developing the
economic and political aspects.

It is timely that we should examine again the
ways in which we, the international community -
international institutions and individual countries -
can all manifest our solidarity with Iraq by reinforcing
current involvement. The needs are quite clear. The
question is how can the United Nations do more to
accelerate political process, where we have an
increasingly common perception of what needs to be
done in Iraq. How can we speed up support for
reconstruction and economic development? We need to
enhance security. What does the Security Council need
to do, better to help those nations wishing to contribute
to be able to do so? How can we meet the different
policing needs in Iraq, Iraq's relations with the
neighbouring countries, the security of the unitary State
and the protection of its borders? They are all issues
which are germane and crucial. So, what is the scope
for action which would further the achievement of a
successful Iraq? The United Kingdom very much hopes
that in the coming days the Security Council can
constructively debate those issues.

