The Secretary-General (spoke in French): May I
first of all commend the leaders of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and in
particular Presidents Kufuor and Obasanjo on their
tireless efforts to find a solution to the crisis in cote
d'Ivoire. I also wish to thank all of those countries that
have provided contingents to the ECOWAS mission in
Cote d'Ivoire. They are fulfilling their mandate in
extremely difficult conditions, but thanks to them and
to the French forces of the Licorne operation, an
escalation of the conflict has, thus far, been avoided.
However, I am deeply concerned by the current
political stalemate created by the withdrawal of the
Forces nouvelles from the Government of National
Reconciliation on 23 September. Unless urgent steps
are taken to resolve that impasse, the tenuous security
situation in the country could deteriorate still further.

Already, there are signs that the situation in some
parts of the northern provinces controlled by the Forces
Nouvelles is degenerating into lawlessness. Tension
between the Forces nouvelles and the Forces armees
nationales de Cote d'Ivoire is also escalating. In that
context, the Forces nouvelles has declared a state of
emergency in areas under their control, and accused
President Gbagbo of preparing to attack their positions.
There is clearly a danger that Cote d'Ivoire could slip
back into conflict.

I was pleased to note, however, that, during the
summit of seven ECOWAS leaders held in Accra on 11
November, President Gbagbo and Prime Minister
Diarra worked closely together to ensure that the
Government of National Reconciliation is able to
function and to implement the work programme
developed by the Government last May. It is indeed
essential that the Government be able to carry out the
tasks assigned to it under the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement with the necessary means and authority.

The undertakings made by the President and
Prime Minister in Accra must be matched by deeds. In
this regard, all parties concerned must demonstrate
genuine political will to honour their commitments and
implement the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement in good
faith.

In order to jump-start the stalled peace process,
the parties must tackle the fundamental issues behind
the deadlock. As indicated in my latest report to the
Security Council, issued on 4 November,
implementation of the key provisions of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement must begin without delay.

I urge the Ivorian parties to take the key measures
identified in that report immediately. Those measures
include the following: the Forces nouvelles must rejoin
the Government of National Reconciliation without
delay; all parties must accept the Government of
National Reconciliation as fully constituted after the
appointment of the Defence and Security Ministers on
12 September; all militias must begin to disband
immediately; the armed groups must be cantoned and
disarmed as soon as possible, while at the same time
the country's security forces are restructured; the de
facto partition of the country must end at once; and the
National Assembly must adopt, as soon as possible, the
reforms proposed in the Government's work
programme.

The United Nations reaffirms its commitment to
continue to work closely with ECOWAS in the pursuit
of peace in Cote d'Ivoire and to help implement the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. I intend to send an
assessment mission to Cote d'Ivoire soon to review the
situation on the ground, so that I can prepare
recommendations for the consideration of the Council,
pursuant to resolution 1514 (2003), which requested
me to report on how efforts of the United Nations
Mission in Cote d'Ivoire to facilitate peace and
stability in Cote d'Ivoire might be improved, including
through the possible reinforcement of the United
Nations presence in the country.

Finally, let me appeal once again to all the
members of this Council, and to the international
community as a whole, to remain engaged in Cote
d'Ivoire and to provide the necessary support to enable
the ECOWAS forces to continue their useful work in
that country.

