Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I, in
turn, would like to thank High Representative Lajcak
for his introduction and for his very detailed and
comprehensive report to the Security Council. I would
also like to thank the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Nikola Spirie, for his presence and for his
statement.

Belgium aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of France on behalf of the European
Union.

Allow me to say from the outset that Belgium
fully shares the general assessment of the High
Representative. Like the High Representative, Belgium
would like to underscore the importance for Bosnia and
Herzegovina of the signing of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union on
16 June 2008. This demonstrates that, when it comes to
crucial reforms such as police reforms, results are
possible.

However, since the signing, progress on reforms
has clearly come to a halt. Belgium is deeply
concerned by the political developments of the past
few months in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular
the period before the local elections of 5 October 2008,
when ethnic motivations and nationalist rhetoric
unfortunately once again paralysed the political
process. Clearly, this kind of attitude and behaviour
undermine the very foundations of the State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and will not help the country achieve
its Euro-Atlantic goals, which my country fully
supports.
In view of that Euro-Atlantic integration process,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has great challenges ahead of
it. Allow me to highlight a few elements.

Belgium welcomes the recent political agreement
of 8 November 2008 among the three most important
political parties of the country. The time has now come
to ensure that the agreement is also supported by other
political actors and that all the measures necessary for
its full implementation are carried out. It is important,
inter alia, for Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue to
implement the 27 February 2007 declaration of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council.
That declaration links the future closure of the Office
of the High Representative to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's achieving the five objectives and
meeting the two conditions set out in the declaration.

A recent statement by the Steering Board after its
meeting in Brussels on 19 and 20 November reaffirmed
the importance of these criteria, in particular such
unresolved questions as the distribution of public
property between the State and other Government
entities and the complete implementation of the Brcko
Arbitration Tribunal's Final Award. The resolution of
these two questions will enable the Steering Board to
take a decision at its next meeting, to be held in March
2009, on the transition from the Office of the High
Representative towards a more substantial
representation by the European Union.

In addition, Belgium wholeheartedly urges the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to cooperate
fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.

In conclusion, Belgium reiterates its full support
for the Dayton Agreement's provisions and the
involvement of the international community, as
demonstrated by the renewal of the mandate of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force by this
Council. We also reiterate our appreciation and support
for the work of the High Representative, who is also
the Special Representative of the European Union.

