Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba once again expresses its pleasure at seeing
you, Madam, preside over the Security Council.
We commend you for the manner in which you have
discharged you duties, as during its prior presidency.

We fully support the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The Middle East situation has worsened in recent
months and the international community remains highly
attuned to developments there. The crimes committed
by Israel in its latest aggression against the Palestinian
people shocked global public opinion. Israel again acted
with impunity. The Security Council, revealing once
again its characteristic double standards, stood silently
by as Israel murdered over 2,000 Palestinians, most of
them children, women and elderly, and we again bore
witnesss as Israel's massive military might destroyed
homes, livelihoods, basic services and infrastructure.

Cuba reiterates that the Security Council must
uphold the duties with which it is entrusted by defending
international peace and security and by adopting,
without delay, specific and practical measures to bring
to an end once and for all Israel's aggression against the
Palestinian people, and to hold it accountable for the
crimes of aggression, collective punishment, arbitrary
arrests, mass imprisonment and genocide committed
against this people.

We fully support the Palestinian initiative seeking
a Security Council resolution setting a deadline for the
end of the Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
territories that began in 1967 and permitting the
exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to self-determination in
an independent Palestinian State within its pre-1967
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The General Assembly took an historic decision
when its members adopted the majority resolution 67/19,
granting Palestine non-Member observer State status
in the United Nations. The international community
must continue to support the Palestinian people in their
legitimate call for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State and its admission as a full Member of
the United Nations.

The construction and expansion of illegal Israeli
settlements, the building of the wall of shame in the
occupied Palestinian territory, the destruction and
confiscation of Palestinian land and property, the forced
displacement of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian
families and the transfer of settlers into occupied
Palestinian territory are unacceptable. Following the
recent announcement by the Israeli Government of the
construction of over 2,000 new Israeli settlements in
occupied East Jerusalem, we demand the immediate and
complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in
the Palestinian territories.

Such aggressive Israeli colonizing policies and
practices deliberately contravene United Nations
resolutions, international law and international
humanitarian law; constitute a threat to regional and
international peace and security; and deprive the
Palestinian people of their fundamental human rights.
Only the end of the colonization policy, the release
of Palestinian prisoners and the recognition of the
legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people will allow for the launching of a meaningful
political process that could lead to lasting peace in the
region.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation in the
besieged Gaza Strip, where living conditions have been
excacerbated by the most recent atrocious bombardment,
requires the urgent attention and support of the
international community. Cuba reiterates its support
for the Palestinian people in its just struggle for self-
determination. We demand an end to the occupation of
all Arab territories and reiterate our position in favour
of a just and lasting peace for all the peoples of the
Middle East.

We reiterate our call for the safeguarding of the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria and for the right to self-determination of its
people without foreign interference or intervention
of any kind. Foreign intervention in Syria must stop.
Cuba reiterates its opposition to the calls of those who
promote regime change in the Syrian Arab Republic
and are committed to the use of force and violence.

We cannot but reiterate our serious concern at
the loss of innocent life resulting from the Syrian
conflict. We condemn all acts of violence taking place
in that country against the civilian population, but
the supposed protection of human lives and the fight
against terrorists cannot be used as a pretext for foreign
intervention. Cuba reiterates its condemnation of all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all their
forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomever
they are committed, including State terrorism. We
condemn all the acts of terrorism that have taken place
in the Middle East and any support of irregular armed
groups, including the use of mercenaries, which sows
only destruction and death and attempts to obstruct the
settlement of this conflict through diplomatic channels.
We reject unilateral actions and those taken outside
the United Nations, such as those of the United States,
which is launching air strikes across boundaries of
sovereign States in clear violation of international law.
We recall that it is the duty of the Council to promote
peace, not violence; to avoid destabilization and not to
contribute to financing, arming and training those who
would destabilize.

