Mr. Sandoval Cojulun (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Guatemala thanks the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela for organizing today's debate. We are
also grateful for the briefing by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Guatemala agrees with the approach set forth in the
concept note to guide this debate (S/2016/103, annex), in
the sense that this Organization throughout its history
has made significant achievements in various areas,
such as peace, security, international cooperation,
human rights, decolonization and economic and social
development. In accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
has, since its inception, been entrusted with the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, with the aim, inter alia, of not
repeating the mistakes committed before the founding
of the Organization.

To achieve that, it was recognized that there was a
need for a set of mechanisms and tools to be applied,
depending on the situation and circumstances of each
particular case. In most cases, unfortunately, those
tools have been used to stop conflicts already under
way rather than to prevent them before they burst
out, with devastating consequences, especially for the
civilian population. Furthermore, on prevention, it is
important to promote the responsibility of States in
protecting their civilian populations.

In addition, Guatemala has supported the
traditional View that the Security Council must
continue to customize its mandates after analysing the
situation in question. The Council can have a strong
influence on events on the ground, but ultimately
peace can be preserved - or recovered - only by the
parties to a conflict, whether the conflict is between
States or within a State. In matters of war and peace,
the international community can play a critical role, but
the internal stakeholders are the masters of their own
destiny.

With respect to the current situation in some African
and Middle Eastern States, the Security Council needs
to take a close look at its own role with regard to certain
situations. The conflict in Syria, for example, which
has resulted in and continues to give rise to violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
and where the Council's failure to perform has had
devastating consequences for the Syrian civilians. The
use of the veto or the threat of use does not encourage
or promote unity in the search for understanding, and
the abuse of the use of the veto and the threat of its use
has prevented the Council from fulfilling its mandate.
Far from favouring the defence of shared interests with
arguments that would facilitate consensus, the veto has
obstructed and undermined the common interest and,
as has been proven, is divisive among members of the
Council. All of that requires us to evaluate both the
internal dynamics of the Council and the adequacy of
the instruments available to the Council and the means
to apply them.

As a country that has benefited from a Security
Council mandate to verify its peace process, we can
share our unique experience in everything related to
peacebuilding and, as a country contributing troops to
different missions, in the area of peacekeeping. In that
regard, we take the opportunity to welcome resolution
2261 (2016), adopted by the Council on 25 January,
where, taking into account the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Colombia,
a special political mission was established to verify and
monitor the ceasefire in Colombia and the surrender of
weapons.

As we have previously stated before in the Council,
the circumstances of the reality on the ground are
subject to change at any time and for various reasons.
In order for a judicious mix of Council policies to have
the ability to prevent conflicts or to influence trends,
we need a proactive Security Council. However, despite
the Security Council's exceptional failures to live up to
its mandate, the United Nations remains the best option
we have for meeting the current challenges facing
humankind.

