The Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway - applaud the Dominican Republic for convening this open debate on youth, peace and security. We appreciate its efforts to keep this important issue on the Council's agenda and for facilitating the submission of written statements from non-Council members. We also welcome the participation of the young civil society briefers in this new format. The voices of civil society and youth-led organizations continue to bring vital input into the work and considerations of the Council, even amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We thank the Secretary-General for his report on youth and peace and security (S/2020/167). The report shows that we have made progress across several pillars, in support of the meaningful participation of youth in peace and security issues. However, we emphasize the need for continued focus and momentum on the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda. Since the adoption of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), we see more consistent reporting on youth-specific issues to the Council. Together with Jordan, the Nordic countries have consistently reported on the role of youth through the Group of Friends of Preventing Violent Extremism. We encourage countries to report on the contribution and situation of young people in peace and security efforts, giving special attention to marginalized groups such as young women. We also welcome a measure mandating the Secretariat to regularly report on the youth, peace and security agenda. Young women and men have both the wisdom and the commitment to help pivot societies towards sustainable peace and security, and they are a positive force in that regard. However, systematic exclusion and many structural barriers for youth engagement and participation remain, even within the Council. The Secretary- General's report offers interesting ideas for stimulating the broader participation of young people in conflict resolution, mediation, peace and political processes. In that regard, the relevant Security Council mission mandates should include language requiring the meaningful participation of youth in peace and security efforts, including in the mediation, monitoring and implementation of ceasefires, as well as in peace agreement negotiations. Those mandates should also include age- and gender-sensitive conflict analysis. The Nordic countries have a long tradition of youth engagement. We support a range of initiatives at both the national and the international levels, including youth- led initiatives that support young peacebuilders in conflict contexts. For instance, Norway and Finland are key partners of the African Union's flagship initiative, Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020, which aims to promote peace in conflict- affected areas. We recognize the efforts that the African Union is taking to involve African young women and men in peace processes, and we highlight the importance of similar efforts made in the Middle East and Latin America. At the global level, Sweden is a key partner in the institutionalization of the youth, peace and security agenda within the United Nations system. The safety of young people who speak up in their societies is a source of major concern. The Secretary-General's report includes important provisions on the protection of young mediators, peacebuilders and human right defenders. We stress the importance of respecting and protecting human rights, and we reiterate that Member States have an important role in preventing abuse committed against these groups. The Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth plays an important role in promoting the protection of aspiring peacebuilders and human rights defenders. We hope that the framework for the effective protection of young peacebuilders is one of several deliverables that the Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on Youth, launched by the Office, will help bring about. Finally, supporting the youth, peace and security agenda requires continued commitment across other areas, such as education. The Nordic countries will remain engaged so as to directly and indirectly empower young women and men as agents of change for lasting peace.
