Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As I
take the floor for the first time this month, I should like
to congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency and once again express to you the support
of my delegation, which I will prove by brutally
shortening the statement I had prepared. I wish you the
greatest success. I would also like to welcome the
presence among us of the Prime Minister of Haiti,
Mrs. Pierre-Louis, and to thank President Clinton for
his statement. My delegation is delighted to see Special
Representative Annabi here once again. We
congratulate him on his work and thank him for his
briefing.

If for many years to come we do not want to find
ourselves in this same Chamber repeating the same
questions and tirelessly formulating the same pious
intentions on Haiti, we have to ask and answer in all
honesty the question of what we have done wrong for
15 years that as yet we cannot see the progress and
welfare we are seeking for the people of Haiti. Even
more important, we have to analyse what we are doing
now and ask ourselves whether we really are moving in
the right direction and if we are sure that within a
reasonable time frame, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) will be able to leave
Haiti, leaving behind a strong State, a peaceful country
and a prosperous people.

On four occasions, the international community
believed that it had achieved its goal, and on five
occasions it has had to return. Although it is true that
Haiti is gradually moving away from its past of
conflict, it must also be stated that it seems that the
progress is still very fragile. In this situation, Costa
Rica agrees that it is not yet advisable to begin to think
about an exit strategy for MINUSTAH. But we support
the recommendation that it be reconfigured.

My country believes that the Stabilization
Mission and the international community have not
achieved a relationship with the people of Haiti that
combines actions in a way that can ensure that the
progress made remains sustainable. Although it is
undeniable that the five interventions in Haiti have
been justified on grounds of security, we cannot ignore
the fact that a large part of the failure is due to
obstinately ignoring that, in any human community,
sustained peace and stability depends on social,
economic and political development.

We agree with Professor Jeffrey Sachs that
stability provides the basis for the economy to take off.
Hence, it is vital to ensure that there are complements
to peacekeeping tasks, with actions to bring about
sustainable development that can ensure stability in the
future and preserve the benefits of security that have
been achieved over the past few years.

We believe that some of the difficulties in
building sustainable peace in Haiti are linked to goals
that have been promoted. Costa Rica firmly defends
the principle of national ownership in the processes of
reconstruction and peacebuilding. However, we do not
believe that in the name of this principle of national
ownership the international community should endorse
and support opinions that are clearly inappropriate,
such as the rebuilding of the Haitian army, which was
dismantled years ago and which had evidently been
made suitable only for typically civil functions, such as
environmental protection, or worse, in some cases, in
assisting the police to quell civil unrest.

Haiti's priorities do not include the creation of a
new army or the squandering of its scarce resources on
military expenditure, given that the Haitian people
faces no external threat. The Government and people of
Haiti, in cooperation with the international community,
must define their priorities more clearly. My delegation
welcomed Prime Minister Pierre-Louis' statement this
afternoon because it demonstrated greater clarity of
Vision on the part of the Government and people of
Haiti with regard to their future.

Costa Rica believes that the lack of
socio-economic development deserves priority
attention and that certain chronic problems, such as
food insecurity and very low agricultural production,
must be addressed more energetically. In that respect,
we believe that it is perfectly apposite to establish
development parameters, as informally suggested by
the representative of Japan during Council members'
visit to Haiti. It is not sustainable for Haiti to produce
only half the food it requires, which clearly accounts
for the high levels of anaemia among the population,
with a particular impact on women and children.

Another urgent priority is the drafting and
implementation of a national strategy to develop
human capital. Nearly half of Haiti's population is now
under the age of 18. This young and abundant labour
force needs training and jobs before it loses hope,
which in turn would foment instability in the country
and beyond. The task of training human capital must
go hand in hand with the necessary special focus on
developing a national strategy on competitiveness.
Haiti has an unshirkable responsibility to establish a
regulatory framework for a modern economy. It must
update production factors, such as the land tenure
system, that are widely recognized as obstacles to
growth.

The participation of the Haitian diaspora is also
required in the development of its country. Foreign
investment must also play a more dynamic role, while
priority must be accorded to the provision of basic
services, in particular health care and education. Haiti
will achieve only two Millennium Development
Goals - those on gender equality and the reduction of
HIV/AIDS. The vast gulf separating Haiti from the
attainment of the other Goals can be largely explained
by the alarming lack of basic services of which all are
aware.

Haitian society must continue to strive for
political and institutional capacity-building to foster
modernization and development. The Haitian political
system must reject factors that limit and undermine the
country's development in order to become an
instrument that legitimizes democracy and lays the
foundations for development. We believe that Haiti
would be helped by adopting a simple, more
predictable and less costly political system. The many
continual electoral processes and the uncertainty they
promote disrupt the stability that is so necessary to the
public and private sectors. The costs of numerous and
frequent elections could be rationalized to release
resources necessary to other ends. The simplification
of the complex institutional framework should be
considered to promote improved governance.
Maintaining the stability of Haiti will also depend to a
large extent on how the authorities are able sustainably
to strengthen the pillars of the rule of law. In that
respect, we welcome the progress described by Special
Representative Annabi.

I conclude by expressing my delegation's concern
over the situation of children in Haiti, who are afflicted
by malnutrition and its consequences, including
abandonment, abuse and human trafficking. We urge
the Haitian authorities and the international community
to advocate intensively to protect children and to
design and implement a strategy to extend their
opportunities, leading to genuine hope for future
generations.

