Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno for his substantive briefing on
the latest developments in Timor-Leste and for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (S/2008/26). We also listened
very carefully to the assessments contained in the
statement by the Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste.

Against the backdrop of a gradual improvement
in the security situation, the attacks against the
President and Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, which
took place in Dili on 11 February were a dangerous
challenge to the legal authority and to the peace
process. We firmly condemn those attacks. Those who
planned and perpetrated them must be brought to trial.

We would like to wish a speedy recovery to
President Ramos-Horta, whom we deeply respect and
whose authority is internationally acknowledged.

We are pleased to note that, despite these
unprecedented crimes, the country's leadership has
demonstrated political responsibility, restraint and
professionalism and has been able to keep the situation
under control. Great credit for maintaining security and
law and order goes to UNMIT and the International
Security Forces.

The events of 11 February were a direct outcome
of the crisis of May 2006. Promptly eradicating the
causes and consequences of this crisis, specifically the
problems of the petitioners and the internally displaced
persons, would make it possible for Timor-Leste to
move towards constructing a democratic society.

We support the core conclusions and
recommendations contained the report of the Secretary-
General. We believe that the mandate of UNMIT
should be extended for one more year. We believe that
the efforts of UNMIT should be aimed above all at
training a robust and professional national police force,
which would then be able gradually to take on primary
responsibility for independently maintaining law and
order in that country.
International support to Timor-Leste is also
needed to help strengthen State institutions, the legal
system and economic and social development. In the

current situation, it is particularly important to advance
the process of national reconciliation in Timor-Leste
and to promote dialogue and cooperation among all
political forces in the country. The Russian Federation
will continue to support the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste in their efforts to build a
stable and democratic society in their young State.

