Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We appreciate your
wise leadership of its proceedings. I would like to offer
your friendly country our gratitude for the important
role that you have played during your non-permanent
membership in the Security Council, which is almost
at its end.

We would also like to thank the other Member
States that will depart from the Council at the end of
this year, namely, Egypt, Senegal, Italy, Ukraine and
Uruguay. We wish their peoples continued security,
prosperity and good will.

We value today's initiative to hold an open debate on
dealing with contemporary challenges to international
peace and security. It comes at a time where peace and
security are absent and where we notice an increase in
violent sectarian extremism, with the causes of conflict
and their multipliers spreading throughout the world.
The United Nations and the Security Council now have
a role to play in resolving conflict in a comprehensive
and systematic manner; this role has in fact become
an urgent necessity, which was made very clear in
the briefing this morning by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres.

Mr. President, we agree with you that contemporary
challenges appear to be complex and interlinked.

However, most of the main root causes of conflict arise
from a small number of reasons, including occupation,
attempts to impose sectarian domination, interference
in the internal affairs of other States, oppression,
marginalization and lack of respect for international
agreements, laws and resolutions. These are also the
main causes of the emergence and spread of terrorism.
It is important, therefore, to note What your proposal for
dealing with existing conflicts, namely, that our actions
should arise from a clear understanding of and a strong
intention to address the root causes. Indeed, conflicts
need to be addressed through a comprehensive and
integrated approach.

Israel's continued occupation of Palestinian land,
its continued aggression against Al-Haram Al-Sharif
and the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque, and the violence
that is being perpetrated by terrorist settlers are all
clear violations of international law and agreements.
Moreover, they are the main causes of many of the
armed conflicts in the region. The frustration and
deprivation triggered by the occupation are among the
main motivators that terrorists use to propagate their
message. The international community must therefore
must work tirelessly and immediately to fulfil its
obligations to the Palestinian people in order to help
them enjoy their inalienable rights. It must put an end
to the Israeli occupation of Palestine and the rest of the
Arab territories. It must help to establish an independent
Palestinian State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
in accordance with United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative proposed by my country more
than 15 years ago.

Approximately 24 hours ago, on 19 December, the
capital of Saudi Arabia, Riyadh, was the victim of an
attempted attack by a ballistic missile that was wantonly
fired from inside Yemeni territory by the rebel Houthi
militias, with Iran's backing. The missile was aimed at
residential areas but was intercepted by the Coalition's
air defence forces. Its wreckage was spread throughout
several residential neighbourhoods, with most of it
falling near a health-care facility without causing any
damage or loss oflife. This abominable act ofaggression
comes after an attempt on 4 November by rebel Houthi
militias to target King Khalid International Airport in
Riyadh with an Iranian-made ballistic missile.

The actions of the rebel Houthi militias in
threatening the peace and safety ofthe Kingdom ofSaudi
Arabia, with the backing of the Iranian Revolutionary
Guard and the terrorist group Hizbullah, are a blatant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of international law and the resolutions of the
Security Council, and may be tantamount to war crimes.
Moreover, they constitute a dangerous escalation that
threatens regional and international peace and security.
The rebel Houthi militias fired 81 ballistic missiles.
It is beyond imagination that a rebel militia has
developed such ballistic capabilities and fired missiles
indiscriminately at civilians without deterrence or
accountability. But the rebel Houthi militias are
doing just that. It is unimaginable that a Member
State could dismiss the resolutions of the Security
Council and violate a sanctions regime, smuggling
weapons and ballistic technology in breach of the
international non-proliferation system, undeterred and
unaccountable. That is the Iranian regime. It is a well-
known and documented fact that the Iranian regime
has transported and smuggled weapons and ballistic
missiles to the rebel outlaw Houthi militias. The Council
has been briefed on the Secretary-General's reports on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which
include substantial, irrefutable evidence of the danger
of the Iranian regime's violations of international
law, which threaten regional and international peace
and security.

The criminal and terrorist behaviour of the rebel
Houthi militias in the aftermath of the assassination of
the former President of Yemen, Mr. Ali Abdullah Saleh,
comes amid abominable sectarian calls to violence. It
has also been accompanied by raids of homes and the
arrests or detention of thousands of civilians, including
women and children. Yemen has also witnessed
widespread political assassinations that have drenched
the city of Sana'a and other Yemeni cities in blood.
Such behaviour is damning evidence of the sabotaging
role that Iran is playing in Yemen and of its support for
the terrorism of the rebel Houthi militias.

The escalation of Violence and terrorism in such
an unprecedented and insane manner in recent days
is a result of an uprising in Sana'a against Iranian
oppression and domination in the wake of the brave
decision made by the leaders of the General People's
Congress to confront the rebel Houthi militias and
Iran's destructive plans in Yemen and to return to the
political process.

As the rivers of blood flow in Yemen, we call on
the Security Council to respond to the Yemeni people's
cry for help and save them from Houthi and Iranian
terrorism. The Security Council should clearly condemn
such terrorist crimes and strive to put an immediate end
them and to hold their perpetrators accountable. We
call on the Security Council to take deterrent measures
against Iran for the support that it continues to lend to
the terrorist actions of the rebel Houthi militias and
their attempts to undermine international and regional
peace and security. We call for the immediate and
full implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Security Council must support all
efforts to prevent Iran from smuggling weapons to the
Houthis and all forms of its proscribed support.

It is no secret that sectarian policies and
interference are being carried out in a manner that
creates a distorted image of the situation and enforces
oppressive political domination, all of which create
fertile ground for terrorism, including the cross-border
terrorism that we are witnessing today, as embodied
by Da'esh, Hizbullah and the Iranian Revolutionary
Guard. We believe that attempts to impose domination,
interfere in the internal affairs of States and create and
sow sectarian conflicts, as Iran is attempting to do in
many of the countries of the region, will create fertile
ground for further conflict.

It is important to note that Iran's aggressive
behaviour is one of the most important causes of
instability in our region and the threat it poses to
international peace and security. Iran's expansionist
and radical policies, which are based on extremism,
have led to conflict and the continued suffering of
peoples, both in and outside of Iran, and the spread
of terrorism in the region and throughout the world.
Iran shamelessly supports the terrorist actions of the
Iranian Revolutionary Guard, which has been tasked
with exporting radical Iranian ideology and supporting
terrorism across the world, including by its agents, the
terrorists of Hizbullah. Those actions are not limited to
perpetrating war crimes against the Yemeni people, but
include the following few examples.

Iran continues to Violate international humanitarian
law, including by perpetrating war crimes and crimes
against humanity in Syria, where it provides financial
support, fighters and training. Iran also supports and
recruits thousands of sectarian militias and foreign
mercenaries from all over the world. Iran continues
to support, fund and arm the terrorist organization
Hizbullah in Lebanon, Syria and throughout the world.
Iran continues to support sectarian militias in Iraq that
have obstructed the State's efforts to create unity and
establish peace. Iran continues to meddle in the internal
affairs of many countries of the region, including the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Kingdom of Bahrain.
We call on Iran to immediately abandon its sectarian
agenda and expansionist policies, end its aggressive
behaviour and abide by the Charter of the United
Nations and all relevant United Nations resolutions.
We call on Iran to concentrate its efforts and resources
on its own development and the welfare of its people,
which is the only way that the countries of the Arabian
Gulf can arrive at an understanding based on peaceful
coexistence, dialogue and mutual respect.

Resolving conflict requires a deep understanding
of the root causes of its conflict. Some parties are
duplicitously masking their political desires behind a
so-called sacred right to breach international laws and
conventions. That is the case with the Israeli occupation
authorities and the mouthpieces of the Iranian regime
and its assistants, Da'esh and Al-Qaida, as well as those
who follow in their footsteps. All of that underlines the
importance of confronting threats to international peace
and security comprehensively and systematically, based
on the rule of law, the implementation of international
resolutions and accountability for all of those who
violate international law.

We would therefore reiterate the need to end the
Israeli occupation and the expansionist behaviour
of the Iranian regime. We must hold those who have
perpetrated war crimes and crimes against humanity
accountable. We also stress the importance of good-
neighbourliness and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, as well as the need to guarantee the
full implementation of United Nations resolutions. If
we do all all that, we will find it easier to resolve the
current crises.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will
firmly confront any threat to its security and safety,
in accordance with the principles and goals of the
Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, we will work
diligently to contribute to any initiative that would
entrench and enhance peace and stability and achieve
sustainable peace and development in the region and
the world beyond.

