Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to welcome the presence and
participation of His Excellency Mr. Jose Luis Guterres,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, and to
congratulate him on the significant progress made in
his country with the assistance of the United Nations
and the international community. I would also like
to welcome Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Timor-Leste
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), as well as to congratulate
him and his team on the remarkable work they have
accomplished in support of peace and stability in
Timor-Leste.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(S/2012/765) comes at a moment when the country is at
an important and crucial turning point in its history and
is envisioning the future with confidence and optimism.
During the reporting period, positive developments
took place in Timor-Leste, as evidenced in the
success of the presidential and legislative elections.
Those elections reflected the country's ability to hold
pluralistic, uncontested elections with a high turnout.
That said much about the population's commitment to
the democratic process. The recognition of the results
by all parties, in the Government and the opposition
alike, bolstered the vote's credibility.

The reporting period was also marked by the
Timorese Parliament's adoption of a five-year
programme primarily directed at women's active
involvement, fighting corruption, promoting human
rights and integrating moral values into political life.
All that progress, which has greatly benefitted the
people of Timor-Leste, would not have been at all
possible without the positive and active commitment of
neighbouring countries to support peace and stability
in the entire region.

The Council's adoption ofresolution 2037 (2012), in
February, which endorsed the definitive withdrawal of
UNMIT, and the adoption by the High-level Committee
on Transition, which includes the members of UNMIT
and the Timor-Leste authorities, of a Joint Transition
Plan, prepared the ground for a transformation of the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste. The recent
visit by the Security Council delegation to Timor-
Leste - in which I, unfortunately, could not participate
due to the impact of Hurricane Sandy - confirmed the
meritorious efforts of the Timorese people and their
leaders' desire to turn the page of the United Nations
presence in the country.

However, despite the progress achieved, Timor-
Leste still requires the assistance of the international
community in a number of areas, such as in rebuilding
State institutions, strengthening the security
sector, especially the Timor-Leste national police,
strengthening rule of law, and access to justice. That
assistance must take into account the desires of the
country's authorities and the need to build on the
achievements of recent years. We believe that from now
on it is essential to respect the wish expressed by the
Timor-Leste Government regarding the status, scale
and nature of the United Nations presence in Timor-
Leste.

The assumption by the Timorese authorities of
essential State functions and their determination and
commitment to ensure those functions and take them
on with the assistance of their regional partners and the
United Nations should encourage the Security Council
to terminate, as stipulated in resolution 2037 (2012),
UNMIT's mandate and to assess, together with the
Government, the best formula for reaching a mutual
agreement to strengthen capacities and support the
country's efforts.

