Mr. Skracic' (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and Mr. Boyd
for their remarks and introduction of the Secretary-
General's report on Somalia (S/2009/503).

I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ould AbdalIah for his dedication and
commitment in Somalia, as well as the tireless efforts
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, the
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the United Nations
country team and other organizations operating in the
country under extremely harsh circumstances.

Croatia notes the progress made in some key
areas identified in the Secretary-General's report,
especially in the field of national reconciliation,
drafting a constitution, capacity-building and the
building of national security forces. In that context, we
further welcome the establishment of the commission
for security and pacification, which is tasked with
reforming Somali security forces, as well as the major
reshuffling of the Cabinet, including the appointment
of the new Minister of Defence. We hope that this
change will contribute to the Government's capacity to
consolidate its authority and restore order in the
country.

Croatia reiterates its strong support to the
Djibouti peace process and calls upon all relevant
actors to fully implement the commitments undertaken,
including the creation of an inclusive administration in
Somalia. We urge all those groups still outside this
process to join it as soon as possible. We therefore
welcome attempts to revitalize the work of the
High-level Committee, the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General aimed at
engaging autonomous regions, and the continued
support of regional organizations to the Djibouti peace
process.

We are deeply concerned by the marked
deterioration of the security situation in southern and
central Somalia and we condemn the continuing
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population.
We urge all parties to the conflict to fully comply with
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
and in this regard we express our sincere condolences
to the families of those killed and injured during the
attacks of 17 September in Mogadishu.

Croatia expresses its concern regarding the
looming humanitarian crisis in Somalia, which is
exacerbated by the severe difficulties experienced in
the delivery of humanitarian assistance caused by
increased violence against humanitarian workers,
ongoing fighting and drought. We hope that adequate
funding of the consolidated appeals process and the
United Nations Transition Plan for Somalia will allow
for the continuation of critical humanitarian activities.

On piracy, my delegation shares the position
expressed by other Council members that long-term
solutions will come about only through the rule of law
and the establishment of security on the ground.

Croatia supports the incremental approach, as set
out by the Secretary-General. We welcome preparations
for a shift to the second, "light footprint" phase and
further consultations between the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the African Union on a
possible future peacekeeping operation in Somalia. We
commend the African Union and AMISOM. for their
unfaltering attempts to stabilize the situation in
Somalia and the crucial role AMISOM. plays in
repelling insurgents and protecting vital infrastructure
in Mogadishu. In that context, we would also like to
use this opportunity to pay special tribute to Uganda
and Burundi for the vitally important contribution they
are making to AMISOM.

