Mr. Sen (India): Let me begin by welcoming you,
Sir, and by expressing appreciation for the Belgian
presidency of the Security Council in the current
month. India appreciates the opportunity afforded to
Member States to participate in today's timely
discussion on a subject of vital interest for all of us.
The concept paper circulated by the Permanent Mission
of Belgium earlier this month afforded us a most useful
starting point for the discussion.

The issue is important because so many
developing countries are crucially dependent on natural
resources; for instance, a third of Africa's export
income is from natural resources. At the same time,
those natural resources often cause and prolong
conflict, leading to growth that is sometimes lower and
poverty that is sometimes higher than in natural-
resource-poor countries. As in a Greek tragedy, the
saviour is also the damned. That is the nature of the
natural resource curse. Conflicts hold back
development, but a certain kind of development also
leads to conflict.

Globalization sharpens inequality and regional
imbalances, often stimulating natural-resource-rich
regions of a country to try to break away. Similarly,
deflationary policies and the elimination of subsidies
encouraged by the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
as well as trade liberalization encouraged by the World
Trade Organization, have substantially reduced rural
purchasing power and tipped the scales of the natural
resource curse into conflict. Rotberg and Easterly have
both shown that five resource-rich countries in conflict
were, during the preceding 10 years, more than 65 per
cent of the time - and in the case of Sierra Leone, 83
per cent - under an IMF programme.

In any treatment of the linkage between natural
resources and conflict, the full and permanent
sovereignty of each State over its natural resources is a
key principle that is immutable. While conflict
prevention through better management of the
exploitation of resources is theoretically an idea worth
considering, it is in practical terms fraught with legal
and operational complexities. We are therefore of the
View that the best method of preventing conflict prior
to its outbreak lies in more comprehensively
addressing the problems of inequality and economic
deprivation. Creative solutions are needed to the crisis
07-39374

of expectations and the disparities in economic
development. Those cannot be divorced from
international economic governance - making
globalization fair, making the Doha Round truly
development-oriented, and comprehensively reforming
the IMF.

With regard to resources prolonging conflict, it
appears that the international community is arriving
through trial and error at a useful approach, whose
contours are only now becoming visible. A judicious
mixture of sanctions to prevent the illegal exploitation
of natural resources and certification schemes, such as
the Kimberley Process, has begun to yield some
results. In the instance of rough diamonds, that
approach appears to have been successful because it
approaches the problem at the level of extraction and
from the standpoint of processing and trading. This is
also perhaps because such an approach is inclusive
enough to visualize a role for the entire international
community, including civil society. The Kimberley
Process also has merit in its approach to the trade in
diamonds by creating a certification scheme that
validates and regulates the production of rough
diamonds. Last, but not least, such a mechanism avoids
the pitfall of treating the issue of resources fuelling
conflict as a matter purely related to peace and
security. As a result, major diamond trading and
processing nations such as India have engaged
constructively and actively with the Kimberley
Process.

Apart from that, we find some useful suggestions
in the concept paper, such as authorizing a role for
United Nations mission and United Nations
peacekeeping forces in conflict-torn countries.
However, such a mandate would need to be very
carefully drawn up, both to limit their role to a
supporting one, at best, to prevent other forms of
potential misuse, and to ensure that neither the United
Nations mission nor the peacekeeping forces are
diverted from their core responsibilities. Questions of
capacity, training and accountability will need to be
addressed at the stage of planning such a mandate.
Therefore, we would urge that evolving a consensus on
those aspects be an exercise carried out with the
widest-possible consultations, including with troop-
contributing countries.

Lastly, there is the aspect of creating a post-
conflict consensus on the use of natural resources in
the process of peace consolidation. To evolve
recommendations and approaches on that aspect, we
could perhaps formally task the Peacebuilding
Commission, as a mechanism established by all States
precisely for such purposes, with that responsibility. It
should suffice, therefore, to underline the fact that
effective and consensual exploitation of natural
resources not only brings tangible benefits to all
segments of society, but also provides the intangible
benefit of creating a useful and desirable habit of
cooperation among former foes in a post-conflict
society.

