Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Over
the past few weeks, we have witnessed with great
concern the gradual deterioration of relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan as a result of a spiralling
confrontation that has continued to grow and that
reflects a lack of mutual trust and the inability of either
party to resolve their differences through dialogue and
negotiation. It is truly regrettable that the first steps of
5
the newborn Republic of South Sudan should be on the
path of war and hostility rather than that of
cooperation, reconciliation and joint efforts with its
neighbour in seeking development and prosperity.
Colombia is convinced that the use of peaceful means
and strict compliance with international law are the
only way to resolve the disputes between these States,
alongside the significant role played by regional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security.

My country voted in favour of resolution 2046
(2012) in order to signal our firm and complete support
for the road map and the other measures adopted by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in its
24 April communique, which established concrete steps
to be taken by both countries in order to end hostilities,
reduce tensions, return to a path of dialogue and
negotiation, and focus on a definitive resolution of the
outstanding issues. It is crucial that both parties return
to the spirit of compromise and political will that made
the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
possible and that would make both accountable to their
citizens in terms of peace and compliance with the
timeline for implementing the steps set out in the
African Union's communique and resolution 2046
(2012).

With the adoption of that resolution, the Council
has not only responded to the African Union's requests
but also clearly signalled its firm determination to
prevent a further deterioration of the situation. It is
crucial that we have the cooperation of the authorities
in both countries; we need genuine signs of
commitment from them, reflected in concrete steps for
tackling the problems of both sides, particularly in the
area of security.

The Sudan and South Sudan must build a
relationship on the basis of cooperation in which the
viability, security and prosperity of both States are the
fundamental principles of their peaceful coexistence.
That will require both States to refrain from the use of
force; to respect the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and unity of the others; and to
conduct their relations in accordance with the
principles of good-neighbourliness, non-interference in
internal affairs and regional cooperation.

Both States must undertake to end any kind of
direct or indirect support to armed groups on the
territory of the other side, which is now happening. They
6

must immediately end aerial bombardments in the
border area, fully implement the agreements of 20, 29
and 30 July, and agree to cooperate with the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel on
recommendations on the Sudan in order to advance
substantive negotiations on the four areas set out in the
resolution and the African Union communique with the
support of the Chairman of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development.

Colombia believes that, with the adoption of
resolution 2046 (2012), the Council has taken decisive
action in support of the African Union forces in the
face of an opportunity to restore peace. We trust that
the authorities of the Sudan and South Sudan will
respond with the responsibility warranted by the
current circumstances.

