Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Like previous speakers,
my delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this meeting on a subject of common concern to the
international community. We are also grateful to the
Secretary-General, as well as to Mr. Wolfensohn,
Mr. Malloch Brown and Mr. Piot for their informative
and stimulating introductions.

It is symbolic indeed that the first formal meeting of
the Security Council in the new millennium, so ably
launched by Vice-President Gore, opens up the discussion
of issues of a global dimension and importance, among
which the problem of AIDS ranks as one of the gravest.
This also demonstrates an increasing role of the Security
Council in addressing humanitarian, economic and social
aspects of international peace and security.

Ukraine is honoured to take part in this discussion as
a member of this body. This status and the trust of the
international community, placed in Ukraine when it was
elected to serve in the forefront of the United Nations
efforts to maintain international peace and security, confer
upon us an enormous responsibility. Having been elected
to the Security Council for the first time since its
independence, Ukraine is ready to make its meaningful
and worthy contribution to the Council's work and to
discharge this important mission in a spirit of openness
and cooperation while maintaining a wide and
constructive dialogue with all Member States. We will
strive to bring the Ukrainian perspective into the Council's
activities. Standing at the crossroads of North and South,
East and West, we will bring to the Council all the
knowledge and experience of our geographic destiny. Our
work in the Security Council will be a recognition of the
vital role that the United Nations has played in
consolidating Ukraine's independence, preserving its
territorial integrity and securing its peaceful integration
into the commonwealth of nations.

For almost two decades mankind has been at war
with an invisible enemy. So far, we have only been on
the defensive, and our losses are comparable to those in

 

real warfare - we have already heard the statistics. There
is virtually no country in the world which has been so
lucky as to escape the dark cloud of the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. Yet for Africa, the story is the worst.

The impact of AIDS on the countries of sub-Saharan
Africa is especially devastating. It kills the most productive
and active part of the population, thus increasing labour
costs, reducing formal and informal sector productivity,
eroding human, social, economic and infrastructure
development and increasing health and welfare
expenditures. AIDS also threatens the ability of African
States to sustain credible defence forces, thus making it
increasingly difficult to maintain domestic and regional
security.

One cannot but mention another horrible result of the
AIDS epidemic in Africa that has already started to develop
into an even bigger human tragedy. In previous decades,
about 2 per cent of children in the developing world were
orphaned. Because of AIDS, the rates in some African
countries, according to studies, have risen to 11 per cent,
thus creating a generation of children who have not been
nurtured, properly fed or educated. They in turn also
become susceptible to AIDS, as well as to crime, induction
into rebel militias and other destabilizing phenomena.

I would also like to mention yet another disturbing
aspect of the problem, also rightly referred to by the
Secretary-General, and that is the connection between the
HIV contagion and military conflict. The rise of inter-State
and inter-ethnic hostilities in Africa in the 1990s and the
large number of refugees created by them became a catalyst
for a major explosion in the spread of the virus, which is
yet to show up statistically.
By defusing existing conflicts on the continent and
preventing new ones, the Security Council will thus make
its meaningful contribution to the work carried out by the
agencies and organizations within and outside the United
Nations system in fighting HIV/AIDS.

Ukraine fully shares the concern that brought about
this meeting in the Security Council. My country has also
been hit by the AIDS epidemic, which has been spreading
at an alarming rate in recent years. At some point this
problem became so evident that the Government of Ukraine
began to address it, not simply as a health or social issue,
but rather as a national security issue. The first and
probably the most important lesson we learned is that the
problem of AIDS should be fully recognized; it must never
be ignored or underestimated.

We are confident that today's discussion will
contribute to increasing the global awareness of the AIDS
problem. At the same time, we realise that AIDS will
continue to be a serious challenge for many years to
come. Only the concerted efforts of the international
community will be able to address it successfully.
Ukraine stands ready to join these efforts.

In conclusion, Mr. President, let me express our
strong hope that this Security Council meeting will
provide a powerful impetus to the beginning of a
qualitatively new stage in the struggle of the international
community against AIDS. Ukraine believes that it is high
time for the United Nations to update a comprehensive
agenda for action against this pandemic. In this
connection, it might be appropriate that the Security
Council use its prerogatives and recommend to the
General Assembly that it convene a special session to
consider new strategies, methods, practical activities and
specific measures to strengthen international cooperation
in addressing this problem.

