Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Always thinking the
unthinkable, expecting the unexpected, being totally
vulnerable and living the solitude of the global
world - this is what it means to be a non-military,
ordinary, private citizen in armed conflict.

I wish to thank Uruguay for having convened
today's open debate. Hungary aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union.

We believe that thousands of civilians are not only
suffering from the impact of armed conflicts but are
becoming subjected to the military strategies ofvarious
parties to conflict. The international community
must step up all its efforts to enhance respect for
international humanitarian law. Hungary hopes that
the International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent will reach an agreement on the mechanism to
strengthen compliance with international humanitarian
law, although discussions will continue on the issue. We
must also take into account that the lines that separate
international and internal armed conflicts have become
increasingly blurred, which may lead to uncertainty
regarding applicable rules and their interpretations. For
that reason, we think that it is of utmost importance
that we continue the dialogue on current international
humanitarian law issues.

Hungary attaches especially great importance
to the protection of women and children. We support
international initiatives aimed at combating sexual
violence in conflict, particularly against the most
vulnerable, and we have contributed to United Nations
projects for the elimination of all forms of such
crimes. The Hungarian Government has also provided
assistance to international projects aimed at protecting
children affected by armed conflict and humanitarian
crises, including children in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq,
the Sudan and the Central African Republic.

The protection of civilians should be integral to
the whole United Nations peace operation having such
a mandate. It is important to maintain continuous
consultations and enhanced communication among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and contributing
countries about possible gaps in mission mandates. As
we have always stressed, we agree that accountability
and ending impunity are key to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Hungary wishes to actively
contribute to the initiative on a multilateral treaty for
mutual legal assistance and extradition in the domestic

prosecution of atrocity crimes - an initiative that is
supported by the International Criminal Court and a
number of States and aimed at enhancing and making
horizontal cooperation among States more effective in
the process of prosecuting war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide.

Hungary believes that the best way to protect
civilians is by preventing armed conflicts. The United
Nations should use all available tools for early warning
and for political mediation in order to prevent the
outbreak and reverse the escalation of hostilities.
We would also like to reaffirm the relevance of the
responsibility to protect in today's discussion. To
ensure a more timely and decisive response on the part
of the Security Council, we actively participated in
the drafting of the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes.

As my closing remark, I wish to strongly encourage
those Member States that have not yet done so to join
the initiative, which represents not only a unique chance
to improve the Security Council's ability to prevent and
respond to atrocities, but also an opportunity to preserve
the Council's legacy and legitimacy as a guardian of
international peace and security.

As this is the first time that we are speaking this
year in the Security Council, I wish to congratulate the
presidency and all Council members.

