I thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Williams and Ambassador Schulz for their briefings, and welcome Ambassador Elsonni to this meeting. The current situation in Libya is complex, sensitive and fragile, seriously affecting the security and stability of neighbouring countries and the whole region. The situation is subject to rapid change. China has been closely following the developments in Libya. Under the current circumstances, the people of Libya deserve a peaceful environment to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I wish to make four main points. First, the current priority is to achieve a lasting ceasefire. We express our concern regarding the attacks against civilians and relevant infrastructure. There is no military solution for Libya. We call on all parties to the conflict for a cessation of hostilities and to achieve a lasting ceasefire as soon as possible. China welcomes all efforts conducive to a lasting ceasefire in response to the global ceasefire appeal by the Secretary-General, and encourages the resumption of the work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. Now is the time to be united, since conflicts only deepen the suffering of the people. Secondly, global synergies should be strengthened to promote the peace process. The international community should remain committed to the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process under the framework of the United Nations. China supports the continued leading role of the United Nations, and calls for the appointment of new Special Representative of the Secretary-General as soon as possible for the sake of the peace process in Libya. During the process, Libya's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity should be respected. The African Union and the League of Arab States, being uniquely positioned to mediate a conflict between the parties, should be supported in playing their respective roles and ensure synergies between their efforts and those of the United Nations. Thirdly, unremitting efforts must be made to combat terrorism. Terrorism within and around Libya seems to have resurrected. The international community must stay highly vigilant on this trend, strengthen coordination and cooperation and work together to tackle challenges. It is imperative to combat terrorism in all its forms across Libya and, at the same time, guard against the cross-border movement of foreign terrorist fighters. We must never allow Libya to become the breeding ground for terrorism. Fourthly, sanctions measures must be used properly and effectively. China's consistent position is that sanctions are a means rather an end. Sanctions regimes should always serve the political settlement of relevant issues. Under the current circumstances, it is important to strictly enforce the arms embargo against Libya, and refrain from a military intervention or any action that could aggravate the conflict. Now we have a common enemy in the COVID-19 pandemic. Only by maintaining unity and solidarity can the parties in Libya they bring peace and prosperity to Libyan people and effectively fight the COVID-19 pandemic. We highly appreciate the assistance provided to Libya by the World Health Organization in fighting the pandemic. China will continue to provide assistance to Libya to fight COVID-19, facilitate the Libyan political process and support the Libyan people in their pursuit of peace and stability.
