Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Sir, for presiding over today's
Council meeting.

I thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for a useful
briefing. Also, as all my colleagues have mentioned,
this will be the last time Mr. De Mistura will appear
before the Council in his capacity. I wish to add my
voice to express our deep and profound gratitude to
him for completing his very difficult tasks under
challenging circumstances and for his many years of
dedicated work for the cause of the United Nations. I
also think all members of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) should be
congratulated for their great work.

I would also like to congratulate Ambassador
Al Bayati today for his very useful statement and for
his report of the progress that the Iraqi people and
Government have made so far.

We are pleased with the positive developments
during this period, including the election of the new
Speaker of Parliament and the formation of provincial
councils. It is encouraging that Iraq continues to make
such progress, but obviously many challenges remain.
We agree with many of our colleagues that national
reconciliation is the most important challenge for the
stability of the country. We very much welcome that
Prime Minister al-Maliki is calling for a renewal of the
national reconciliation effort.

A representative and inclusive democratic process
will be an essential basis for national reconciliation.

The preparations for the Council of Representatives
elections are under way. We hope that there will be a
higher turnout than for earlier elections and that this
time the electoral process will be well established as a
norm for Iraq's people, that political grievances and
differences are to be dealt with not with bullets but
through the ballot box. We support the important role
that the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) plays in assisting the Independent High
Electoral Commission.

The disputed internal boundaries are another
important issue for national reconciliation. UNAMI has
made a valuable contribution by providing analytical
reports. We hope that the reports will support the Iraq's
people in coming to an agreement on the disputed
internal boundaries issue, including the status of
Kirkuk.

Those issues will have implications for the
Constitution. We believe UNAMI can also play a
useful role in helping the Iraqi people resolve these
complex interrelated issues.

In the area of security, we note that the recent
security incidents clearly indicate that the gains
achieved in this area continue to be precarious. The
United States forces will leave Iraqi cities at the end of
June. We hope that the Iraqi forces will step up to the
challenge of maintaining security themselves.

Another important issue is Iraq's relations with
its neighbours. We appreciate that UNAMI provides
support to advance bilateral cooperation with Iraq's
neighbours. We also look forward to receiving the
Secretary-General's report, as requested with
resolution 1859 (2008).

With regard to economic recovery, we welcome
the strong initiatives by Iraq's people in the country's
efforts for recovery, reconstruction and development.
The fluctuation in oil prices poses a challenge to Iraqi
Government's budget. But we are confident that the
Government can meet the challenges. Japan has
provided $1.7 billion in grant aid, and we have just
exchanged notes with the Iraqi Government to provide
official development assistance through a loan up to
$2.43 billion for 12 projects in areas of transportation,
energy, industrial plants and irrigation.

Japan is committed to assisting Iraqi people
together with other members of the international
community. We are very confident that Foreign
Minister Zebari's Visit to Japan will not only solidify
our bilateral relations, which are already excellent, but
will also provide a useful opportunity for constructive
dialogue on the important challenges that Iraq faces
today.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan's
strong support for the Government and people of Iraq.

