Mr. Blok (Netherlands): I would like to thank
Mr. Lowcock for his sobering briefing.

In March, I had the honour to speak in this Chamber
for the first time (see S/PV.8217). The same topic
was on the agenda: the humanitarian crisis in Syria.
I am addressing the Security Council today in the
knowledge that this situation will remain on the agenda
for the foreseeable future. Millions of Syrians continue
to suffer. Back in March, the Syrian regime and their
allies were bombing civilians in eastern Ghouta. The
delivery of humanitarian aid was obstructed and long-
established norms of international humanitarian law
were gravely violated.

Today, nine months later, the air strikes on eastern
Ghouta have stopped. But as we all know, that did not
mean an end to the horror for Syrians. Humanitarian
workers continue to have very limited access. Many
refugees and internally displaced persons cannot go
back; they fear for their safety. The conditions set for
their safe return by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) have not
been met.

After years of terror and starvation, children,
women and men in former opposition-held territory still
lack access to food, medical care and schooling. Access
to those basic necessities is being blocked. Furthermore,
those people now live in fear of retribution, persecution

and detention by Al-Assad's security services. There is
a complete lack of security. After seven years of war,
more than 6 million Syrians are internally displaced,
including the incredible number of 2.5 million children.
After seven years of war, those people should be free
to choose to go back to their homes. Instead, they are
faced with discriminatory legislation that undermines
their housing, land and property rights. After seven
years of war, countless Syrians have had no news of
the whereabouts of their loved ones. Is there still hope,
or were their family members, neighbours and friends
arrested, detained and tortured - or even killed - in
regime-run prisons?

We have held a seat on the Security Council for
one year. Many times, the situation in Syria has been
on the agenda. Many times, progress has been blocked
by the lack of implementation of Security Council
resolutions. For how many more years will Syria
remain on the agenda of the Security Council? For how
many more years should we allow the Syrian regime's
systematic human rights abuse and institutionalized
violence to continue? It is clear that the situation must
not be allowed to continue. Syrians are in dire need of
progress. There are four points I would like to make.

First, humanitarian actors should have unimpeded
access to all civilians in need, all over Syria. I that
regard, I welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
cross-border aid mechanism for 12 months so that no
one is left behind. I commend Sweden and Kuwait,
as co-penholders, for their excellent work. It is also
imperative that access from within Syria to areas under
control of the regime be granted without delay.

Secondly, we need a sustainable solution for
the fragile ceasefire in Idlib. I call on all parties
involved to refrain from hostilities, which would
lead to a humanitarian catastrophe with grave
international implications.

Thirdly, with the help of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and UNHCR we have to uncover the
fate of all those Syrians who have disappeared, list the
names of those detained and investigate and prosecute
human rights violators.

Finally, we fully support the Special Envoy's

convening of a constitutional committee before the end
of the year. The United Nations has a central role to
play in that process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Sochi communique. Let me also underline that
the European Union will not begin development and
reconstruction efforts before a comprehensive, genuine
and inclusive political transition is firmly under way.
For my Government, it is inconceivable to finance a
regime responsible for crimes against humanity and
war crimes.

Let me say something about those crimes. Some
of the darkest crimes of modern time have taken place
during the Syrian conflict - and are still taking place.
There will be no stability until the perpetrators of those
crimes are brought to justice. To me it is clear that
accountability is about upholding our human dignity,
but what we see is impunity becoming the new normal.
That must end. We must not allow this immense
human tragedy to become a travesty of international
law. It would be a terrible crisis of credibility for the
international community. The perpetrators of shocking
crimes, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and AI-Qaida, will be found.

I urge all States to increase their support for the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria. Its aim is simple and clear: to ensure
that information about serious crimes is collected,
analysed and preserved for the future. I call on all
Council members to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

Finally, ISIS fighters have committed gruesome
crimes that, in the case of the crimes against Yazidis,
may amount to genocide. I call on all members of the
Council to work together to achieve recognition by the
Council of those grave crimes, including genocide,
so that we can make sure such heinous crimes are
not repeated.

This will be the last time I speak about Syria here,
but I am sure that I will not be the last person to speak
about Syria. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will
continue to fight for justice, peace and accountability
for Syria and others 4 at the Council, in The Hague
and beyond.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands will soon end its
term on the Security Council. On a more personal note,
ifI may, it has been an honour to speak on behalf of my
country in this seat and in this Chamber. I know that
discussions, debates and decisions in the Council are
not always easy. However, that is no reason to despair.
According to the writings of Tolstoy, for every situation,
no matter how difficult, there will be a solution. It all
comes down to making a decision.

