Mr. Lubbers: Indeed, I apologize at the outset that
I shall have to answer a bit in shorthand - very short -
when I see how many very relevant questions were put
forward. Maybe I will answer in the order of the
interventions. I will thus start with the questions and
remarks made on behalf of the Government of Brazil.

When one looks at the world at large, the
climate - the political situation, if you like - in
relation to refugees has become more difficult. As was
rightly said, this is also because many countries have to
deal with the phenomenon of human traffickers
bringing to their borders mixed flows of people: partly
refugees, indeed, but partly also migrants for other
reasons, who are advised that they might be able to
enter countries if they portray themselves as refugees.
That has given flows of refugees a bad name, and it is a
very serious problem.

That means that, as High Commissioner, I have to
invest time and initiatives to reduce what we call
irregular flows of people. Now this falls only partly
within UNHCR's capacity to improve it. It relates in
part to a lack of managed migration. If there were ways
to report inmigration legally, maybe we would have
fewer mixed flows. That is one of the problems.

What we do from our side is take away or at least
reduce the need for people to turn to human traffickers
by trying from the outset to find better permanent
solutions for refugees. There would be much less need
for people who must flee to another country to turn to
human traffickers if they knew that when they reported
to a refugee camp there would be a solution for them,
either because, within a reasonable time frame, peace
would come to their country so they could return, or
because they would be allowed to gradually integrate
into the country to which they had fled or would be
welcome in country resettlement programmes further
abroad. By the way, Brazil is now participating in such
a programme.

So, in addition to the point, which was rightly
made, that we have to keep intact the obligation not to
refoule people and to accept people when they are real
refugees, the role of UNHCR here has to broaden to
include a new concept to reduce irregular, secondary
flows of people by putting in place joint mechanisms
for countries to provide solutions: sustainable
repatriation, local integration and resettlement. That is
possible only if we learn to practice burden-sharing
among countries. It simply is not fair to think that the
obligations vis-a-vis refugees can be fully fulfilled
country by country. I gave the remarkable positive
example of Pakistan, and there are certainly others.
However, we also know from this experience that, at
some point, it simply breaks down: one says, "This is
no longer fair, we have to share the burden, we have to
do something together".

I turn to the questions posed on behalf of the
Government of Chile, about Darfur. These questions
were very clear, and I will try to be as specific as
Ambassador Mufioz was in asking the questions.

First, do we see outflow from Darfur into the
Central African Republic? We still do not, and that is
for geographical reasons. The conflict in Darfur started
in the north of Darfur, let us say in the Bahai region. It
then spread downwards. We are somewhat concerned
that it might spread further, all the way to the area of
Darfur bordering the Central African Republic, and
then we would certainly see people going there. This is
still not the case.
I turn to the question of the relationship of the
Government of Sudan to the Darfur crisis. I have
learned in my mission as High Commissioner to be a
bit more blunt than I would be in normal diplomatic
language. I think it is obvious that the effective
ceasefire in Sudan provided the potential for the army
of Sudan to utilize its spare capacity to start an action
in Darfur. This might have been promoted, of course,
by rebel movements in Darfur, by movements of
people who want autonomy. That is, of course, a
broader phenomenon. However, this specific type of
action became possible because of the effective
ceasefire and the spare capacity. We then saw there
what we have seen elsewhere in the world: a joint
action of the army working together with the militia. It
is the Janjaweed, that are, as it were, a factor in this;
one from the air, the others on the ground. The process
of cleansing then starts. I say "cleansing" not because
it is motivated by ethnic motivations; I think it is
motivated more by an effort to break the rebellion and
to motivate people to join the Government forces,
using the prospect of getting the acreage, the land and
the villages. So you move people out with all possible
awful systems, which are also practised elsewhere in
the world. The J anjaweed does indeed effect incursions
into Chad, chasing the same people for their cattle and
trying to intimidate them. As members may know,
there is an agreement between the two armies - and
this is, in a way, remarkable - on the Chadian army's
right to go, I believe, 100 kilometres into the territory
of the Sudan in Darfur. The army there acknowledges
that it does not have the capacity to control this. Now,
after what I have said, members may have other
thoughts on the subject, but that is happening. You see,
therefore, a certain militarization of the situation on
both sides of the border.

The third question was about access to Darfur. A
multitude of initiatives have been taken by the
international community to get access there; it is still
very difficult. There have been missions; we know that
the Red Cross movement and Doctors without Borders
are working there. We have seen missions going there;
we have seen Mr. James Morris go there. Then we get
assurances that people are allowed to go in, that they
have access. They then try to get visas, and, when they
arrive, they see that their visa is no longer valid and
they need a new visa. It is not very nice. In terms of
access, it does not really work, at this moment. That is
one of the reasons that UNHCR, although we are very
burdened - overburdened, if you like - with the
situation in Chad for Darfurians, has nevertheless now
offered to go there ourselves, with a few teams, in
addition to others who are there in the Darfur area. We
will make a plea to the Government to afford us that
possibility. In this regard, I am optimistic, because I
have also to testify that, in general, we have a very
good working relationship with the Government of the
Sudan. So we will say that there is a need for us to be
in the Darfur area. We will go there with three officers,
in addition to the officers of others. I spoke with
Mr. Kellenberger of the ICRC to see if we could
coordinate a little bit, so that our work is really
complementary and effective. We will do that to
improve the situation in Darfur.

I now return to the issue of Chad, which was the
next question. We have been informed that the
J anjaweed militia sometimes crosses the border. I have
no information as to their having gone far enough to
reach our refugee camps. It is exactly for that reason
that we chose to have the camps 60 kilometres from the
border; we have to work hard with non-governmental
organizations to find water. It is very difficult, and
these are small camps. We can accommodate perhaps
6,000 or 7,000 people, and then we have to move to the
next place and expand the number of camps. That is
what we are doing. Is there a food problem? Yes, but I
would say it is not dramatic. The World Food
Programme is doing its utmost to provide food. I would
not qualify this as the key problem.

As to the question of the rainy season, we are
working very hard. Our ambition was to have
accommodated 60,000 or 65,000 people before the
rainy season. I think we will have achieved that. There
were more questions, but at this stage I leave the issue
of Darfur in Sudan here.

I turn, now, to the others who had questions. I turn

to the remarks and questions on behalf of Angola on the
concern about security, with which I very much agree,
since those were my two main themes in my briefing. I
will say a few words on UNHCR's cooperation within
the United Nations system. It is going well, I would say;
I gave examples here today of very close cooperation, in
particular with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. It is the same with the Department of
Political Affairs. I also said that we are part of the
United Nations Development Group, as we work with
Jan Egeland in the humanitarian group. By and large,
this coordination is going well.

Of course, we have specific challenges.
Regarding refugees, I described these problems; there
are the others regarding internally displaced persons
(IDPs). In short, we, as UNHCR, only work with IDPs
selectively and when we are requested to do so by the
system. Of course, we also need to have capacity. In
this respect, the example of Darfur is an interesting
one: we started with refugees only, and now we are
asked whether we can do something in Darfur as well,
because the United Nations system cannot deliver
sufficiently without us. So I stretch my capacity and try
to do something.

A more systematic problem regarding IDPs is in
the area of returns. Our experience is that, when it
comes to repatriation and areas of return, you can no
longer divide the refugees and the IDPs, since they all
become returnees to the same areas of return. We
therefore need planned returns and planned
reintegration, perhaps together with others. We try to
practice, with the local population, having the refugees
and the IDPs return. In this area, we are really in the
middle of that issue. We accomplished this, I think
pretty successfully, in Afghanistan. I reported on it in
Sierra Leone, and we are doing it in Sri Lanka, Being
involved with IDPs is thus not opposed to our type of
work. On the contrary, we have to be involved with
them - and effectively. Still, formally, I only do it
when requested by the system. The Humanitarian
Coordinator has to very formally ask UNHCR to take
care of returning IDPs. He informs Mr. Egeland of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) of the plan and when he has done that, I say,
fine, I am available.

Many mentioned financial support. That is
constantly an uphill battle, as the President and others
observed. Of course, it is sometimes very difficult for
us that other branches receive assessed contributions,
while we must go around time and again to ask timidly
for voluntary contributions. I have no good answer
with regard to that. I do not feel free to make a plea
that is not in line with the original idea of the United
Nations 50 years ago that we would be funded mainly
by voluntary contributions.

I can say only two things here. First, at least the
basic UNHCR staff - which, according to the Statute
of 50 years ago, was supposed to be funded by the
regular budget should be funded by the regular
budget, which is not the case. Secondly, countries with
mature economies that consider it their responsibility
to assist developing countries by spending resources on
development assistance should be aware that the best
way to do that is to spend a fair amount on solutions
for uprooted people. That is not only humanitarian, in
the interests of those people; it is also very much
related to ensuring that there is more security, less

 
crime and less human trafficking in this world.

Prioritizing those dimensions is a key aspect of
sustainable development. And, as members are aware,
since the International Conference on Financing for
Development, held at Monterrey, there has been greater
opportunity - at least on paper - to do more, to have
a North-South partnership between the rich world and
the still-developing world. My thesis is that that will be
successful only if we can overcome the problem of
being stand-offish - not that UNHCR can take care of
that problem. UNHCR itself does not have one dollar;
we must go to countries. So countries should plan
sufficient room in their budgets not only for
humanitarian emergencies, but also for permanent
solutions. And here, things come together, as I have
tried to explain.

I now turn to the remarks of the representative of
France, who spoke about West Africa. Very briefly, I
was there recently, and I made a plea; I was even a bit
instrumental in the planning of the 20 May event on
the Mano River countries. I asked them to put on their
agenda cross-border demilitarization with regard to
both persons and weapons. In order to do that, the three
peacekeeping operations must learn from one another
and work together. It is not only about individuals; it is
also a joint effort to find the too-numerous weapons
that are still there.

I also made a second point: that it might be good
if the Mano River countries worked not only on that
dimension, but also on what you might call the
political dimension. To be very specific, if an African
lives in Guinea for 10 years, he has the right of
citizenship; he is considered a Guinean. In Sierra
Leone and Liberia, one has the right of citizenship after
five years. It would be a blessing for Cote d'Ivoire -
and therefore for the whole Mano River region - if
the region's heads of State agreed that this was to be a
systematic tradition, a rule of law, for the entire Mano
River region. That would eliminate the risk of
excluding people from participating in elections or
from being elected.

Such an initiative taken by the Mano River region
heads of State - if they wished to take it - would
perhaps have more credibility than a request to do
something from the international community or
Brussels, not to mention Paris. It would be better if
those countries themselves came to the conclusion that
there was a very valuable tradition in this part of
Africa of assimilating as normal citizens, after a
relatively short period of time, Africans who have
come to those countries.
The representative of France also asked a question
about Darfur, in relation to the estimated numbers. We
have said from the outset - I have to say, as a result of
our experience interviewing people and seeing people -
that there will probably be a caseload of approximately
100,000. Because I spoke with French diplomats there, I
am aware that they thought there were fewer. We spoke
about that: how was that possible? They said that they
were nomads, who were going back and forth across the
border. It is true that there is cohesion among the
population. Therefore, although we said we could
accommodate 60,000 out of the 100,000, we have
probably accommodated all of them in theory, because
we estimate that large numbers will cross the border to
go to their families, so they will not really be refugees;
they will be refugees only technically. But that was our
idea.

There are now two changes. First, the border area
itself is becoming increasingly insecure - including
for the families living there - so there is probably a
need to accommodate a larger percentage of the people
who cross the border. Secondly, we do not rule out the
possibility that more will come. That, of course, will
depend on the effectiveness of the ceasefire - not so
much the ceasefire itself, but the belief that it will end
with human rights violations there. If you have a
ceasefire but violations occur in practice on the ground
and people think they will continue tomorrow, those
people will use the final days, weeks or months to flee.
So at this time, I must prepare for larger numbers.

The representative of Romania, among others,
posed a question regarding the discrepancy in the
figures between 1 million and 2 million. I do not know
the answer; I was not there. We spoke with the
refugees; we know it is awful. We said quite some time
ago that the number was 1 million. I cannot rule out the
possibility that it is much higher; I simply do not know.
So I leave that for others to answer.

With regard to Kosovo, very briefly, we have had
an enormous setback since the most recent events. We
are continuing our work; it is exhausting. UNHCR is
truly successful in the former Yugoslavia; the one
exception is in Kosovo. I intend to speak with
Mr. Holkeri about whether there is another way forward,
because we really must think hard about where we go
from here. So, to be brief, we are just doing our job. But
the possibilities for people to return have been limited,
and I do not see many prospects. We must look into this
again. I do not think that rhetoric - the people should
do this or that - works very well; perhaps we should
opt for more practical steps forward and try to find a
somewhat different approach. Perhaps I will be able to
tell the Council more about that in the future.

I have already addressed the cross-border
questions.

I turn now to the representative of Germany, who
mentioned the figures in the millions provided by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I
am not denying that, but I cannot confirm it either.

I was asked to say a few more words about
security, country by country. I will try to do that. I will
start from the UNHCR perspective. UNHCR, starting
with my predecessor, Mrs. Ogata, has improved
security considerably. How have we done this? It is
through the training of people - how they have to
behave. Secondly, it is through technical
communications. People always have to report every
20 minutes on where they are, and so on. Thirdly, we
have trained people to communicate with all
stakeholders in a given region, to come together and
analyse situations. There may be misunderstandings or
elements of which one may be very aware but which
may not be controlled even by those who are locally
empowered. We have very much improved that aspect.

I tend to say that we have become a very
professional security organization. We are profoundly
secure and operate securely. Where we are a bit
concerned is the inter-agency dimension in this. It
started with the Office of the United Nations Security
Coordinator (UNSECOORD). We are in favour of
UNSECOORD. UNSECOORD brings the agencies
together so that we have a United Nations country team
on security. It is good when there are some
UNSECOORD people on the ground. Then it goes
well. When it goes wrong - if it becomes a system of
only writing papers, reporting to Headquarters, and
then Headquarters making philosophies of how one has
to act in a country - then nothing can be won.

We made a study, together with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and we
found that we - not only UNHCR - have a highly
professional structure working in Afghanistan,
involving the expertise of non-governmental
organizations in structures. We have made a strong plea
that others should learn from that, as we did in Sierra
Leone and as we try to do in Liberia and other
countries, and be very cautious about having a system
in New York that thinks it must manage the situation.
That might lead to less security, not only by drawing
the wrong conclusions - such a judgement call can
always happen - but by abdicating the responsibility.
It would really be a step back if people should say:
"Security is not my business. You have experts outside
who provide security".

We have invested so much in this "operate
secure" way that I stress we should not lose it. I can
provide an example concerning Iraq. Today, when local
staff in Iraq stay at home because of an analysis made
totally outside Iraq, it is very difficult to relate to your
local staff if they ask why. We cannot answer. These
are indications that, as I say, we should take care over.
Maybe we have become too obsessed by the Iraq
experiences, which is why I made the remark that we
will find out later that perhaps we went too far by
supposing that people who do humanitarian work have
no knowledge about security. I think my people have a
lot of knowledge about security and they behave very
properly. We had the critical reports after Baghdad on
agencies that did not behave and had more people than
was allowed, and so on. I checked with my own
people. It was simply not true for UNHCR, and not
only there. So I think the time has come to raise our
voice a bit, to look to the good experience and to
capitalize on it.

Having said all that, security is so important for
me and such a priority that sufficient funding for
security - we spend more on security these days - is
very key. It is in the interests not only of our people,
but also of our operations, that people continue to
prioritize security. Do not misunderstand me. I do not
like cowboy attitudes, but neither do I like to say: "Let
us not operate at all". Therefore, I cited that example
of the fortress, as I wish to explain a little bit further to
the Council.

In response to the representative of Philippines,
let me say that there is a system with regard to the
security in camps. That started long before I came in,
but we have improved considerably. I have mentioned
one thing: refugee camps should be located at a
distance from areas of conflict. That is one thing.
Secondly, we must check on people and organize the
camps. Very often, together with a Government, which
we have invited, we have organizations in the refugee
camps to rid them of arms. That is very important.
Thirdly, we must not accept overly protected situations,
because then you get a degradation; it becomes too
attractive for young people to relate to armed groups.
These are the systems we have put in place and we are
trying, of course, to improve this further.

The representative of the United States asked
about Darfur, and I am grateful for his generosity in
mentioning it. I made my remarks and have not much
to add. We have, of course, tried to prepare in Chad so
that, if more come, we can accommodate more. I have
to balance my capacity now: Do I have spare capacity
in Chad or do additional things in Darfur? That is what
I wanted to say on this.

As to the question posed by the representative of
Algeria, I have to repeat what I said earlier, because I
think it is the main point in relation not only to
funding, but also to solutions. Today, making pleas to
countries to respect the refugee law and not to push out
refugees is not enough. We have to add the dimensions
of burden-sharing, to understand that only the
multilateral efforts of countries together can provide
permanent solutions and reduce these irregular
secondary flows and the risks of human trafficking and
crime. This is, as it were, the new era. We have to do
that. There is a word for it: we call it "Convention
plus". That is also the key answer, I think, to the
financial dimensions. Again, it is my job to try to
explain to Governments that spending money on this is
beyond a humanitarian gesture. It is indeed building a
safer world. That is the basic point.

Therefore, we must also not allow ourselves to
forget certain crises, and not only in terms of hunger or
misery. Most of the time, I would say, if it is serious
the media will report on it. It took some time, but the
reports are now in on Darfur. So that is known, but
what is a problem is when there some 100,000
Bhutanese who have been living in Nepal for more
than a decade and people ask: "Are there refugees
there?" They have never heard about them. There is a
real risk, and it even becomes a political problem if we
cannot find solutions for a forgotten refugee
population. And that is only one example. We will try
to work on that.

I come gladly to your questions, Mr. President. I
have tried to answer the question on assessed
contributions, on the one hand, and the humanitarian
challenge, on the other. Then I was asked, regarding
Afghanistan, to shed some light on the tripartite
agreement. The answer is, yes, we tried to fill in the
road map. That starts, of course, with respecting the
tripartite agreement. This year, again, we have tried to
bring home about 500,000 from Pakistan, but we want
to prioritize somewhat - a little bit - the returns
from the new camps, because we see security risks in
the so-called new camps. Those are the camps near the
border in the tribal areas. We see this as part of the
tripartite agreement and we are in consultation with the
Government on how to do that. It cannot be all forced
in one day, but there has to be that ambition to do that.
And from there, we will look at other priorities. It
is not a secret that the Government of Pakistan has an
ambition to see substantial returns out of the cities as
well. That is happening. For us, the process is a
voluntary one of offering possibilities. There are, of
course, certain priorities. In the cities, refugees are
sometimes understood as a real problem, but in other
situations, less so. That is part of the reality. I have
already underlined that, from my perspective, the new
camps are the top priority. But we will probably have
to do both. Then we will achieve our numbers. Then
we will see where to go from there.

In Iran, as well as in Pakistan, at a certain moment
we will come to the Afghans who have now been living
there for a long time and have become very productive.
The reduction of assistance poses something of a test
because individuals who do not receive assistance really
have to make a choice about earning a living: do they go
home or do they already have a job, an income, an
activity - some even have businesses - in those

countries? So, I can see that when we gradually come to
the end of the tripartite agreement - and I have already
put this on the table with both Governments - we have
to establish to what extent Afghans living there are still
a burden on the country and to what extent are we
gradually starting to talk about temporary migrant
workers. At some point we will recognize that, while
respecting the tripartite agreement.

Finally, on the elections, as the High
Commissioner for Refugees, I applaud when people
with whom I am concerned can participate in elections.
Therefore, there is motivation to participate in the
process. As a United Nations person, I have to respect
the specialized expertise of the structure of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The United Nations has put in place people, et celera,
for that purpose. I spoke about this frankly in
Islamabad and said that I am positive about
participating, but please respect the role, on the United
Nations side, of the UNAMA structure organizing the
elections. The UNHCR cannot be seen to be organizing
the elections. It is a question of making ourselves
available for assistance and promoting the process.

Another aspect is that when the elections are
over, we are still there, with the Government, with
many Afghans in Pakistan. We will probably have to
do an analysis of the Afghans in question, not only in
terms of numbers but more in terms of what we call
profiling the people to see how to assist in the
repatriation of those people over a number of years and
to see to what extent they will be temporary migrant
workers for a number of years. That is not something
that can be done hastily before the elections. So, there
are two phases in all this.

I have spoken too long, I fear. I could go on.
Clearly, I like my job. But perhaps it is better that I
stop here.

