Mr. Ahmad Husni Hanadzlah (Malaysia): Ijoin
other Council members in thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting, which Malaysia fully
supports. I wish to acknowledge the presence of my
counterparts around the table, which is a sign of our
collective resolve to combat the scourge of terrorism,
particularly its financing aspects. I also wish to express
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon and to
Mr. Je-Yoon Shin for their respective briefings on the
issue at hand.

I wish to echo and underscore the sentiments by
earlier speakers about the need for additional measures
to further isolate the terrorist entity Daesh/ Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) from the international
financial system, with a view to effectively constraining
and ultimately cutting off its sources of funding.

Malaysia strongly condemns the recent multiple
terrorist attacks, including the most recent ones in
Paris, Beirut, Mali and the Sinai.

Malaysia strongly rejects the warped ideology of
Daesh. We fully reject any attempt on its part to link
such ideology with Islam, which is a religion of peace,
compassion, moderation, justice and tolerance towards
all cultures and religions.

Too many innocent people have paid the price of
terrorism, and the international community needs
to step up to do more. The heinous attacks serve to
reaffirm the need for all countries to stand united and
firm against terrorism. We believe the United Nations
and other multilateral frameworks provide the best
platform for coordinated and sustained action. It is
on that basis that Malaysia fully supports the present
initiative by both the Russian Federation and the United
States, and we welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2253 (2015) today, which we co-sponsored.

Malaysia welcomes the comprehensive coverage
of the new resolution to further focus the long-
standing 1267 (1999) Al-Qaida sanctions regime on
evolving terrorist threats. The new resolution covers
all aspects of the obligations of Member States with
regard to establishing the necessary legal framework
for the criminalizing of terrorism financing and to
operationalize terrorism financing sanctions through
the listing and delisting process.

On the domestic front, Malaysia has adopted a
comprehensive framework that criminalizes terrorism
financing and money-laundering. Punishment for
terrorism financing under section l30N ofthe Malaysian
penal code carries severe penalties, among others, of up
to 30 years of imprisonment. The terrorism financing
offence is also provided under the Anti-money-
laundering, Anti-terrorism Financing and Proceeds of
Unlawful Activities Act of 2001.

In June, Malaysia underwent the mutual evaluation
exercise of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).
Among other things, the exercise highlighted Malaysia's
commitment to FATF standards, including our strong
legal and regulatory framework for combating terrorism
financing. Malaysia's legal framework for targeted
financial sanctions against terrorism provides strong
tools to identify terrorist networks and take steps to
freeze terrorist assets. The regime against terrorism
is administered robustly and is well implemented, to a
large extent based on resolution 1267 (1999).

Malaysia is well placed to adopt and implement the
proposals set out in the new resolution. Our strategic
plan under the anti-money-laundering and combating
financing of terrorism act includes measures such as
engaging with the private sector on terrorism financing
issues and implementing the necessary measures.

Malaysia's financial regulators and compliance
officers constantly exchange views and share
information on issues relating to the implementation
of anti-money-laundering and countering the financing
of terrorism with our regional and international
counterparts. We constantly work to identify key Daesh
threats, including the trends and modus operandi of
terrorism financing, enhance investigation techniques
and conduct specialized training in relation to
typologies, investigations and new areas.

The threat of international terrorism has increased
with the terrorists' capabilities to manipulate the
various technological innovations of our time. Hence, it
is imperative that Member States resolve to undertake
further multilateral and high-priority measures to
combat terrorist financing. Our experts will have to
continuously work together to address the defining
and urgent challenges arising from that threat. The
international community needs to be vigilant of
terrorist financing activities. Concerted efforts are
urgently needed not only to adopt and implement the
new resolution, but also to renew our commitment to
carry out the measures conscientiously to counter the
challenge.

In conclusion, Malaysia joins other Council
members in urging all Member States to continue to
take appropriate measures to counter radicalization and
violent terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
that lead to terrorism, financing, recruitment or the
mobilization of individuals into terrorist groups.

