At the outset, I would like to commend the wise leadership of Estonia during its presidency of the Security Council for the month of May 2020, as well as its initiative to address this important issue and call for statements from the wider membership, with a view to hearing the views and proposals of countries, which is in itself a practical way to improve the working methods of the Security Council. I would also like to thank the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for her leadership of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. Edward Luke for their valuable briefings. I wish to underscore that it is all the more important to discuss the working methods of the Council in view of the current circumstances, especially given the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on the Council's activities and the ensuing logistical challenges that have prevented the wider membership from keeping abreast of Council proceedings. This state of affairs makes the work of the Council even less transparent. We believe that the best way to address this is by committing to implement the points set forth in document S/2017/507, to the extent possible and within logistical constraints. In this regard, we would like to stress several points that we believe to be vital to improving the working methods of the Security Council and its subsidiary organs and committees. First, the periodic briefings given to the wider membership on the monthly programme of work of the Security Council should be developed, and the input of the wider membership should be taken into account when formulating the programme of work. Briefings should give an overview of the most important meetings, activities and visits carried out by the Council, and the chairs of the subsidiary organs and committees should also present periodic briefings before the wider membership. Secondly, the frequency of public meetings of all kinds, whether of the Security Council or its subsidiary organs and sanctions committees, should be increased. Let us not forget that the Security Council represents and works on behalf of the wider membership, so its meetings and work must not, as a general rule, be kept from the wider membership, unless they concern matters related to the national security of a State and the State has made a request to that end. Thirdly, it is important to ensure that the documents and reports submitted to the Security Council be made available to the wider membership and in all six official languages of the United Nations, unless they include information related to the national security of States that do not wish to make this information available to the public. Fourthly, draft resolutions and presidential statements that come before the Security Council should be shared with the wider membership. Countries should be consulted so as to allow the wider membership the opportunity to share their views and proposals on these drafts with members of the Council. Fifthly, it is important that the Security Council consult with States and relevant regional and subregional organizations, especially the African Union and the League of Arab States, on conflicts that are being addressed by the Council or any of its subsidiary organs or committees. Sixthly, consultation between the Security Council and the countries that contribute troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations should be improved, in accordance with paragraph 91 of S/2017/507. I wish to underscore that the role of the subsidiary organs of the Security Council in general, and the sanctions committees in particular, is extremely important and sensitive, because those organs follow up on the implementation of sanctions regimes and monitor compliance. It is therefore important that the working methods of those organs and committees be periodically reviewed in order to ensure that they continue to be capable of carrying out their functions in an effective and transparent manner. In this regard, Egypt calls for the technical bodies and panels of experts of Security Council organs and committees to consult the States concerned when preparing reports that relate to them. It is important for the Chairs of the subsidiary organs and committees to invite the States concerned to participate in their meetings whenever those States are being discussed, in accordance, inter alia, with paragraphs 101 to 110 of S/2017/507. In closing, we would like to note that many suggestions have been made regarding how to develop the working methods of the Security Council and its subsidiary organs and committees. What matters the most, however, is having the political will to implement them and to have the conviction that improving the Council's methods will enhance the added value of the Council and its subsidiary organs and committees, and increase its credibility before the wider membership, and, of course, vice versa.
