Mr. Kim (Slovenia): Slovenia has already
associated itself with the statement made by the
representative of Greece on behalf of the European
Union and with the statement made by the
representative of Austria as Chair of the Human
Security Network, and we fully endorse both of them.
Since the issue of children and armed conflict is one of
particular importance for Slovenia, I would like to
highlight some points in our national capacity.

Let me first express our appreciation to you, Sir,
for having convened this meeting. We consider it
primarily to be an opportunity to review the progress
achieved and to identify further action to be taken.
Since the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999), the issue
of children and armed conflict has been firmly
established on the agenda of the Security Council, in
recognition of its importance for peace and security,
thus adding a new dimension to the discussions in this
body, which Slovenia firmly supports.

We are pleased to see that a number of significant
developments were achieved in the past year,
particularly in the normative domain, such as the entry
into force of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. Slovenia ratified the Rome Statute in
December 2001, and we are looking forward to the
constitution of the new Court in March this year.
Almost a year ago, the Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict entered into
force, and it is encouraging to note the growing
acceptance of this new instrument. Slovenia will ratify
it in the very near future.

The special session of the General Assembly on
children, held last May, and the adoption of the
outcome document, "A world fit for children"
reaffirmed our joint commitment to protect children
during armed conflict, in accordance with international
humanitarian and human rights law. This provides the
necessary political, as well as legal frameworks, to
combat the abuse of children in armed conflict. We call
on all Member States and all other parties in conflict to
fully implement or respect their provisions, and
especially to act against impunity for all crimes
committed against children.

Slovenia welcomes the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict. We
would like to express our sincere appreciation of and
support for Special Representative Olara Otunnu and
his Office for their work in this respect. This is the first
time that parties recruiting and using child soldiers
have been specifically identified, giving us a clear
picture of who the perpetrators of crimes against
children really are. The report and the annex list
represent a very clear sign that the international
community is no longer ready to tolerate abuses of
children in conflict situations. They also represent a
concrete contribution to the raising of global awareness
on this issue. Slovenia shares the views expressed that
the report should be the first step towards drawing up
an integral list of all parties using children, not only
those involved in situations on the Security Council's
agenda.

Austria, on behalf of the Human Security
Network, presented a set of specific recommendations
to the Council on how to further address this issue, and
Slovenia fully supports those recommendations. I
should like just to recall the need to regularly update
the list, to extend it by including situations that are not
on the Security Council's agenda and to ensure that the
issue of war-affected children is taken fully into
account in all of its decisions on peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building operations.

Another positive development this year is the
beginning of the deployment of child protection
advisers in some United Nations peace operations. We
concur with the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative that the deployment of such advisers in
each United Nations peace operation is highly
desirable.

In addition to efforts undertaken globally,
regional and interregional action is needed. We greatly
appreciate the opportunity to share our views with the
like-minded countries of the Human Security Network.
As pointed out by Austria, the Network believes that it
can significantly contribute to the global debate on the
issue, as well as improve the situation in our respective
regions through various concrete activities.

Being aware of the importance of children for the
future and for the prosperity of our societies, Slovenia
decided several years ago to contribute to the recovery
of South-Eastern Europe by establishing an institution
to assist war-affected children - the Regional Centre
for the Psychosocial Well-being of Children, which is
also called "Together". The basic aim of the Centre is
to strengthen local structures in the field of child care,
to develop mechanisms for their psycho-social
protection and to empower war-affected children,
remaining in the region even after international
assistance has been withdrawn. We would like to thank
all donors and to invite all other countries and
institutions to work with us to improve the situation of
war-affected children in South-Eastern Europe.

Another of Slovenia's initiatives contributing to
the safety of children in the region of South-Eastern
Europe is in the area of anti-personnel mines and
demining - the work conducted by the Slovenia-based
International Trust Fund for Demining and Mine
Victim Assistance.

The report of the Secretary-General points out
that little progress has been made regarding efforts to
sever the link between the proliferation and widespread
use of small arms and light weapons and the related
victimization of children. In this regard, I am pleased
to inform the Security Council that a United Nations
subregional conference on the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects, co-organized by
the United Nations and Slovenia, will be held in
Slovenia in March this year. We hope that the
conference will contribute to reducing the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons and its negative
impact, including its impact on children, in the region
of South-Eastern Europe.

In conclusion, allow me to reassure you,
Mr. President, that Slovenia fully supports all
endeavours of the Office of the Special Representative,
the United Nations Children's Fund and other United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
in this field. We encourage continuous and meaningful
dialogue and cooperation among all of us, with the aim
of alleviating the plight of children affected by armed
conflict.
