Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank all
of the briefers for their remarks today. We particularly
welcome African Union Commissioner Chergui's
perspective and vision for possible ways forward,
which he outlined this afternoon.

The United States has been disappointed by the
lack ofprogress since the twentieth ordinary Summit of
Heads of State of the East African Community (EAC),
on 1 February. It does not appear that any steps have
been taken by regional leadership since the Council's
last meeting on Burundi in February (S/PV.8465), even
though Burundians continue to flee the country under
political pressure.

The Office ofthe UnitedNations High Commissioner
for Refugees reports that, although 8,253 Burundian
refugees were assisted in returning voluntarily from
January to April, during that same time period another
2,569 people fled Burundi for the first time. With this
continuing displacement in mind, we call upon the EAC
to reinvigorate talks. It is important that all parties
commit to the EAC-led process and reach an agreement
ahead of the 2020 elections.

Civic and political space is critical to free and fair
elections. Unfortunately, continued reports of human
rights violations cast a shadow over Burundi and its
electoral preparations. Extrajudicial arrests, beatings,
intimidation and kidnappings, especially by the
Imbonerakure ruling party youth wing, pose a grave
threat to the country's peace and security.

A free press is indispensable to democracy. We
urge the Burundian Government to respect freedom
of expression and to allow journalists to operate
independently without fear of violence or a forcible
shutdown because of their reporting. We also urge
the Government of Burundi to address persistent and
reliable reports of illicit arms transfers, combatant
recruitment and armed group activity in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo that are tied to
Burundi. Now is the time for all of the parties to the
2013 Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
to live up to their commitments of non-interference in
the internal affairs of neighbouring countries and to
deny support or safe harbour to armed groups.

The Great Lakes region has a chance to transform
into an interconnected hub of peace and prosperity. By
resolving its domestic political crisis and strengthening
its respect for human rights, Burundi could play a
central role in that effort.

Finally, we note our continuing support for
resolution 2303 (2016), in which the Council requested
that the Secretary-General report on the situation in
Burundi every three months. We are concerned by
the United Nations failure to submit timely reports as
requested by the Council.

