Mr. Motoc (Romania): This being the first public
meeting of the Council since the beginning of 2004, it
gives me great pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, and
pledge the full support of the Romanian delegation in
the successful discharge of your presidential duties.
Our gratitude goes to the delegations of the 10
countries that were on the Council last year for having
so encouragingly welcomed us to this body, as well as
for their generous support in the preparation of
Romania's mandate as an elected member of the
Council.

I wish to join others in congratulating you, Sir,
both for your very convincing report, which we fully
support, and for your excellent work as Chairman of
the 1267 Committee. Your dedication at the helm of the
Committee and the valuable support of the Chilean
team, the Secretariat and the Monitoring Group created
the necessary prerequisites for the progress of the
Committee's work. I also wish to assure you of
Romania's full commitment, as vice-chair of the
Committee to fostering the goals you set out.

Romania associates itself with the statement to be
made by the Permanent Representative of Ireland on
behalf of the European Union. Therefore, I wish to
offer here only three specific points from our
delegation.

First, we commend the Chairman's recent visits
to selected countries and strongly support the
continuation of this valuable practice. Ambassador
Mufioz's conclusions following those visits, together
with the recommendations provided by the Monitoring
Group reports, provide a solid starting point for
improving both the existing measures imposed on the
Taliban and Al Qaeda and the work of the Committee.

My second point is on Romania's concern at the
significant number of States that have not submitted
the reports required by resolution 1455 (2003). We
would like to recall that responsibility for effectively
implementing the measures imposed globally by the
Security Council against the Taliban and Al Qaeda lies
with the Member States themselves. Undoubtedly,
national reporting remains an important tool for
assessing the level of implementation and the practical
difficulties associated with it. Therefore, we call on all
States that have not yet submitted their reports to do so
expeditiously.

The quality of reporting is also of utmost
importance and must be further improved, including by
means of a more focused approach. Likewise, the
constant difficulties encountered by so many States in
submitting reports should be addressed and additional
ways of assisting them devised and implemented.

My third comment concerns the potential of
regional cooperation to play an important role in
fighting terrorism sponsored by the Taliban and Al
Qaeda. We are all vulnerable to terrorism. We all need
cooperation, consultation on threats and coordination
of responses. It is Romania's strong belief that
regionally-owned organizations and initiatives can help
deliver that. Undoubtedly, one of the most substantial
contributions in this field is made by the European
Union. It was with Romania in the chair that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
developed, back in 2001, the first regional response in
the 11 September context and subsequently made its
specific contribution to the international fight to
prevent and counter terrorism.

Seeing cross-border organized crime as a
potential breeding ground for terrorist activities,
Romania is also committed to the valuable work done
in countering the former at the subregional level, in
partnership with South-East European nations.
Bucharest is thus to host to the Southeast European
Cooperative Initiative Regional Centre for combating
transborder crime, which for half a decade now has
supported the crackdown on organized crime in the
subregion on the basis of a unique mechanism of data-
sharing and cooperation between national police and
customs authorities. Its experience should be
referenced in the outreach activities that both the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the 1267 (1999)
Committee have started to develop.

To conclude, I believe that the time has come
fully to take stock of the experience we have gained
and to look to the future. Al Qaeda remains a serious
threat in that it is adapting to and taking profit from
existing vulnerabilities. The international community
should also adapt to this menace. We should carefully
consider the ways in which a new resolution could
bring more effectiveness to measures against the
Taliban and Al Qaeda, invigorate the activity of the
Committee and thereby advance our fight against
terrorism.

