The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Luxembourg.

Luxembourg is deeply concerned about the recent
developments in Ukraine, in particular in Crimea. Our
position is reflected in the conclusion that the Foreign
Affairs Council of the European Union has just adopted
today during an urgently convened meeting. We strongly
condemn the violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and
territorial integrity by Russian armed forces and the
decision taken last Saturday by Russia's Federation
Council to authorize the deployment of Russian armed
forces on the territory of Ukraine.

Those actions are a flagrant violation ofthe Charter
of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act. I
would like to echo the appeal of the European Union
to Russia to withdraw its armed forces without delay
in order to meet its obligations under the 28 May 1997
Agreement between Russia and Ukraine on the Status
and Conditions of the Presence of the Russian Black
Sea Fleet on the Territory of Ukraine.

The crisis must be resolved peacefully. A first
critical step would be for Russia to accept Ukraine's
offer to hold consultations without delay, as provided
for in the Memorandum on Security Assurances in
Connection with the Republic of Ukraine's Accession
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, signed 5 December 1994 by Ukraine, Russia,
the United Kingdom and the United States, and under
the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership,
signed on 31 May 1997 between Russia and Ukraine.

We would like to believe that it is still pssible to
avoid the worst. Owing to its history, unfortunately,
Luxembourg is well placed to understand the threats
that a military escalation poses to the peace and security
of Ukraine and the region. We must therefore do our
utmost to start a de-escalation of the situation through
specific actions. We resolutely support the ongoing
efforts within the United Nations, in particular the good
offices role of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who
took the decision to dispatch the Deputy Secretary-
General to Ukraine.

The principles of the United Nations and the very
raison d'etre of the United Nations are at stake. We call
on the entire international community to support the
efforts of the United Nations, together with those of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Council of Europe and the European
Union, to reach a political settlement of the crisis with
the parties concerned. We welcome the preparations
under way with a view to establishing an OSCE
observer mission to impartially assess the situation on
the ground.

A lasting political solution to the Ukrainian crisis
also requires an inclusive political dialogue, taking
into account the diversity of Ukrainian society, the
aspirations of all Ukrainians and the need to respect the
rights of all Ukrainians. Luxembourg supports the new
Government and Parliament of Ukraine, which have
taken steps to promote that inclusive political dialogue.
We encourage the Ukrainian authorities to appeal to the
expertise of the Council of Europe and the OSCE, in
particular with regard to the protection of the rights of
minorities.

In conclusion, we welcome the restraint shown by
the Ukrainian authorities in the face of the crisis, in
particular in Crimea. It is vital for all parties to respect
the unity, territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of Ukraine.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

