Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for your continued and able
stewardship of the Council this month. In particular, I
would like to commend you on your steadfast
leadership in response to the restated global challenges
which were revealed last week. I would also like to
thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto for his informative briefing
on the Middle East.

Positive currents are flowing in the Middle East.
Moderate voices are beginning to surface courageously
where they have been suppressed or ignored in the
past. But before I delve into some of those aspects, an
outstanding and highly pressing concern must first be
addressed.

In Israel, every day, we are tortured by
unimaginable anxiety and shattered hopes, painfully
awaiting the safe return of our boys, the Israeli
soldiers- Gilad Shalit, Udi Goldwasser and Eldad
Regev - who were callously abducted earlier this
summer by Hamas and Hizbollah. This Council, in its
unanimous adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), took
upon itself the responsibility to secure their
unconditional release. I ask Council members now, as I
did then, to do their utmost to alleviate this
humanitarian crisis and bring them home.

Israel welcomes the steps taken by its Arab
neighbours and other moderate Arab leaders in the
region seeking to follow through on their commitments
to peace. Those positive voices from the Arab and
Muslim world show a genuine desire to embark on a
path of historic reconciliation and mutual
advancement. Regrettably, different voices are still
sometimes heard in this building - including those
heard just a few minutes ago - which too often fail to
reflect the dramatically changing world we live in. One
of our major tasks is to narrow the gap between what is
heard and done in the "real world" and what is still too
often heard and done on First Avenue.

Roughly two months ago, the clarion call of
resolution 1701 (2006) went forth from this Chamber.
Resolution 1701 (2006) sent a clear and unambiguous
message that the international community will not
tolerate a State within State, be it Hizbollah or any
other terrorist organization. The strength of that
conviction and that resolution is a test for this Council.

Today, two and a half weeks after the last Israeli
soldier left southern Lebanon, the situation along the
northern border has begun to stabilize. The Lebanese
army is deployed throughout its territory. Today, there
is one unequivocal address in Lebanon, and it is the
Government of Lebanon.

Success, however, cannot be prematurely
declared. Success will be determined only to the extent
to which resolution 1701 (2006) is fully implemented.
In that regard, there is reason to be concerned about the
smuggling of arms across the border between Lebanon
and Syria. Hizbollah's rearming not only violates the
essence and strength of resolution 1701 (2006); it also
places the entire region in immediate peril. There can
be no ambiguity in policy here. The embargo must be
enforced, and its violators must be held accountable.

As members of the Council know, Prime Minister
Ehud Olmert, speaking at the Israeli Knesset earlier
this week, called upon Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad
Siniora to meet directly, without mediators, in order to
make peace between our two countries. Israel is a
serious and committed partner to a peace-seeking
Government in Lebanon. The events of the recent
summer - the conflict, suffering and pain - compel
us all to rise above the culture of skepticism and
distrust that often pervades our region and to forge a
direct line of communication. Only in that way,
through direct and open dialogue, can we bring peace
to our two peoples.

While hostilities in the north have ceased,
hostilities in the south have only escalated, indeed as a
result of the Palestinians' tragic choice to, as my
Palestinian colleague just verified, turn Gaza into a
base for terror. During the month of September, no less
than 45 Qassam rockets, launched by Palestinian
terrorists from the Gaza Strip, pierced the ordinarily
tranquil, blue skies of southern Israel and fell hard on
our communities. Along with these rocket attacks
comes daily psychological trauma, inflicted on an
entire civilian population, whose only wish is to live in
peace and security. Israel, the children of Sderot in
particular, sleeps under the constant threat of attack.

By now it is clear to all that the Hamas
Government, not mentioned in the Palestinian
statement, is currently leading the Palestinian
Authority and driving it dangerously on a road that
only leads to further isolation. As long as the Hamas
Government fails to recognize Israel, accept and
implement agreements signed between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, terminate violence and eradicate
terrorism - including, but not limited to the attacks on
our southern communities - we cannot dialogue with
it. These are conditions that have been recognized by
the international community. Israel will not, and the
international community should not, compromise on
these conditions.

As you know, Vice Prime Minister and Minister
of Foreign Affairs Tzipi Livni met with Chairman
Abbas here in New York last month. In that meeting
there was an agreement to reinvigorate the dialogue
between us and establish a permanent channel for talks.
There was also agreement on the road map and the
principles for peace already confirmed between the
parties. It is a real pity that this positive spirit was
lacking in the Palestinian statement today.

As the escalation of Violence in Gaza shows, the
Hamas Government, the President of the Palestinian
Authority and the Palestinian people are not one and
the same. As the Violence continues, the world is
beginning to recognize that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the consequence, not the cause of such
ideology, intolerance and hatred. Today, the Palestinian
people face a critical decision, one that can reverse
their situation, a situation that they chose and for
which they alone are responsible.

We are witnessing the rise of a new world order,
where moral courage and authority is confused with
militaristic chauvinism and pomposity. One day, future
generations will pass judgment on the way in which the
international community dealt with the rise of these
nuclear threats.

To be sure, the swift action taken by this Council
last week under your leadership, Mr. President,
demonstrates the consensus View within the
international community that rogue States cannot be
allowed to threaten our global security. But at the same
time, let there be no illusions. North Korea is only the
prelude to a more disturbing story, namely, the

emergence of a nuclear Iran, armed and willing to
share its State terrorist capabilities with other unholy
extremists who yearn to destroy us all. Indeed, North
Korea is only the preview. A nuclear Iran is the main
feature - coming soon, if we do not act resolutely, to a
theatre near you.

Israel sees the Iranian threat as an existential one,
not only to itself, but to the entire world as well. Iran's
web of lies, perversions of history, and distortions of
human destiny are lurid warnings for us to read the
writing on the wall and respond now. The international
community must be determined, clear and unequivocal
in its plan of action. There is no room for hesitation,
second-guessing or compromise. There is only one
choice: the world must ensure that Iran does not attain
nuclear weapons.

As I said earlier, we are bolstered by the
surfacing of moderate voices in the region - voices
that recognize the true threats facing us. The real, most
urgent threat to stability and peace in the Middle East
is Iran.

Today, many of you have mentioned, yet again,
the need to release Corporal Gilad Shalit. I thank you
for your commitment to seeking his release. It is in this
context that I wish to share some very disturbing news
with you. Just this morning, we heard news that Iran
bribed Hamas leader Khalid Mashal, hosted graciously
in Damascus by Syria, a regime famously hospitable to
terrorists, with $50 million with the sole purpose of
sabotaging the negotiations on the release of Corporal
Gilad Shalit and preventing his release. If this is how
Iran uses blackmail to threaten humanitarian initiatives
I shudder to think about the lengths to which Iran will
go, and may already be going, to undermine a
diplomatic initiative and achieve its dangerous regional
aspirations and nightmarish dreams of nuclear
capability.

Since the opening of the sixty-first session of the
General Assembly, we have heard constructive
speeches and statements echoing the recognition that
Iran is the real threat. Moderates are now joining
together to form an alliance against the extremists. We
must bolster this coalition of the moderates and isolate
the opposition formed by the extremists.
Global terrorism and extremism is moving us all
closer together, uniting us in places where we thought
only division and difference existed. The dawning of
this new reality and recognition speaks to the very
depth of our conviction, and reflects the renewable
optimism of life expressed so boldly by Alexander
Pope: indeed, "Hope springs eternal".

