Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin by welcoming the participation of the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan in this meeting. Likewise,
we would like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and to
reaffirm our support for his work in the political
dialogue on Darfur. We would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
briefing.

Peru welcomes the initiatives that are being taken
to realize the political dialogue process in Darfur. We
note the participation of the African Union (AU) and
the regional partners working with the United Nations
in seeking dialogue among the parties. In the light of
the most recent developments, it is clear that we must
persevere to bring an end to the crisis and achieve
peace and security in the region. The process of peace
talks, which began on 27 October in Sirte demonstrates
this.

Here, we feel it necessary to repeat to the parties
that it is only through political dialogue and inclusive
consultations that a sustainable, viable and
comprehensive solution to the Darfur crisis can be
reached. We also believe it is important to persevere
with endeavours to ensure that the rebel groups that
have not yet joined the process will do so before the
07-61468
beginning of the next stage, assuming their
responsibility to the peace and stability of the region.

We believe that the topics dealt with by the
parties during the two stages of the discussions -
security, wealth- and power-sharing and, humanitarian
affairs, among others - are complex and are a point of
controversy between the rebel groups and the
Government. However, we feel it is necessary that the
Mediation and the parties work to achieve sustainable
and practical solutions that will guarantee the safety
and security of the population and the continuation of
the process.

The dismantling of the militias is a matter that
should be part of the agenda for these talks. We believe
in the need to have a disarmament process of the
Janjaweed militia that goes beyond the Darfur Peace
Agreement that was signed in May last year.
International oversight is necessary to ensure that it is
effectively and promptly implemented.

Moreover, we are concerned by the continued
deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation. It continues to be essential to ensure the
protection of the civilian population and that the
parties cease hostilities. Additionally, all parties should
be required to ensure total and unhindered
humanitarian access. We also reaffirm the need for the
Government of the Sudan and all parties to the conflict
to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court
and its Prosecutor, in keeping with the provisions of
resolution 1593 (2005).

On the subject of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, Peru echoes the
concerns about the delays in deployment that could
lead to a further deterioration in security situations.
Therefore, the established time frames must be met,
and the Blue Helmets must assume their
responsibilities, as mandated by this Council.

The Government of national unity should
cooperate to ensure that all pending matters are
resolved, including the matter of aviation and land
transportation units, and to ensure that their freedom of
movement and communication are not hampered. The
objective is to ensure that deployment of the Hybrid
Operation takes place with the necessary due urgency
so that it can start to provide needed protection to the
civilian population.
25
