Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I would like, first of all,
to thank Mr. Otunnu for his valuable and, at the same
time, very disturbing briefing this morning.

The Netherlands welcomes the draft resolution
before the Council, which will establish the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). In doing
so, the Security Council will be taking a decisive and
necessary step in support of the Lome Peace Agreement.
The Agreement's ultimate success, however, remains in
the hands of the parties themselves.

An element of critical importance in this phase is
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. Success of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme will be an important indicator of the success
of the peace process as a whole. It is our intention to
contribute to the World Bank trust fund set up to cover
the costs of the disarmament programme. All efforts
should now be made by the parties involved to make sure
the fighters disband, give up their arms and are
reintegrated into civil life. The first steps towards this end
were taken on 20 October, with the inauguration of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme.

Special attention must be given to child soldiers,
who are often victims and perpetrators at the same time.
Collected arms should be destroyed immediately to
prevent them from entering into circulation again.

The situation in Sierra Leone remains volatile, as
recent events have demonstrated. The Security Council
shares the opinion of the Secretary-General - which was
seconded by the representative of Sierra Leone in his
statement today - that robust rules of engagement are
indeed essential if UNAMSIL is to fulfil its mandate and
protect itself and civilians under threat. It is therefore
important that UNAMSIL, as per paragraph 14 of the
draft resolution before us, be given the teeth it may need
to live up to these responsibilities.

 

For peace in Sierra Leone to be lasting, it is essential
that those responsible for the sufferings and the atrocities
that occurred during the eight-year civil war not go
unpunished. Peace without accountability cannot be a
lasting peace. The work of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission should start as soon as possible in an effective
manner and should get all the support it needs, both from
the parties themselves and from the international
community. Progress in this field, in our view, will serve as
another test of the success of the peace process.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) and its troop-contributing countries - in the
first place Nigeria - for its continued efforts towards
peace in Sierra Leone. I also thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative for their important
contribution. We count on continued close cooperation
between ECOMOG and UNAMSIL, which is going to be
of paramount importance in the months ahead.

The Netherlands, for its part, is prepared to continue
and to renew its support to ECOMOG, as we have done in
the past through our support to a Malian ECOMOG
contingent.

