Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O'Brien for the clarity of his briefing. Above all, I
welcome his commitment and that of his team to the
cause of the Syrian people, who are being sorely tried
indeed. We believe that the time has come to renew our
tribute to humanitarian personnel for the sacrifices that
they are willing to make, as well as to the medical staff
and others who are devoted to the cause of the Syrian
people.

Unfortunately, as we are all aware, the situation
continues to deteriorate. Violence has become
heightened in many areas, especially in eastern Aleppo,
where there are hundreds of civilian victims, including,
most unfortunately, many children. That does not take
into account the wounded. As has also been pointed out,
western Aleppo has unfortunately also been affected.
I will not dwell on the figures, which unfortunately
speak for themselves about the depth of the ongoing
tragedy in Syria. That is why my country wishes to
renew its call for a 48-hour humanitarian ceasefire,
especially in eastern Aleppo, as called for by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in order
to make it possible for the more than 215,000 people
under siege to be assisted by humanitarian workers and
to conduct the evacuation of the injured and those most
vulnerable.

My country emphatically condemns attacks on
humanitarian convoys, especially the one against the
United Nations-Syrian Red Crescent convoy at Orem
Al-Kubra on 19 September, which led to the deaths of
almost 20 people. We express our support for the efforts
of the Secretary-General to identify those responsible
for that tragedy. In the same vein, with regard to
the tragic humanitarian situation, we condemn the
consistent practice of removing medical supplies and
equipment from humanitarian convoys destined for
people in urgent need, especially pregnant women.

When it comes to Palestinian refugees, they too
are suffering because of the tragedy. My delegation
condemns the deaths of four Palestinian refugees at the
Khan Eshieh refugee camp, south of Damascus. Along
the same lines, we express our concern regarding the
continued security constraints that the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East faces in gaining access to the Yarmouk
refugee camp. Those constraints also affect the situation
of other Palestinian refugees.

Clearly, the question we are all asking is what
the Security Council should do in these particularly
serious circumstances. Unfortunately, to date the
Council remains divided, especially with regard to
the unacceptable situation in Aleppo. We think the
time has come for the Council at last to take up its
responsibilities in the face of the ongoing deteriorating
situation on the ground and the continuing tragedy.
We therefore once again call on Council members
to demonstrate flexibility in order to reach a lasting
solution. Of course, we lent our support to the draft
resolution aimed at consensus submitted by New
Zealand. We believe the draft resolution provides a
good basis to work towards giving new impetus to the
cessation of hostilities, which would make it possible
not only to provide humanitarian assistance, but also
to resume the political process, which we believe to
be a priority. We also believe it is a priority to fight
terrorist groups, especially the Islamic State and the
Al-Nusra Front, with full respect for humanitarian law
and international humanitarian law.

Lastly, we encourage the talks that took place
at Lausanne, which are continuing in Geneva. We
renew our call on countries with influence, especially
the co-Chairs of International Syria Support Group,
to continue their efforts for the soonest possible
resumption of intra-Syrian negotiations, with a view
to finding a political solution to the crisis on the basis
of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015).

