Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and for his commitment.

The Oslo Accords, signed in 1994, at a time of
great hope, made the establishment of a Palestinian
State living side by side in peace and security with
Israel the key to the resolution of that historic conflict.
Nevertheless, let us be frank. More than 20 years after
those agreements, the creation of a Palestinian State
has never been as remote. The daily progression of
Israeli settlement activity, which parcels up Palestinian
territory so as to reduce it to a small portion, calls into
question the viability of a future State.

Violence structures relations between Israelis and
Palestinians, whether in acts of terrorism, individual
attacks or simply the weight of occupation. The wave of
violence with increasing intensity that has persisted for
six months has led to hundreds of deaths and thousands
of wounded. The rift between the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples is unprecedented. It fuels the radicalization of
public opinion; people seem to no longer believe in the
possibility of the peaceful coexistence of two States.
That is one of the most worrisome aspects. We must
make no mistake against that backdrop. The status quo is
an illusion; the status quo is mechanically a regression,
that daily takes us farther and farther away from the
possibility of one day seeing a two-State solution
emerge. We must look squarely at the harsh reality on
the ground. If nothing is done, the tenuous prospects
for a two-State solution will disappear and the risk of
generalized violence will once again be reinforced.

Given that undeniable observation, France's
message for several months now can be summarized
in a single sentence: there is crucial need to create a
credible political horizon to save the two-State solution,
as that solution is the only one that responds to the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians for a State and
Israel for security.

As demonstrated by the ongoing implacable nature
of the conflict, we know there can be no easy solutions.
However, the choice of not dealing with the matter,
or searching for ways to act to manage or contain the
conflict, is not that of my country. France believes that
we must all undertake our responsibility to act and,
when the time is right, to do so through the Security
Council. Given the scope ofthe challenge, we think that
collective mobilization of the international community
is today the only way to move forward. Under the
leadership of President of the Republic and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, France has decided to launch an
initiative to provide a credible political horizon for
the peace process. It is a cooperative, inclusive and
progressive approach.

First, it is cooperative. To that end, the Special
Envoy of France, Ambassador Pierre Vimont, conducted
broad, in-depth consultations with the parties and the
international and regional stakeholders to formulate
proposals. The approach, then, was inclusive, as I
noted. The initiative is complementary to the actions
conducted by the Quartet, the United Nations and the
United States. Given the difficult task before us, we will
indeed need the commitment of all stakeholders if we
hope to succeed. Finally, the initiative is progressive.
Given the rift between the parties, it would be illusory
to think there would be an immediate resumption of
negotiations. Our goal is therefore based on the priority
of halting the negative spiral and taking the necessary
decisions so as to safeguard the two-State solution, to
recreate on that basis a positive political dynamic.

As was announced by the President of the Republic
in Cairo, France itself proposes to organize in Paris in
early June a ministerial meeting, notably by gathering
the members of the Quartet, the permanent members of
the Security Council and the Arab League, as well as
other regional and European stakeholders. The meeting
would have three objectives.

First, as I mentioned, it would be to reaffirm the
support of the international community to the two-State
solution and the major principles of conflict resolution.
We will be guided by the Quartet's report, which will
provide one of the foundations of our actions.

Secondly, an objective would be to focus on
garnering specific commitments by the international
community. To implement those ends, we will establish
working groups so as to produce a comprehensive
package of incentives that could decidedly engender
a special European partnership, the reaffirmation of
the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as economic and
security guarantees.

Thirdly, the objective would be to define a timetable
with specific goals as well as the methodology for
an international conference, which we would like to
convene in the fall. The objective of the conference
would be to provide a foundation for relaunching
the process of credible negotiations within an
internationally agreed upon framework.

Since resolution 181 (II), adopted by the General
Assembly in 1947, the two-State solution has been the
shared guideline for the Organization. France is aware
of the difficulty of the challenge; it is a conflict where
so much goodwill has failed. We, however, believe that
is our collective responsibility not to give up. We must
never give up. Our ambition is not claiming that we alone
are able succeed where others have failed. No, France's
idea is to be a link and to make available our experience
and relationships with the parties in the region so as to
energize the emergence ofa consensual approach. That
method is demanding, but at the same time we believe it
is the best way to make solid progress and to create the
conditions conducive to forging credible negotiations.

With regard to the situation in Syria, France
welcomed the resumption of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva
on 13 April under the aegis of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General. Mr. Staffan de Mistura enjoys our
full support in his ongoing mediation efforts. We also
welcome the constructive approach of the opposition,
which is engaged in the Geneva negotiations despite
provocations from the regime.

We welcome the stated objective of the resumption
of talks concerning the decisive question, among
others, of the political transition and negotiations with
the regime. The high negotiating committee should lead
to the terms of a compromise for the implementation
of the Geneva communique (S/2013/522, annex), in
particular a transition authority within the next six
months, paving the way for the drafting of a new
Constitution by the Syrian people and the holding of
elections in free and fair conditions within 18 months.
Half measures or unilateral arrangements, which the
regime might announce, following fake elections would
have no value, as they would not be the outcome of an
agreement with the opposition, pursuant to resolution
2254 (2015).

We deplore the worsening situation in the Syrian
territory in recent weeks with the observed increase in
attacks by the regime. Those practices demonstrate that
the regime continues those atrocities and violates the
cessation of hostilities, thereby seeking to undermine
the efforts of the international community for a political
solution. Without a political solution, we know there
can be no sustainable peace in Syria.

Finally, hand in hand with the cessation ofhostilities,
France believes that the full, safe and unhindered
access, without any preconditions, to humanitarian
assistance to those in the population impacted is a top
priority. The Syrian regime and Da'esh bear significant
responsibility in the matter. Again, strengthened and
effective pressure should be exerted on the regime.
Those actions of the Syrian regime that undermine the
Geneva negotiations must cease.

Allow me say a few words about Yemen, to express
our hope that the delegations will soon meet around
the negotiations table for the resumption of talks
scheduled to resume today, Monday, 18 April. The
resumption of negotiations could give rise to genuine
hope. We hope that the Security Council can rapidly
send a clear message to the parties to support this new
dynamic and to provide full support to the work of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. The hope for
the future of Yemen needs especially to be encouraged
and supported, given the fact that the humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate. Furthermore, the
terrorist threat in Yemen is increasing every day. The
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula group and Da'esh
are taking advantage of the instability to spread their
influence across the country. A good-faith commitment
on the part of the parties to the conflict to a political
settlement in Yemen and a clear commitment by the
Security Council are therefore all the more urgent.

