Mr. Merafhe (Botswana): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. We are particularly grateful to you for your
initiative in organizing this high-level meeting to
deliberate on an issue of the utmost importance to

Africa and the wider international community. Indeed,
the fact that you are presiding over this meeting is a
clear testimony of your commitment and of the
determination of your country, South Africa, to
consistently use its membership of the Council to
elevate to a global level the African agenda of
achieving durable peace, security and sustainable
development. Our presence here today is a clear
demonstration of our full support for this initiative.

We strongly believe in the instrumentality of the
United Nations and, in particular, of the Security
Council, as the organ vested with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Peace is indivisible. The search for
solutions to conflict is the responsibility of all. It is
therefore imperative and urgent that we assume
collective ownership of these challenges.

Africa has the political will and determination to
work alongside other countries in the prevention of
conflict as well as in the management and resolution of
disputes. In that respect, Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations provides for cooperation with
regional organizations, such as the African Union, in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Therefore, there can be no doubt that, when the
African Union deploys a peacekeeping mission in an
African country, it does so on behalf of the Security
Council and of the international community as a whole.
As the United Nations recognizes the advantages of
regional organizations in responding timeously to an
outbreak of war in a given region, it is necessary that
that recognition be translated into practical measures
that can strengthen this relationship for the common
good. A clearly defined partnership would achieve not
only faster results in alleviating human suffering, but
also better cohesion and alignment and efficient
utilization of resources in peacekeeping operations.

Regional organizations, such as the African
Union, have a crucial role to play in enhancing the
capacity of the United Nations to respond more
timeously and efficiently in the prevention of armed
hostilities. That is vital if we are to save human lives as
well as improve the credibility of the mission of the
United Nations.

The Peace and Security Council of the African
Union embodies the strong resolve of Africa to
prevent, manage and resolve conflicts. It is a
dependable mechanism that the international
community should support and put to good use.

We have to acknowledge that there are capacity
constraints. A lack of adequate resources severely
hampers Africa's ability to successfully execute and
sustain peacekeeping operations. We believe that
financial and material resources can be mobilized to
assist regional organizations in effectively carrying out
peacekeeping operations.

Issues related to peace and security in Africa are
urgent and important. This is not the first time that the
Council has considered this matter at the summit level.
There is a time to talk and negotiate. Clearly, there
should also be a time for action and results.

In that respect, it is our expectation that the
outcome of this meeting will be practical and
measurable. We urge the Council to adopt a draft
resolution that can set in motion concrete measures
aimed at translating into reality our hope that the
necessary support will be provided to the African
Union peacekeeping missions. We strongly believe that
the proposals put forward are realistic and achievable.
We encourage the Council to adopt them. We must now
put in place a granite foundation in the area of conflict
prevention and management, to ensure that the
continuing threat to development and economic
prosperity in Africa is brought to an end.

I wish to conclude by reiterating what I said
before this Council two years ago. Our business as
States Members of the United Nations is to take out of
business the business of making war. We must invest
more resources in the capacity of both the United
Nations and the African Union to make peace.
Mediation and good offices must be strengthened, so
that conflict does not break out because of a poverty of
diplomacy or a lack of capacity to prevent, manage and
resolve disputes.

