The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Germany.

We too welcome today's adoption of the mandate
renewal of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). We
consider the work of the Mission to be vital to ensuring
stability on the ground and providing the space for
the political process to move forward. We want to
explicitly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Western Sahara, Mr. Stewart,
for his commitment to de-escalating tensions in the
area of operations and in closely coordinating with
the parties and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara. He and his Mission must
be granted all rights and the freedom to fulfil their
mandate, which includes being able to meet with the
parties without restrictions.

The fact that resolution 2468 (2019) could not
count on the unanimous support of the Security
Council is regrettable. This should not discourage us
from standing united behind the political process and
the Personal Envoy. I welcome the unanimous support
given to the Personal Envoy in all statements heard
in the Council this morning, including the statements
made by the representatives of South Africa and the
Russian Federation. The Council, its Member States and
other countries with influence should demonstrate that
they are willing to use their weight and that influence
to support President Kohler in his efforts aimed at
bringing to this conflict a realistic, practical and lasting
solution that provides for the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara.

Personal Envoy Kohler was very clear in his
last briefing to the Council. He expects gestures of
good faith by the parties before he convenes a third
round table. In this context, I am also grateful that
the mandate now to clearly include the demand for
additional trust to be built up between the parties.
It is now up to Morocco and the Frente Popular para
la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro
(Frente POLISARIO) to demonstrate political will and
engage in confidence-building measures. The Frente
POLISARIO's destroying its remaining stockpile of
landmines was an encouraging sign. The resumption of
family visits or granting access to independent human
rights observers could also be gestures that would
facilitate dialogue and create trust. This list is anything
but exhaustive.
In the end, we must not forget that Western Sahara
is not an abstract conflict to resolve. It is a conflict that
has affected the lives of thousands of people every day

for many decades.

I now resume my functions as President of

the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list

of speakers.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
