Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin by expressing our pleasure at seeing you,
Madame Foreign Minister, presiding over this meeting
and at seeing Colombia as President of the Security
Council for the current month. I would also like to
express our appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of China and members of his delegation
for their wise stewardship of the Council in the past
month.

First, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report to the Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Also, I would like to
express our satisfaction, because the report contains
this time, after omissions in past reports, direct
references to the humanitarian situation of Palestinian
civilians in the occupied territories. We hope that
future reports will reflect in a more accurate and better
fashion this important dimension.

There is an international consensus on the
existence of a genuine humanitarian crisis endured by
Palestinian civilians living under Israeli occupation.
There is an international consensus that this crisis
arises from the measures and policies enforced by
Israel, the occupying Power. Those measures and
policies have led directly to the death and injury of
civilians and also to destruction of residential homes,
commercial enterprises, agricultural crops and physical
infrastructure on a broad scale. This is in addition to
measures and policies relating to what is called
"access", including extended curfews, isolation of
population centres, and internal and external closures
of communities, all of which have been reported by the
Secretary-General in his reference to the report of
Madame Bertini, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.

We believe that no one is treated like our people
are. What is taking place is the destruction of the entire
Palestinian community, the present and future of an
entire people. Of course, that involves serious
violations and grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, and its
first Additional Protocol, which involves the
commission of committing war crimes and State
terrorism, in addition to systematic violations of the
human rights of the Palestinian individual.

Against that background, therefore, the
international community is dutybound to take specific
measures, including bringing the perpetrators of war
crimes and other crimes, and their authorities, to
justice, to stand trial for their crimes.

We refer now to what others call Israel's right to
self defence. While we acknowledge that Israel has the
right to take all necessary measures to ensure the
prevention of acts of aggression against its citizens
within Israel proper, we must, nonetheless, stress that
Israel has been present in our occupied territories since
1967 as an occupying Power and, therefore, it must
respect the principles of international humanitarian
law. More seriously, Israel is engaged in an ongoing
war crime of colonization of the Palestinian territories
through its settlement activities. We would like to state
that those settlers who have been brought to the
occupied territories are not civilians. Their presence
constitutes the essence of the war crime committed by
the occupying Power. Israel is the last colonial Power
of contemporary times and, thus, must be condemned
and forced to end its current crimes.

The Security Council has, despite repeated
attempts, failed for many years to provide protection
for the Palestinian people and even to adopt the
appropriate international presence in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, which
would certainly have created a different situation for
Palestinian civilians. Nonetheless, that does not exempt
the Council from fulfilling its obligations under the
Charter regarding this issue. Of course, we look
forward to that.

