Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing. I also listened attentively to the statements of
the observer of Palestine and the representative of
Israel.

The current situation in the Middle East remains
complex and volatile. The early end to tension and
confrontation and the achievement of a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East are the shared
wish of the international community. China maintains,
as always, that political negotiations are the only way
to solve the Middle East question. We support
negotiations between Palestine and Israel so that they
can live side by side in peace as two States.

We welcome the launching of proximity talks
between Palestine and Israel, and we urge both sides to
build up their faith in peaceful negotiations and to
solve the issues of security, borders, settlements,
refugees and the status of Jerusalem in a
comprehensive, just and sustainable manner. At this
stage, the international community should make greater
effort to push for a new momentum for negotiations so
as to reinvigorate the Middle East peace process.

The parties concerned must demonstrate political
will, enhance mutual trust, make courageous
compromises and avoid any action that could
undermine mutual trust, obstruct the negotiations or

prejudge the outcome of the negotiations. We oppose
Israel's recent approval of the construction of new
housing in East Jerusalem and its demolition of
Palestinian structures. Not only has this complicated
the situation, but it will also hurt the negotiation
process. We urge Israel to completely cease all
settlement and wall construction in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including the West Bank and East
Jerusalem.

The humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, and the Gaza Strip in particular,
remains grim. Israel's blockade has inflicted great
suffering on more than 1 million residents of Gaza,
whose rights to life and development have been
gravely violated. This state of affairs is unacceptable
and must not be sustained. We call on the international
community to continue to follow these developments
closely and to provide greater assistance to the people
of Gaza.

We welcome the fact that Israel has recently
eased its restrictions on the flow of some humanitarian
aid and commercial goods to Gaza, and we call on
Israel to put a complete end to its blockade of Gaza and
let the people of Gaza resume their normal, dignified
existence and livelihood and regain their space for
development.

The Israeli attack of 31 May against a flotilla
transporting humanitarian aid to Gaza was unfortunate.
Such incidents must not recur. We support fair,
impartial, credible and transparent investigations
conforming to the spirit of the United Nations Charter
and based on the principles established in the
presidential statement of 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9).

As always, China supports Palestine in its just
cause of establishing an independent State. We hope
that all Palestinian parties will work in their long-term
national interest and stay united in their efforts to
establish an independent State of Palestine and ensure
a bright future of peace and steady development. China
supports the early establishment of an independent
State of Palestine through the two-State solution on the
basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative, the principle of land for peace and the
Road Map, so that Palestine and Israel can live side by
side in peace as two States. We will continue to make
greater efforts to this end alongside the international
community.
