Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): Let me begin by joining
others in congratulating you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the

month of May. We look forward to working closely with
you, Madam, and your team in the coming weeks. Let me
also express my appreciation for the clear and insightful
briefing presented today by the High Representative,
Mr. Valentin Inzko. He can rely on Sweden's full and
continued support for his important efforts in support
of Bosnia and Herzegovina going forward.

Sweden aligns itselfwith a statement to be delivered
later on behalf of the European Union (EU).

In October of last year, the Council of the European
Unionreiterated, once again, itsunequivocal commitment
to Bosnia and Herzegovina's EU perspective. Central to
that perspective is its commitment to the EU integration
process and the reform agenda. Unfortunately, the pace
of reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina has stalled since
last year, yielding only very modest results. It is now
crucial that adequate reform of the electoral law take
place in order for elections to happen in October and for
their results to be implemented. We regret that, so far,
there seems to be no real desire to reach a compromise
on that issue.

The implementation of the reform agenda must
be stepped up urgently to put necessary reforms
back on track, with an emphasis on the rule of law
and socioeconomic development. That is essential
for the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as high
unemployment and widespread corruption are
contributing to a worrying trend of young, educated
people leaving the country.

The security situation on the ground remains
relatively calm and stable; nonetheless, there are
worrying developments. The recurring use of separatist,
divisive and nationalistic rhetoric threatens the integrity
and unity of the country. We call on all parties to refrain
from engaging in ethnically motivated disputes and
agendas. Political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must live up to their responsibility in that regard.

Sweden believes that a credible EU perspective,
based on conditionality and progress on own merits, is
one of the most powerful drivers for peace, stability and
prosperity in the Western Balkans. The future of the
region is closely interconnected with the future of the
rest of Europe. Joint challenges require joint solutions.
Therefore, we must strengthen our cooperation to meet
common challenges, such as organized crime, terrorism
and migration.

To move forward, the focus of our efforts should
be on the future and not on the past, both within
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in its relations with its
neighbours. Regional cooperation and reconciliation
are crucial for stability and progress in the region
and beyond. We support the Regional Cooperation
Council in its important work to strengthen good
neighbourly relations in the Western Balkans. To build
peaceful mutual understanding between the countries
of the region, cultural and social differences among
communities must be bridged, not least among children
and youth.

It is also essential to recognize and address the
scars of war for survivors. In that regard, sexual and
gender-based Violence committed during the war must
be addressed. We welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina's
national action plan on women and peace and security,
which should be implemented in an inclusive manner.

We acknowledge the need for discussions on the
reconfiguration of the international presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We remain supportive of the idea of
phasing out the international presence in due course,
when the situation on the ground allows for it. However,
we do not believe that the current situation is sufficiently
stable for a drawing down at the present time.

Since the end of the war in 1995, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, supported by the international
community, not least the European Union, has been
on a journey to build a better future for all its people.
We will continue to support those efforts as Bosnia
and Herzegovina works towards realizing its European
perspective and building a country ofprosperity, peace,
stability and equality for all.

