Mr. Losada (spoke in Spanish): Let me first
thank Egypt, as President of the Security Council, as
well as Spain and the other members of the Council
for providing the European Union the opportunity to
enumerate the many efforts we are making in the Sahel
region towards the construction of what we consider, or
wish to consider, a strategic, multifaceted partnership
between the European Union and the Sahel.

I also wish to thank and commend the briefers
for their outstanding statements early in this meeting,
which have not only enriched the debate on the Sahel,
but also demonstrate the fact that the Sahel is and must
remain high on the international agenda.

(spoke in French)

The Sahel is the theatre of many crises and
represents a multitude of challenges, but - we must
not forget - opportunities as well, such as the Peace
Agreement in Mali signed just one year ago, and the
consolidation of regional cooperation within the Group
of Five (G-5) Sahel. At the same time, however, we
are witnessing growing irregular migration in African
territory and towards Europe, a rise of extremist and
terrorist forces, as Mr. Laborde eloquently described,
and the effects of climate change, including accelerated
desertification in the Sahel region, as laid out by
Ms. Barbut and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ibn Chambas.

I wish to make a point here. At the end of the day,
we must ensure the presence of the State if we are to
fight terrorism, because a vacuum of governance is the
oxygen of terrorism. I shall make four observations in
this regard: the European Union Sahel strategy, Mali,
the Group of Five (G-5) Sahel and the fundamental
question of coordination.

My first point is the strategy and actions of the
European Union. The European Union was the first to
adopt - even before the crisis in Mali - a strategy and
comprehensive approach for the Sahel in 2011, which
gave rise to a regional action plan adopted in April
2015. Its aim is to strengthen our political dialogue
with the subregion and to support the countries of the
Sahel region, now extended to all the countries of the
G-5 Sahel.

The European Union and its member States are
strongly committed to the Sahelian countries, in
particular through a comprehensive approach that
closely links development issues to security issues,
short-term emergency measures and support for
structural reforms in the medium and long terms.
For us, this is very clear. There is no security without
development, but there is no development without
security. The two are very closely linked and form the
very basis of the European Union's 2011 strategy.

The European Union is to allocate more than
€5 billion to the Sahel between 2014 and 2020 through
its various instruments of cooperation and humanitarian
activities. That amount is expected to exceed €8 billion
with the actions of member States included. Other
European Union instruments include the Common
Security and Defence Policy missions such as the
European Union Sahel Capacity-Building Missions in
Mali and the Niger, the European Union Mali Training
Mission, and the actions of member States.

At the Valletta Summit in November 2015, an
emergency trust fund of the European Union was
adopted in favour of stability and the fight against the
root causes of irregular migration and the phenomenon
of displaced persons in Africa. The Sahel and Lake
Chad Basin account is funded to €1 billion. Almost 30
projects were decided in January and April, amounting
to nearly €382 million. On 13 June, the operational
committee will meet to approve new projects. I would
also recall that the terrorist threat in these two regions
is a reality that we can only fight together. It is to
strengthen this cooperation that the European Union
supports the Multinational Joint Task Force in the fight
against Boko Haram. It will, of course, continue to
do so.

Climate change and its impact on the Sahel, as
mentioned today by the Executive Secretary of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification,
is also a clear priority in the approach of the European
Union. Europe was the heart of the historic agreement
reached at the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and
is fully committed to its implementation, particularly
in the Sahel through the strengthening of the resilience
capacities of the vulnerable populations - the Global
Alliance for Resilience Initiative - adaptation to
climate change through the support provided in the
framework of the programmes of the Global Alliance
against Climate Change, and the integrated and
sustainable management of natural resources.

The Sahel countries are increasingly faced with
desertification and land degradation, which threaten
food security, livelihoods, population stability and
security and, more broadly, the economies of these
country, which rely heavily on agriculture. As the
Permanent Representative of Spain put it so well,
this is ground zero of global warming. The European
Union is a major player in the Convention to Combat
Desertification, whose implementation inalienable right
actively supports through a wide range of initiatives,
such as our support for the Great Green Wall, Action
Against Desertification, the RIVER project and other
projects to promote sustainable land management. The
European Union and its member States are determined
to continue to support the Sahel countries in this fight,
which remains essential to the long-term prosperity,
stability and security of the region.

My second point concerns Mali, to which President
Buyoya referred. I take this opportunity to recall the
historic opportunity offered by the implementation of
the peace and reconciliation agreement in Mali. We
must remember that we are far from where we were
a year ago, when there were still clashes among the
various factions. There can be no stability in the Sahek
without stability in Mali. That is therefore a priority
goal. I want to emphasize the strong commitment of
the European Union and its member States in Mali,
alongside the United Nations, using all technical and
financial instruments, and to acknowledge the efforts
being made by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and Operation Barkhane against these many challenges
to peace in Mali and the Sahel.

My third point concerns the G-5 Sahel. The
European Union welcomes the establishment of G-5
Sahel, which we support at the political level. The
Group demonstrates the firm commitment of these
countries to pooling their efforts to confront, together
and in coordination, the many cross-border challenges
in the areas of security and development.

The Summit of Heads of States of the G-5 Sahel,
held on 6 November 2015 in N'Djamena in the presence
of the High Representative and Vice-President of the
European Commission, Federica Mogherini, set the
goals to be achieved with the adoption of a European
Union-G-5 Sahel road map. The road map identifies the
mechanisms for dialogue, consultation and cooperation,
and the main activities and joint initiatives planned for
2016. Security, border management, the fight against
terrorism, the issue of youth and radicalization,
trafficking and organized crime are at the heart of our
shared priorities. I take this opportunity to emphasize
that another meeting between the High Representative
and the Foreign Ministers of the G-5 countries is
scheduled for 17 June in Brussels, where they will
analyse the implementation of our road map and the
way ahead.

My final point concerns the coordination among
the international actors. Coordination, I believe, is at
the centre of our debate. If we count all the various
initiatives and strategies on the Sahel, I believe that
there may now be 16 or even more. It is clear that there
is a real need for coordination. Such coordination
does exist. President Buyoya referred earlier to the
Platform and other institutions. I want to emphasize
the excellent coordination between the European Union
and the United Nations, which is illustrated, inter alia,
by the participation of Mr. Mahamat Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif
and Head of MINUSMA, in the European Union
Political and Security Committee in Brussels, as well
as by many meetings and fruitful exchanges between
the institutions and their special representatives,
in particular Special Representative Ibn Chambas.
There is also very close cooperation with the African
Union and other institutions, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, and with Operation
Barkhane. But we must work very hard within that
coordination; otherwise, we will find ourselves working
against ourselves. It goes without saying that we must
work together.

Finally, it is clear that these challenges can really
be met only in a framework of democratic governance
and human rights, which includes the protection of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, democratic
principles, the rule of law and equal access to justice
and basic social services, the fair and sustainable
management of natural resources, and of course good
governance.

That is the basis of the strategic partnership between
Africa and the European Union. Let me finish by
quoting the High Representative in regard to building a
strategic partnership based on the principle of African
ownership. Her adage sums up our desire to act. "We do
not work for Africa; no, we work with Africa."

The meeting rose at 6.25 pm.
