Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to commend you, Sir, for your brilliant conduct of the
presidency of the Security Council this month and to
express my thanks for your initiative of holding this
open debate on a conflict whose developments and
implications cannot, as we see it, allow any
indifference.

The Government of Chile emphatically reiterates
its rejection of the disproportionate use of force and of
all acts of terrorism and violence against the innocent
civilian population of either party, whatever its origin
or justification. In this context, Chile condemns the
recent Israeli air strike in Gaza, which took 15 innocent
lives, nine of them children's, leaving sorrow and
discouragement in its wake, at a time when the
representatives of the two peoples are working very
seriously to reduce violence and to restore security
agreements. We wish to convey our deep condolences
to the families of the dead and injured. Such acts not
only undermine the mutual confidence that the
international community is trying to restore between
the parties but are also an attack on fundamental human
principles.

Chile associates itself with the majority voice of
the international community, which firmly repudiates
and calls for the immediate cessation of the spiral of
violence in a conflict which has no military solution.
The prolonged suffering of the Palestinian people
prompts us once again to reaffirm the need for a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East on
the basis of resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1397 (2002), the mandate of the Madrid Conference
and the principle of land for peace. Likewise, we
highlight the vital role of the Palestinian Authority,
which is still a legitimate and indispensable party in the
peace process.

The excessive use of force, the demolition of
houses and restrictions on movement, in addition to
policies of internal closures, curfews, targeted killings
and the deportation of families, serve only to intensify
the suffering of the Palestinian people and to
undermine their capacity for economic recovery, thus
making hopes for peace even more remote. The
occupation must end and give way to the peaceful
coexistence of two independent States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side within secure and
internationally recognized borders.

My country is concerned by the grave
humanitarian situation to which the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian cities and camps has led. The situation
has also had environmental repercussions such as land
degradation and damage to water resources. Chile also
concurs with the view of the international majority,
which demands the end of all Israeli settlement activity
in occupied Palestinian territories and the occupied
Syrian Golan. Those activities not only lead to the
destruction of houses and property in order to establish
and expand such settlements; they also restrict the
freedom of movement of the Palestinians, deprive them
of agricultural land and destroy the territorial integrity
of that people.

We View with satisfaction the prospect of an
international conference to address the situation in the
Middle East and the Palestinian question. My country
encourages the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to restore the basic minimum
conditions of mutual respect necessary so that their
participation in negotiations can begin again in
conditions of equality. Chile recognizes and values the
dedicated efforts of the international community and,
most particularly, of the Secretary-General, the
Security Council and the "quartet". The conclusions of
the "quartet" at their recent New York meeting on 16
July refresh our hopes for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

