Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes today's briefing on the events unfolding in
eastern Aleppo. We thank the briefers and commend
them and the brave people that have been working with
them in such difficult circumstances.

Over the past five years, New Zealand has been
highly critical of the Security Council's failure to live
up to its responsibilities with regard to the ongoing
conflict in Syria. We have not been alone in doing so.
For much of that time, the Council has remained largely
silent as the country has unravelled and the fighting
has become more cruel and more brutal. Often, we have
been prevented from acting or even speaking due to
the inability or unwillingness of some of the Council's
most powerful members to move beyond their own
politics and vested interests. That has prevented the
Council from putting in place measures that would
have saved lives. The people of Syria have paid, and
continue to pay, a terrible price for that inaction, and so
do their neighbours.

New Zealand has been working with Spain and
Egypt to find a way through that impasse. We have
sought to cut through the politics and the polemics
and focus on agreeing on action that can make a
practical difference on the ground. We have tried to
work constructively with all key players to that end.
The draft resolution that we put forth yesterday is a
manifestation of those efforts. Our objectives in putting
forth the draft resolution are the same that have guided
our engagement on this issue since joining the Council,
and the same that led my Prime Minister to convene a
high-level meeting on the issue during our September
presidency: to reduce the violence, restore the ceasefire,
enable humanitarian assistance to reach those most in
need and create space for the resumption of political
talks on an end to the conflict.
A key focus has necessarily been on seeking
to address the grave situation unfolding in Aleppo.
Over the past few months, we have seen the presence
of a few hundred Al-Nusra Front terrorists in eastern
Aleppo used to justify an all-out attack on more than
250,000 civilians. Every hospital in opposition-held
areas has been destroyed. No humanitarian assistance
has been allowed in since July, despite several pauses
in the airstrikes. We have seen indiscriminate attacks
on eastern Aleppo that have killed and injured many in
western Aleppo. In the past few weeks, it has become
clear that the Syrian Government has eschewed efforts
to establish a ceasefire and resume political talks in
favour of pursuing a military outcome. The result is
another humanitarian catastrophe. We urgently need to
halt the hostilities in Aleppo in order to get humanitarian
assistance to those who so desperately need it. We call
on all parties to work in coordination with the United
Nations to ensure humanitarian assistance is delivered
to those who remain in eastern Aleppo.

We are disappointed that the parties have not yet
been able to agree on terms to implement the United
Nations four-point plan. We also need urgent action to
protect those fleeing eastern Aleppo and assurances
regarding the fate of those taken into custody by the
Syrian Government. The draft resolution that New
Zealand, Egypt and Spain submitted to Council
members yesterday seeks to start a process to put the
protection of civilians at our highest priority. The text
represents the minimum that is required for a credible
response from the Council, and we urge all Council
members to support it. However, it will mean little
unless we see urgent changes in the behaviour of the
parties themselves, including some at this table.

Some may argue that our text addresses yesterday's
issues and is no longer relevant to the situation on the
ground, especially in Aleppo. An immediate ceasefire
in Aleppo would undoubtedly address the most
pressing humanitarian needs to get desperately needed
humanitarian and medical assistance to traumatized
civilians and to allow those civilians who want to get
out to get out safely to a destination of their choice.

Some may argue that the implementation of our
resolution would give aid to the terrorists. We cannot
exclude the possibility that terrorist groups may try
to use a ceasefire to their advantage, but despite the
rhetoric of terrorism that is regularly heaped on this
conflict, the conflict between the Syrian Government
and its people is not fundamentally about terrorism.
Terrorism is an incident of the conflict, not its cause
or rationale. In sacrificing the lives of hundreds of
civilians and putting hundreds of thousands into misery
and suffering cannot be justified by waving the banner
of counter-terrorism.

Like Staffan de Mistura, we do not accept that the
military advances into Aleppo will lead to the objective
towards which the Council has allegedly been working
for so many years - a political settlement leading to
a stable and unified Syria, living at peace with itself
and its neighbours. While our immediate focus must
be on saving lives, we urge all parties to the conflict to
recommit themselves to a political solution and a return
to talks and a pathway towards sustainable peace and
national reconciliation.

