Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): To echo others, I would
like to begin on a sad note by extending my sincere
condolences to our colleagues from Afghanistan and the
United Kingdom, whose countries have once again been
the targets of cowardly and senseless terrorist attacks.

At the outset, let me thank the Bolivian presidency
for convening the today's meeting on such important
topic. The World Economic Forum's 2017 Global
Risks Report ranks water crises as a top-10 global risk.
The report links potential water crises to a cluster of
environmental risks, notably extreme weather events,
failures of climate change mitigation and adaptation, as
well as to migration and conflicts.
As of today, nearly 1 billion people in the world
are in danger of experiencing shortages of food and
water. Moreover, 90 per cent of the world's current
population live in countries that share rivers, lakes or
aquifers with other countries. Those transboundary
watercourses are overexploited and vulnerable to
pollution. That all serves to underline the fact that
transboundary water cooperation is essential for
maintaining national, regional and global stability.
There is no doubt that many countries and peoples,
similar to thousands of years ago, are facing fierce
competition over access to water resources. In regions
where water is both scarce and in high demand, the
problem may trigger a significant decrease in economic
growth, leading to uneven distribution of limited water
resources, lower living standards, rising unemployment
and humanitarian needs. All this may result in forced
migration or even cause armed conflicts.

We fully share the view that such current trends
clearly require that Governments, the United Nations
system, civil society, the private sector and local
authorities work together to address holistically and in
a comprehensive manner this challenge and mitigate
the associated risks.

To achieve this outcome, Ukraine advocates
strengthening river basin cooperation and international
partnerships with regard to sustainable water
management and environmental protection as well as
the transfer of affordable technologies on water and
energy. We also endorse the developmental approach
of acquiring technical knowledge and technological
capacity through education and the relevant research
activities, particularly in developing countries.

We are convinced that progress in upholding peace
and stability in the area of water security also depends
on adequate management of the growing demand
for resources under the conditions of reduced supply
combined with population growth. To minimize the gap
between supply and demand in access to fresh water, the
international community will require effective security
and developmental strategies for resource management
and conservation.

We believe that creating effective legal and political
frameworks is crucial for preventing conflict and
fostering cooperation on transboundary water issues. It
is only natural that many, if not all, colleagues around
this table referred in their statements to successful
examples of regional cooperation in this field.

As a State party to the United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe Convention on the Protection
and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and
International Lakes, or Water Convention, adopted
in 1992, Ukraine supports and promotes knowledge-
and experience-sharing as regards the water and
security nexus.

In this regard, it is also important to note that
together with 13 other countries and the European
Union, my country is actively working on the sustainable
and equitable water management of the Danube river
through the International Commission for the Protection
of the Danube River. That organization has grown into
one of the largest and most active international bodies
with river-basin management expertise in the world; it
is an excellent example of regional water diplomacy.

Another good example is the involvement of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
in water-related environmental and security issues in
Central Asia, a useful tool of preventive diplomacy.

We firmly believe that our desire and will to protect
the planet must be translated into action. For this,
States Members of the United Nations need to move
from declaring their aspirations to taking concrete
steps to secure the future we want for present and
future generations.

