The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

Whether international sanctions succeed or fail
depends on the difference between words and deeds.
Sanctions are just words on a page unless they are
effectively enforced. Russia originally called for
today's meeting to discuss the implementation of
sanctions against North Korea. Then its representatives
changed their minds. But we thought that the issue
was important enough to bring forward and have a
briefing. The United States welcomes the chance to
examine the difference between words and deeds. We
welcome the opportunity to see whether or not Security
Council efforts to eliminate North Korea's nuclear- and
ballistic-missile programmes are being honoured and
enforced and if not, why.

The measures we adopted last year are something
the Security Council should be very proud of. We
achieved historic unity by implementing historic
sanctions. The Security Council unanimously adopted
three major sanctions packages, thereby creating one
of the most restrictive sanctions regimes in history.
Together, we have also implemented sanctions against
dozens of specific North Korean individuals and entities
supporting the regime's nuclear- and ballistic-missile
programmes. All of us pledged a ban on North Korea's
exports and 30 per cent ofits imports. All ofus promised
to uphold the expulsion of all North Korean overseas
labourers and stop all joint ventures. We supported a
cap on North Korea's imports of oil and other refined
petroleum products at 500,000 barrels a year, and a
total ban on the export of North Korean coal. We all
promised to expel North Korean overseas financial
representatives. We agreed that North Korea should
not be able to obtain chemical and biological weapons-
related materials, and we all agreed to stop international
scientific engagement with North Korea. Such sanctions
were put in place for a very specific reason - to cut
off funding and materials for North Korea's nuclear-
and ballistic-missile programmes - because we know
that the cash revenue going to North Korea is used to
build its weapons programmes, not to help the North
Korean people.

The difficult and very sensitive talks with North
Korea are ongoing. The Trump-Kim summit has set us
on a path to complete denuclearization. But we are not
there yet and, until we get there, we must not ease the
powerful worldwide sanctions that are in place.

It is important to note that, like the rest ofthe Security
Council, Russia voted in favour of all of the sanctions
Ijust described. Despite that, and despite not having
yet come close to the achievement of denuclearization,
Russia is now asking to ease the sanctions. Russia
originally requested today's meeting for the purpose of
criticizing the United States for blocking rail projects it
wants to pursue with North Korea. Russia had planned
on asking the Security Council to begin to remove
sanctions on North Korea so it could pursue a project
for its own economic benefit. The question one should
ask is: Why? Why after voting in favour of sanctions
11 different times is Russia now backing away from
them? We know the answer. It is because Russia has
been cheating and has now been caught.

Despite its repeated support for United Nations
sanctions, Russia is actively working to undermine
the enforcement of the Security Council's sanctions on
North Korea. Its violations are not one-offs. They are
systematic. Russia has not simply looked the other way
as its nationals and entities engage in activities explicitly
prohibited by United Nations sanctions; Russia has

engaged in a concerted campaign in the Security Council
to cover up violations of sanctions, whether committed
by Russia or citizens of other States. The United States
has evidence of consistent and wide-ranging Russian
violations, which should offend every current and
former member of the Security Council that knows how
difficult it was to gain passage of those sanctions. It
should offend every country that has felt the looming
threat of North Korean nuclear weapons.

One of the main ways North Korea cheats is
through ship-to-ship transfers of banned items, mainly
oil but increasingly coal and other goods. To evade port
inspections, oil tankers come together on the high seas.
North Koreans use hoses to transfer refined petroleum
products to their ships to bring back home. Many tankers
are willing to provide oil to make a quick buck. One
Russian vessel - the Patriot - was captured on film
transferring refined petroleum in April this year to a
North Korean-controlled vessel that is United Nations-
listed. The Patriot helped the North Koreans evade
sanctions by allowing them to obtain oil on the high
seas without having to dock in a port, since the North
Korean boat was subject to a global port entry ban.

With our allies and partners, the United States
has evidence of many more ships we have uncovered
providing oil illegally through ship-to-ship transfers.
Just this year, the United States tracked at least 148
instances of oil tankers delivering refined petroleum
products obtained through illegal ship-to-ship transfers.
We estimate that North Korea obtained at least more
than 800,000 barrels of refined petroleum products in
the first eight months of the year. That is 160 per cent
of the 2018 annual cap of 500,000. In reality, we think
it obtained four times the annual quota in the first eight
months of the year.

We presented evidence of those violations to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), which tracks sanctions implementation, but
Russia prevented the Committee from declaring that
North Korea had exceeded its oil quota. Today, North
Korea continues to illegally procure refined petroleum
products with the help of Russia. Not only that, when
we have pursued United Nations designation of the
Patriot and other North Korean, Russian and other
country flag ships that have been found to be illegally
transferring oil, Russia has consistently blocked those
designations in the sanctions committee.

It is not just on the high seas that Russia is aiding
sanctions evasion. When North Korea assassinated Kim
Jong-nam with VX, a deadly nerve agent, the United
States moved to strengthen United Nations controls
on the flow of North Korean chemical and biological

weapons technology. Russia agreed with us in the
Security Council but turned around and again blocked
the sanctions committee from updating its 12-year-old
sanctions list, which is critical to preventing the flow
of dangerous weapons of mass destruction-related
materials to North Korea. When North Korea began
developing intercontinental ballistic missiles to target
the United States and other nations with nuclear
weapons, we tried to stop it, but even when it came
to denying North Korea the means to deliver nuclear
weapons, the Russians resisted the enforcement of
the sanctions.

The list goes on. Russia agreed with the rest of
the Security Council one year ago to sanction a North
Korean operative in Moscow who was raising money
for weapons programmes, but it never expelled that
operative. And when it came time to act, not only did
Russia fight to allow the operative to remain in its
country, but it is also fighting for him to retain access to
his Moscow bank account. For what? Is it to finance his
illegal operations in Russia, in violation of the United
Nations sanctions? Step by step, sanction by sanction
and time and again, Russia works across the board to
undermine the sanctions regime.

Last month, the independent Panel of Experts on the
implementation of North Korean sanctions submitted
its biannual report to the sanctions committee. The
report contained evidence of multiple Russian sanctions
violations. We have seen and read the report, but when
the Panel submitted the report to the Security Council
last week, we noticed something deeply troubling.
The evidence of Russian violations that was detailed
in the earlier report was missing. It has been removed
from the open section of the report. Apparently, Russia
threatened to prevent the release of the report unless
its demands to hide the evidence of its violations were
met. To our deep regret, the Panel agreed. That Russian
interference was so egregious that the United States
had no choice but to prevent the publication of the
tainted report.

The United Nations panel of experts reporting
process is our most valuable tool for ensuring that
sanctions are implemented fully and effectively. It
gives the Security Council and the world an impartial
and independent means of ensuring accountability for
violators, and a warning to anyone who is considering
violation sanctions in the future.

We have seen the Russian tendency to kill the
messengers of inconvenient truths before. They did
not like it when the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) concluded that Russia's client, the
Al-Assad regime, used chemical weapons against its
own people in Syria, so theyjust killed the Mechanism.
Now, Russia has succeeded in discrediting the United
Nations independent panel reporting process because
it called out its violations. Russian corruption is like
a virus. It is impeding our ability to achieve complete
denuclearization in North Korea. It has now spread to
the sanctions reporting process. If we are not careful,
the sickness will make its way into the integrity and
effectiveness of the Security Council itself.

Finally, let us look at why Russia is so focused on
developing railways with North Korea - so focused
that it will tell us today that we should remove
sanctions. Russia's far-eastern region has few economic
opportunities, but coal is one of them. Exporting coal
has not been easy without a warm-water seaport.
Russians have therefore been leasing the North Korean
port of Rason. It poured a lot of money into building
that port. We knew it was important for Russia, so we
have exempted it five times since 2016.

But that is not enough for Russia. It wants sanctions
relief so that it can connect its Trans-Siberian Railway
to North Korea to ultimately reach a global port in
South Korea. The problem is that it is not time yet to
relieve the pressure on North Korea - no matter how
lucrative it is for Russia. As we have all agreed, that
time comes with denuclearization, and not before. Now
is the wrong time to undo all the good work that we
have done in the Security Council. Now is the wrong
time to ease sanctions pressure on the North Korean
regime by repealing sanctions, and it is never the right
time to allow cheating to go unpunished. Every time
the Security Council overlooks sanctions violations,
and every time we allow the Russians to bury evidence
of violations, we remove incentives for Pyongyang to
end its nuclear programme.

The evidence we have presented today leaves
Russia with a choice; it is binary - either it wants
sanctions to succeed or it does not, and either it wants
to deprive the Pyongyang Government of the means to
finance its illegal nuclear weapons system or it does
not. Unfortunately, I think that we know the answers
to those questions. Either way, the Security Council
can no longer be indifferent to Russia's actions. Russia
must cease its violations of North Korean sanctions. It
must end its concerted effort to cover up evidence of
sanctions violations.

The final and fully verified denuclearization
of North Korea is the international community's
overriding objective. The evidence no longer allows
us to take Russia's word that it shares that objective.
Russia must now demonstrate by its deeds that it shares
our objective in North Korea. The United States calls
on all members of the Security Council to join us in
demanding that the Panel of Experts submit its original
report to the Security Council. Every member of the
Council should go on the record on that request. Nothing
less than the integrity of the United Nations and our
unified approach to North Korea hang in the balance.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

