Mr. Dah (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the adoption of resolution 2414
(2018), on the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) until 31 October 2018.

My delegation voted in favour of the resolution,
which clearly sets out the framework and the goals
of the mandate handed down by the Security Council
to the Secretary-General so as to enable him to take
concrete action through negotiations, with a view to
breaking the political impasse on the conflict, which has
lasted for far too long. This will require a renewed and
determined commitment on the part of the stakeholders
to take ownership ofthe political process, with a view to
holding a fifth round of negotiations under the auspices
of the Secretary-General.

In that respect, we welcome the serious and
credible efforts made by the Kingdom of Morocco to
achieve a definitive resolution to the conflict through
its autonomy proposal. My country welcomes the
commitment of the Secretary-General and his Personal
Envoy and strongly encourages them to continue
working towards promoting a framework for dialogue
that could lead to peace in Western Sahara.

We welcome also the invitation extended by
Security Council to neighbouring States, which is
aimed at securing their genuine involvement in making
a fruitful contribution to the political process, so as to
find a definitive solution to the crisis that would benefit
all of the countries of the region.

We wish also to underscore the importance, in
line with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), of
involving women and young people in the framework
of negotiations, as called for by the Security Council.

MINURSO's key role was reaffirmed by the
Council, specifically as concerns compliance with
the ceasefire and existing agreements as well as the
maintenance of security through the region as a whole.
My country hopes that on the basis of the straightforward
provisions of this new resolution, negotiations will
begin, in a spirit of frankness, between the stakeholders
in their quest for compromise, with a view to reaching a
definitive resolution to the conflict.

