The President (interpretation from Arabic): Members
of the Security Council will recall that the date and agenda
for this meeting of the Security Council were agreed upon
by members of the Council in its prior consultations.

The agenda was adopted.

Maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict
peace-building

The President (interpretation from Arabic): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Croatia,
Egypt, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Malaysia, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, the Republic of
Korea, Slovakia, the Sudan, Tunisia and Ukraine, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baali (Algeria),
Mr. Petrella (Argentina), Ms. Wensley (Australia), Mr.
Sucharipa (Austria), Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh),
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Fowler
(Canada), Mr. Simonovic (Croatia), Mr. Elaraby
(Egypt), Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia), Miss Durrant (Jamaica), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia), Mr. Dos
Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Gambari (Nigeria), Mr.
Kolby (Norway), Mr. Kamel (Pakistan), Mr. Lee See-
young (Republic of Korea), Mr. Varso (Slovakia), Mr.
Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) and Mr.
Yel'chenko (Ukraine) took seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.


