Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our delegation is pleased to welcome you,
Mr. Foreign Minister, to the presidency of the Security
Council. Your presence in this Chamber, along with the
participation of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
representatives of a broad spectrum of leading regional
organizations in this meeting, are convincing proof of
the importance of today's topic.

We agree with the Secretary-General and
previous speakers that, while cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations has increased to a truly unprecedented
level, additional efforts could be made to further
intensify it. In our view, the threats and challenges now
facing us can be overcome only through a
comprehensive and collective approach and in strict
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations.

An important element in further efforts to
increase the effectiveness of our world Organization, as
the central multilateral institution responsible for
maintaining international peace and security, is the
continued growth of practical cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations, including the
Security Council, and regional and other
intergovernmental organizations. Such interaction, as
clearly stipulated in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), must continue to
be based on the solid foundation of the Charter, in
particular its Chapter VIII, and on the need for careful
observance of the basic principles and criteria of
international peacekeeping at all stages of conflict
prevention and settlement and post-conflict
peacebuilding.

That involves, first and foremost, the indisputably
important responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Ideally, all regional or coalition peacekeeping
operations should be authorized by and held
accountable to the Council. That condition should
become binding in cases in which the mandates of such
operations include elements of enforcement measures.

There have been many positive experiences in the
area of cooperation between the Council and its
regional partners, which we have already discussed.
Here, I am thinking in particular of the European
Union, NATO, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of American
States, the Caribbean Community and a number of
other subregional organizations, including the League
of Arab States, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, the African Union (AU), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). Obviously, the experience acquired in this
area demonstrates the need to accord priority to
political and diplomatic means of conflict prevention
and settlement, with a key role to be played by
Africans themselves. The peacekeeping efforts of the
AU, ECOWAS, SADC and IGAD, as well as the
mediation missions conducted by prominent African
political leaders, in a broad range of situations, have
made it possible to make important progress in
strengthening regional stability.
The Russian Federation has consistently stated
that the efforts of African organizations should be fully
supported by the authority of the Security Council and
by the logistical and technical capacities of the United
Nations. Particularly timely, in that context, are the
efforts made in Darfur by the African Union Mission in
the Sudan and the preparations for deploying the
hybrid peacekeeping force established pursuant to
resolution 1769 (2007) in Darfur by the end of the year.
Of course, it is important to have feedback. Here, I am
referring in particular to the need to ensure that
regional operations are effectively planned and
executed and that they are held sufficiently accountable
to the Security Council. That is particularly relevant in
those cases in which the Council not only supports
such operations, but also authorizes them through its
decisions.

This year's follow-up visit to Africa by members
of the Security Council and our comprehensive
meetings with AU leaders have enabled us to discuss
virtually the entire range of acute crisis situations on
the continent, as well as issues related to the future
development of the Council's practical cooperation
with the African Union Peace and Security Council to
resolve the most critical problems threatening peace
and security in Africa. The Council's visit has
established a mechanism for regular exchanges of
views between the two organs regarding issues of
mutual concern to them.

Peacekeepers from the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) are also making a substantial
contribution to conflict settlement in the post-Soviet
space. In particular, together with the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia, they are continuing to
support security and stability in the area affected by the
Georgian-Abkhaz conflict. The Russian Federation
intends to continue to vigorously promote long-term
cooperation between the United Nations and the CIS,
particularly in the area of peacekeeping.

In that context, the cooperation developing
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO) - which has been
working intensively to establish its own peacekeeping
potential, including for use in United Nations
peacekeeping operations - has great potential. The
CSTO is also making a significant contribution to
international efforts aimed at the reconstruction of
Afghanistan. Under CSTO auspices, effective
mechanisms have been at work for several years to
combat the northern route of the drug trade from
Afghanistan to Europe, and Operation Canal has been
set up to establish a permanent counter-narcotics belt
along Afghanistan's borders.

In ensuring stability and security in the Eurasian
region, an important role is being played by the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, whose members
have expressed a desire to cooperate with the United
Nations in a host of relevant areas, including, in
particular, combating international terrorism and the
illegal-drug trade and assisting in post-conflict
reconstruction in Afghanistan. In that regard, we
continue to endorse the recommendation, set out in the
2005 World Summit Outcome, that regional
organizations with conflict prevention or peacekeeping
capacities should consider making those capacities part
of the United Nations Standby Arrangements System.

We are convinced that the coming together of
regional partners and the United Nations will continue.
On the one hand, we expect that regional and
subregional organizations will more actively make
their resources and comparative advantages available.
On the other hand, the United Nations, including the
Security Council, should consolidate coordination and
interaction with these organizations, keeping in mind
the principles of reasonable division of labour and
respect for the prerogatives of the United Nations and
its Security Council.

The collective efforts for rapid social and
economic rehabilitation of countries emerging from
crises is an integral part of the international strategy to
secure peace and the non-renewal of conflict by
establishing safeguards against renewal of conflicts.
Here, a coordinating role should be played by the
Peacebuilding Commission, whose agenda already
includes Burundi and Sierra Leone.

We welcome the practice of holding regular high-
level meetings between the Secretary-General and the
leaders of the regional organizations on an increasingly
broad and varied joint agenda. In addition to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding tasks, we have added
countering the spread of weapons of mass destruction,
the illegal flows of small arms and light weapons,
settling other destabilizing transborder problems,
combating drug trafficking and organized crime. In this
context, it would be useful to have an official
structuring of agreements between the respective
secretariats of the United Nations and its regional
partners.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to the entire
Indonesian delegation for preparing a good draft
statement, which will be adopted today with our
support.

