Mr. Steinmeier (Germany): We have been
speaking of the many conflicts haunting the Middle
East, especially the terrible Syrian war, now in its fifth
year. Yes, there is much we have to do, and there is
much we have failed to achieve so far. But let me start
with one thing that we have achieved, and that is the
nuclear agreement with Iran. After more than 10 years
of negotiation, that agreement has shown that diplomacy
can overcome even the deepest rift if we give it a
chance. It is crucial that we now use that momentum,
that flicker of hope, to work towards a political solution
in Syria as well.

Today's debate has revealed some significant
differences, but it has also highlighted common
interests. First and foremost, we must engage in a
broad and meaningful political process before the final
collapse of all the remaining State structures - which
the devastated country of Syria will have to rebuild one
day - and before the vicious ideology of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) can gain more
ground amid the ruins of Syrian society. In order to find
a starting point for that political process, we can build
on decisions that have been unanimously adopted here
in the Security Council, and in particular resolution
2139 (2014) of last year.

Today the Council must join forces to see that
the resolution is implemented, including ensuring
humanitarian access and banning barrel bombs. The
standing channels of communication proposed by
Foreign Minister Lavrov today should also be used in
that effort, and I understood Secretary Kerry to have
been hinting at the same direction when he offered
de-confliction talks. Based on such cooperation, we
must then explore together how best to pave the way
for a peaceful and inclusive political transition in
Syria. Building on extensive consultations, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura,
has laid out a road map for the process that Germany
wholeheartedly supports.
Germany does not want to see the Security Council
divided on a matter of such importance. In the face of
unspeakable human suffering, we in the United Nations
all need to live up to our responsibility. I therefore urge
the Council to ensure that we all support an initiative
driven by the United Nations for a political transition
in Syria.

