Mr. Huseynli (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
and timely open debate on children and armed conflict.
Let me also commend the active role and leadership of
Luxembourg in advancing this issue in the work of the
Security Council.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative Leila Zerrougui, the Executive
Director of UNICEF and the other speakers for their
presentations and insights and for sharing experiences
that can hardly leave anyone in this Chamber indifferent
to the gross violations committed against children and
their unspeakable suffering during armed conflict. We
join the call for efforts to be stepped up at all levels to
reduce the grave impact of conflicts on children and
upholding justice by bringing to account those who
perpetrate crimes against children.

Azerbaijan remains deeply concerned by the
negative impact of conflict on children and strongly
condemns all violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights
law committed against them. Azerbaijan's principled
position with regard to the protection of civilians,
including children, in situations of armed conflict
is based on a strong interest in contributing to the
protection of human right and fundamental freedoms
and to the achievement of sustainable peace and
development. In doing so, my country proceeds from
its practical experience in addressing the devastating
consequences of serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law committed during
the war waged against my country. It is a well-known
fact that today Azerbaijan continues to suffer from the
presence of high numbers of refugees and displaced
persons, many of whom are children.

The consistent attention of the international
community, in particular the United Nations, to the
problem has been crucial in developing and applying
measures to prevent and respond to violations and
abuses committed against children. Azerbaijan remains
committed to continuing to support the activities of
existing United Nations mechanisms aimed at ensuring
more effective protection for the rights of children and
improving the situation of children affected by armed
conflict.

Important steps have been taken in a number of
situations of armed conflict to achieve accountability
for grave violations of children's rights, including the
development of the international legal framework.
However, serious challenges remain. Among them is the
continued lack of proper attention and responses at both
the international and regional levels to the violation of
international humanitarian and human rights law in
some situations of armed conflict.

It is obvious that more resolute and targeted
measures are required to protect children in situations
of armed conflict and to end impunity for the most
serious crimes of concern to the international
community perpetrated against children. Combatting
impunity is important not only for the purposes of
prosecuting such crimes and bringing those responsible
to justice, but also for ensuring sustainable peace, truth
and reconciliation.

Particular consideration should be given to
internally displaced children in terms of ensuring their
inalienable right of return and to the implications of
illegal policies and practices in situations of foreign
occupation for the protection of children's rights. In
addition, determining the fate of children taken hostage
and reported missing in situations of armed conflict,
as well as searching for them and their reunification
with families are other layers of the problem requiring
urgent action.

I would like to conclude by welcoming the adoption
of resolution 2143 (2014) today, which demonstrates
the Council's continued determination to address the
problem in a comprehensive and by focusing on its most
salient aspects.

