Mr. Feltman: I brief the Council today after what
has been another tumultuous and deadly month in the
Middle East. Steadily increasing tensions and swelling
violence have continued to affect the region. The
conflict between Israel and the Palestinians continues
to threaten further escalation. As we warned the
Council last month, if this occurs it may have highly
damaging and potentially irreversible consequences for
both parties and for the two-State solution.

The Palestinians are facing acute fiscal challenges
that must be urgently addressed. On 4 February, the
Israeli Government announced that, for a second
month, it would withhold the transfer of the tax
revenues it collects on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority in retaliation for the Palestinian accession to
the International Criminal Court. This brings the total
withheld to over $200 million. As a stopgap measure,
the Palestinian Authority has since borrowed funds
from private banks to pay a portion of the salaries of its
civil servants. This approach is neither sufficient nor
sustainable.

As reported by the International Monetary Fund on
29 January, Palestinian economic activity contracted
in 2014 for the first time since 2006. Paralysing the
Palestinian Authority's ability to conduct essential
Government business, including functions related
to health services and law and order, is in no one's
interest. Israel's action is a violation of its obligations
under the Paris Protocol of the Oslo Accords, and we
again call for an immediate reversal of this decision.
The Secretary-General reiterates his call on both sides
to refrain from taking unilateral steps or actions that
may further aggravate the current divisions.
Against a backdrop of growing disillusionment
with the prospects for a return to dialogue, the Middle
East Quartet met at the principals level on 8 February in
Munich to examine ways to reverse the current negative
trend. The Quartet prioritized the urgent resumption of
negotiations and a strengthening of its engagement to
prepare for a revival of the peace process, including
through regular and direct outreach to the Arab States.
It also called for the acceleration of reconstruction in
Gaza.

This engagement is an important and timely
development and should be supported. But we must be
clear that, absent concrete actions and a clear unity of
purpose on the part of the international community, the
Quartet will not be able to play an effective role. Even
more imperative, however, is the need to obtain a firm
commitment from Israelis and Palestinians alike to put
aside their deeply entrenched mistrust and demonstrate
the courage and leadership that is required at this time.

Turning to Gaza, the Secretary-General continues
to be very concerned about the fragile security situation,
the volatile political dynamics and the persistently
slow pace of reconstruction. In a clear indication of
mounting tensions on the ground and the corresponding
risks to United Nations personnel and operations in
Gaza, violent demonstrators forced their way into the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process in Gaza on 28 January,
in protest of the suspension by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) of its cash assistance programme,
which supports repairs and provides rental subsidies to
refugee families. While, fortunately, no one was injured
in the incident, the Special Coordinator temporarily
withdrew United Nations monitors in light of this
unacceptable incident until assurances were received
that such attacks would not be repeated. Pending the
much-needed full transfer of security responsibilities
to the Palestinian Authority, we continue to hold Hamas
fully responsible for the security and safety of all United
Nations personnel and operations in Gaza.

The Secretary-General is also alarmed at the
reported failed firing by Palestinian militants ofrockets
at Israel on 19 January and 16 February, as well as their
renewed test firing at sea of some 37 rockets during the
reporting period. Reportedly, militants also attempted
to smuggle material that could be used to produce
weapons. These are extremely dangerous developments.
The Israel Defense Forces reportedly shot and injured
two Palestinians who were approaching the Gaza
border fence on 16 and 23 January, and another two
Palestinians were injured on 21 January after the Israeli
navy fired warning shots at their boats.

Meanwhile, the oft-repeated political challenges in
Gaza endure and represent clear dangers for stability.
They include the moribund effort to consolidate
ceasefire arrangements and the absence of genuine
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, including the
outstanding issues of unpaid salaries to Gaza public
sector employees and civil service reform.

Absent the full reopening of the crossing points
within the framework of resolution 1860 (2009), the
temporary Gaza reconstruction mechanism continues
to provide a measure of hope that genuine progress can
be achieved in Gaza. Notwithstanding the difficulties,
the mechanism is now functioning and delivering
concrete results. As of today, more than 75,000
individuals have been cleared to receive construction
material for shelter repairs and more than 47,000 have
already procured construction material to date. The
processing of approximately 50 construction projects
through the Palestinian Authority is ongoing, including
housing projects, water networks and schools. Ofthose,
18 projects have been approved to date.

Yet, despite the mechanism's continued expansion,
four months after the Cairo conference donors have
yet to fulfil the vast majority of their pledges. Frankly,
that is unacceptable. It cannot continue if we hope to
avoid another escalation in Gaza. In that respect, both
the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the
League ofArab States, the Foreign Ministers ofNorway
and Egypt through a joint letter, and the Quartet all
made appeals to donors to honour their financial
commitments to Gaza without further delay. UNRWA
urgently needs $100 million for its cash assistance
programme. Support is also needed for United Nations
agencies tha are providing vital humanitarian assistance
to the non-refugee population. On 12 February, the
United Nations, in partnership with the Government
of Palestine, launched the strategic response plan for
2015, which aims to address the humanitarian needs of
1.6 million Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank.
The plan requests $705 million, 75 per cent of which is
for Gaza.

While acknowledging Egypt's legitimate security
concerns, I also reiterate the Secretary-General's call
for Egyptian authorities to reopen the Rafah crossing.
The previously reported humanitarian concerns persist,
with some 1,400 patients currently awaiting hospital
care referral to Egypt and with over 15,000 people
otherwise registered and unable to exit Gaza.

The Secretary-General is concerned about the
continued clashes in the occupied West Bank during
the reporting period. Israeli security forces conducted
approximately 470 search-and-arrest operations,
resulting in the arrests of some 535 Palestinians.
Reportedly, one Palestinian man was shot and killed
by Israeli security forces on 31 January, after throwing
Molotov cocktails towards Israeli vehicles in the area.

Some 156 Palestinians were injured, including
31 children and 5 women. Palestinians injured four
members of the Israeli security forces, including one
during a demonstration. On 21 January, a Palestinian
man stabbed 12 passengers on a commuter bus in Tel
Aviv - three were seriously injured. Clashes between
Palestinians and Israeli settlers continued to take place
on an almost daily basis, resulting in eight Palestinians
injured, including four children, and nine Israeli settlers
injured, including one child. The Secretary-General
strongly condemns all those acts of violence.

The Israeli authorities continued to demolish
Palestinian structures in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. A total of 62 structures,
33 of them residences, were demolished, leading to
the displacement of approximately 88 Palestinians,
including 49 children. I urge Israel to cease such
demolitions and the displacement of Palestinians in East
Jerusalem and Area C, and to facilitate international
assistance to vulnerable communities. Area C is
fundamental to the contiguity of the West Bank and the
viability of Palestine and its economy.

We are deeply disappointed by Israeli authorities'
decision to issue on 30 January tenders for the
construction of about 450 residential units in West
Bank settlements, at a time when the situation is
extremely volatile. As the Secretary-General has
repeatedly expressed, settlement activity is illegal
under international law and an obstacle to peace. It
should be halted and reversed.

The Council was briefed extensively on the situation
in Syria by Special Envoy de Mistura yesterday. Allow,
therefore, me to turn to recent developments on the
Golan and Lebanon.

On 18 January, personnel of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force observed an air
violation from the Alpha side across the ceasefire
line, which coincided with a reported Israeli airstrike
that killed six Hizbullah elements and a high-ranking
Iranian officer on the Golan in Syria. The Secretary-
General expressed his concern about the violation of
the 1974 Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli
and Syrian forces and the potential consequences of the
reported incident. He called on all concerned to refrain
from any action that could undermine the stability of the
area, in full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries in the region and in adherence
to all the relevant Security Council resolutions. On
27 January, rockets were fired from the Bravo side
across the ceasefire line. The Israel Defense Forces
responded with artillery fire and, later, an airstrike.

On 28 January, a serious breach of the cessation of
hostilities between Lebanon and Israel occurred when
Hizbullah launched several anti-tank guided missiles
from the area of operations of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) towards an Israeli
military convoy south of the Blue Line. Two Israeli
soldiers were killed and several other soldiers and
civilians were injured in the attack. During subsequent
retaliatory fire by the Israel Defense Forces into
Lebanon, a UNIFIL peacekeeper serving in the Spanish
contingent was killed. Hizbullah claimed responsibility
for the attack, which it said had been in retaliation for
the alleged Israeli airstrike of 18 January on the Golan.
UNIFIL is in the process of finalizing its investigation
of the incident, with the cooperation of both parties.
The Secretary-General condemned all violence and
expressed his deep concern over the deterioration
of the security situation in southern Lebanon and
violations of the cessation of hostilities and resolution
1701 (2006). He deeply regrets the death of the UNIFIL
peacekeeper, which the Security Council condemned in
the strongest terms, and expressed his condolences to
the Government and the people of Spain.

The immediate engagement by UNIFIL and the
Special Coordinator for Lebanon helped prevent a
further escalation and to restore the cessation of
hostilities. The Secretary-General addressed the
developments of 28 January directly with both Prime
Minister Tammam Salam and Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and called for a return to calm and for all
concerned to act responsibly. Given the seriousness of
the incident, we welcome the reaffirmation by Israel and
Lebanon of their commitment to the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and to the stability of the Blue
Line area. Neither country nor the region can afford
another conflict.

Elsewhere in Lebanon, the border with Syria
remains impacted by security incidents and cross-border
fighting. The Lebanese Armed Forces shelled positions
of armed militants in the Bekaa outskirts of Arsal,
Baalbeck and Al-Qaa. Lebanon's security authorities
successfully carried out raids and arrests throughout
the country to prevent terrorist attacks. Politically, the
dialogue between the Future Movement and Hizbullah
has so far led to consensus on security issues and steps
to lower sectarian tensions. Meetings between the
leaders of Lebanon's major Christian parties continued,
but without success on the presidential stalemate. The
prolonged vacuum in the highest office of the State is
of serious concern for the stability of Lebanon. The
Secretary-General looks to the continued unity of the
Security Council to preserve Lebanon from the impact
of conflicts in the region and help it to address the
multiple challenges it faces.

In conclusion, we see the circumstances in Gaza
as becoming increasingly worrisome as we approach
the six-month mark since the end of last summer's
conflict The combination of the failure to rectify the
persistent governance and security issues and the slow
pace of reconstruction has created an increasingly toxic
environment.

While the primary obligation evidently lies with
the parties, a key component of reversing those negative
trends is to implement the financial commitments made
by donors at the Cairo conference. A failure to deliver
the necessary support is putting an almost unbearable
strain on an already highly fractious environment.

Establishing a framework that could lead to
comprehensive peace must once again become a
priority. We hope that the international community,
possibly through a reinvigorated Quartet, can help the
parties avoid a downward slide and support a return
to negotiations. The Secretary-General is determined
that the United Nations will continue to play an active
role in supporting those efforts. However, international
efforts cannot succeed in isolation. Genuine and lasting
peace can be reached only through the commitment of
the parties to overcome their mistrust and make the
difficult compromises necessary to achieve a resolution I now invite Council members to informal
to this conflict. consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.

