Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to express at the outset our
affectionate and grateful memories of the eternal
Commander Hugo Chavez Frias, Commander of the
Bolivarian Revolution, a champion of love, friendship
and solidarity, and to convey, on behalf of our President,
the Nicaraguan people and our delegation, our warm
greetings to President Nicolas Maduro Moros and our
congratulations on the very valuable and successful
leadership of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I extend our greetings to our brother Rafael
Ramirez Carrefio, the Permanent Representative, and
to his delegation for their dedication and commitment
during this presidency.

Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement made
by the Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Charter of our Organization, which has just
celebrated its seventieth anniversary, was drafted at a
time when there was a convergence of efforts to "save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war" . Our
Organization presented itself to the world as an entity
that was a facilitator of peace, but, since its founding
to the present day, the stated objectives have been
frustrated. In that regard, allow me share the thoughts
of our President, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra:

"We believe that only when the United Nations is
equitable and democratic, recast, re-created and fit
for the purpose of serving the world and humankind
in the twenty-first century, can we tackle the great
challenges of our time...

"Nicaragua calls for a world of solidarity and

complementarity and a reshaped United Nations

in which everyone's interests are served and all

Member States can listen and talk to each other on

equal footing. We also call for the United Nations

agencies to play a respectful, responsible and
ethical role, devoid of any form of interference and
intervention in the internal affairs of sovereign

States." (A/70/PV23, p. 12).

The decisions that the most important organs of
our Organization make must be based on the full and
unconditional respect for the principles and purposes
of the Charter, which, therefore, makes the present
debate more urgent and meaningful. Unfortunately,
in recent years, we have seen decisions taken by the
Security Council that have not been predicated on those
principles. The increasing greed engendered by global
capitalism, particularly in the Middle East and Africa,
have sparked wars and sown insecurity, destruction,
death and the forced and brutal displacement ofmillions
of refugees, exposing the true nature of war, terrorism
and the conflicts that we are living. Those are all
actions that are unfortunately promoted and supported
by some permanent members of the Security Council.

On the one hand, the Council has found itself
hindered in its efforts to act in the common interest on
several occasions. The most obvious example, in that
regard, is the case of Palestine. On the other hand, the
Council has been misused and manipulated through the
granting of mandates with regard to situations in the
Middle East aimed at promoting regime changes, wars
and the provision of financing to terrorist groups, in
flagrant violation of the principles of international law,
relations of friendship and cooperation among States,
and the Charter of the United Nations. Our country
reaffirms its condemnation of those actions and like
attempts to undermine peace in our America, the only
region that has been declared a zone of peace. We
condemn the coup attempts against our sister Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and the plans to assassinate its
President, Comrade Nicolas Maduro Moros. We also
condemn the maintenance of the inhuman and criminal
blockade against our sister Republic of Cuba.

Nicaragua, as one of the first four States to ratify
the Charter, firmly believes that the maintenance of
international peace and security calls, first of all, for
a sense of community based on the sovereign equality
of its members, the self-determination of peoples and
compliance with international law, where individual
and individualistic interests and the culture of war are
completely eliminated and replaced by a culture of
engagement, dialogue, consensus, peace and solidarity.
That does not entail only the establishment ofnew codes
of conduct for members of the Council, as some have
suggested, but rather strict respect for the rules that
already exist and the principles that guide the Council
and that are set out in the Charter, which is above any
other instrument, as established in Article 103.

Promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes is
a central point in this order of things, and we must
work to eliminate the use or threat of use of force to
resolve disputes. The Charter provides several options
in that regard, one of which is the International Court
of Justice, which deserves special mention, as it is the
principal legal body whose judgments are binding and
are to be complied with immediately. In that regard,
recognition of the jurisdiction of the Court and the
withdrawal of reservations to it is an imperative now
more than ever.

Actions to counter terrorism must be made
collectively within the framework of the Charter and
international law, while ensuring that all Member
States are equal participants in terms of their rights and
respect for their sovereignty and territorial integrity.

With regard to peacekeeping missions, Nicaragua
believes that respect for the empowerment of the
host country is vital to ensuring the legitimacy of the
operations themselves and their success. In that regard,
we reaffirm the need to strengthen the authority of
the General Assembly to address issues relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in situations in which the Council fails
to exercise its primary responsibility in adhering to
the Charter. We call on the international community
to fulfil the objectives that we outlined 70 years ago
to work together in solidarity and with respect and to
eradicate the scourges that continue to be obstacles to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
I conclude with inspiring words from our President,
Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, who said that the
Organization must respond to the challenges of our
time with measures and actions that reflect the best
interests of the peoples, such as respect for others, the
inviolability of sovereignty, acknowledging natural
resources as part of our heritage and the promotion of
security, justice, and peace.

