Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to join others in thanking Special Representative
Holkeri for joining us today and for providing us with
an excellent briefing. I wish also to welcome Foreign
Minister Draskovic and to thank him for his
presentation this morning.

It was almost two months ago that a deplorable
and unjustifiable outbreak of violence shook Kosovo.
That violence was a setback to Kosovo's own
aspiration to develop into a society that can become
part of Europe. It must not be repeated. Violence will
damage the prospects of all of Kosovo's citizens: the
history of the Balkans gives ample evidence of the
devastation brought by ethnic hatred and violence.
Down that path lies destruction.

The international community, through the review
date process, has laid out a brighter path for Kosovo.
Kosovo faces a key decision point now: to choose
whether it will seize that path and make it its own.
Foreign Minister Draskovic told us this morning that
the only way forward is through dialogue and
reconciliation; that suggests strongly that all parties
must participate. We remain determined to see Kosovo
attain, as rapidly as possible, the United Nations
standards for Kosovo through the mechanism of the
Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan; both the
standards and the Implementation Plan have been
welcomed by the Security Council. Implementation of
the Plan will benefit all Kosovars.

The leaders of Kosovo can best respond to the
tragic events of March by bringing a new commitment
and energy to implementing the United Nations
standards. That will require a close and growing
partnership between the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Provisional Institutions, and full consultations with -
and the support of - Kosovar Serbs and other
minorities.

Security for all residents of Kosovo must be
assured. We in the international community will do our
part, as shown by NATO's rapid reinforcement of the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), and by the commitment to keep
sufficient international civilian police on duty. But
Kosovars themselves must be more involved in, and
must be held accountable for, their own security. We
must also address other problems such as an
unacceptably high rate of unemployment. We want to
see privatization revitalized so that State and socially
owned enterprises can be transformed, providing jobs
and growth. And we want to see continued and
renewed efforts to combat the corruption that has
sapped international and local confidence and driven
off needed investment.

As part of the Contact Group, we support the
Group's new schedule of meetings, every six weeks in
Pristina. Those meetings are designed to help Kosovo
meet the standards by focusing attention on key
problems, assessing progress made and identifying
further necessary steps. We are establishing a security
advisory group in Pristina, where Kosovo Albanians
and Kosovo Serbs can discuss critical security
concerns. Another such group has been established in
Belgrade to give Serbia a voice in security issues.

We commend to the attention of all parties
concerned the statement made on behalf of the Security
Council by its President on 30 April
(S/PRST/2004/13). We look forward to hearing at an
early date from the Secretary-General about his
recommendations on possible new institutional
arrangements to allow effective local government
through the devolution of central responsibilities to
local authorities and communities in Kosovo.

I wish in closing to recognize the tragedy of those
in Kosovo who lost their lives or who were injured
during the March violence, and to urge the Provisional
Institutions to quickly rebuild the homes and churches
destroyed, as promised, as soon as possible. I would
also like to recognize the service and sacrifice of all
those internationals serving with UNMIK and its
international civilian police, and with KFOR. In
particular, I wish to recall and commend the United
States police officers who lost their lives in the line of
duty at Mitrovica as a result of the incident there on 17
April, and to extend our hopes and prayers for the full
recovery of those who were injured.

