Mr. Ovales-Santos (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate on
peacekeeping operations.

Our delegation associates itself with the
statement made earlier on this issue on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). Venezuela would like
to highlight some aspects that have already been
mentioned but which are nonetheless important and
essential for the preservation of the credibility and
legitimacy of an instrument set out in the United
Nations Charter for international peace and security.

First of all, United Nations peacekeeping
operations must not be a substitute by which to avoid
the need to address the real causes of conflicts. On
various occasions, international conflicts are fermented
by actors whose interests are foreign to those of the
parties involved, interests certainly linked to the real
powers running the global industrial war machine.

For the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, it is
essential that in conducting peacekeeping operations,
the purposes and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter be strictly observed and that
peacekeeping be guided by its basic principles: the
consent of the parties involved, non-use of force except
in legitimate defence, and impartiality. The
introduction of the concept of defence in the mandate
should not be placed on the same level as that of the
three guiding principles, as its application is limited to
operational and tactical levels.

We also agree with NAM's understanding
concerning respect for the principles of sovereignty,
political independence and the territorial integrity of all
States and non-interference in matters that are
essentially of internal jurisdiction. Such understanding
must be maintained. We also agree with the Movement
that United Nations peacekeeping operations must
from the outset enjoy the necessary support in terms of
resources. They especially need credibility in the
authorized mandates, which depends on their clarity
and feasibility.

We are convinced of the need to unify all
initiatives and processes to ensure continuity in one
coherent direction towards peace.

Lastly, like other delegations, we believe that the
role of the committee is extremely important. Here it is
essential that the recommendations and measures
adopted by the General Assembly and its Special
Committee charged with reviewing all aspects of
peacekeeping operations have a greater impact in the
Security Council and the Secretariat, which will benefit
the collective goals needed to achieve peace.

