I thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing on the continuing dire humanitarian situation in the country. I also want to thank the Special Envoy, on behalf of my Government, for his efforts on Syria. We at my delegation are grateful for the updates from his recent travels to Damascus to revive the United Nations-facilitated political process. The only legitimate path to securing a peaceful future for the Syrian people is the internationally agreed road map for a political transition outlined in our resolution 2254 (2015). In our view, today the Security Council must make clear to Damascus, Moscow and the Syrian people that there is no alternative solution to the Syrian conflict. The United States Government will remain unwavering in calling for the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and that resolution's calls for an inclusive Syrian-led political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. The lack of progress on the Constitutional Committee that we heard just described is both regrettable and unacceptable. The Al-Assad regime has unilaterally stymied any progress in the Constitutional Committee despite agreeing to the Special Envoy's Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure for a Syrian-led, Syrian- owned, credible, balanced and inclusive Constitutional Committee facilitated by the United Nations in Geneva (S/2019/775, annex). At present, from what we are hearing, the co-Chair of the Committee representative of the regime refuses to agree to an agenda or date for any subsequent meeting. Over the past year, every member of the Council has expressed support for the Committee's work. We believe that it is now time to tell the Al-Assad regime that enough is enough. The Constitutional Committee must move forward with regular substantive meetings without further obstruction by Damascus. The United States Government calls on all parties to the United Nations- facilitated political process, which means the regime and the Syrian opposition, to adhere to specific principles, including committing to Syria's unity, independence, territorial integrity and non-sectarian character, the principle of protecting the rights of all Syrians and, finally, the principle of ensuring unimpeded United Nations humanitarian access throughout the country. In order for the parties to move beyond previous discussions of first principles and directly address constitutional reforms, the Al-Assad regime must actively participate in the organization and conduct of future Constitutional Committee meetings. We believe that the Council must do everything in its power to prevent the regime representatives from continuing to block agreement on an agenda as we move into the final months of 2020. The United States Government is concerned that the Al-Assad regime's goal is to further derail the Committee's work into 2021, when, as all members know, Syria is scheduled to hold presidential elections in April. We believe that the regime's hope is to invalidate the work of Special Envoy Pedersen and our calls, the Council's calls, for a negotiated political transition. Syria is wholly unprepared to carry out elections in a free, fair and transparent manner that would include the participation of the Syrian diaspora. That is why we need the Constitutional Committee to work and why we need the United Nations to accelerate its planning to ensure that Syria's upcoming elections are credible. The United States urges Special Envoy Pedersen to take any measures that he thinks are appropriate to facilitate the parties' efforts consistent with the United Nations parameters and principles and also to identify to the Council who is blocking progress. We ask the Special Envoy to press the Syrian regime to act in accordance with the agreements that it has made on the agenda so that the next session can be held as soon as possible, with continued regular meetings throughout the end of the year. We expect the United Nations and the Syrian parties to work on concrete deliverables on other confidence-building measures. Those measures would include elements such as the unilateral release of arbitrary detainees who are languishing in overcrowded regime prisons. They could include the restoration of property rights and the allowance of regular United Nations aid deliveries to all parts of Syria, as well as preparations to support free and fair elections, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The cornerstone of peace in Syria and a negotiated political solution is a permanent, verifiable, nationwide ceasefire. Once again, the United States calls for the 5 March Idlib ceasefire agreement to be fully upheld by all actors on the ground in the north-west - Russia, Turkey, Syria and Iran. The Council must continue to demand the regime's agreement to uphold a nationwide ceasefire. Let me shift to the ongoing humanitarian crisis. I again thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing. The United States delegation salutes the brave work of the United Nations and all the humanitarians working to help the Syrian people. The attacks on humanitarians in the north-west in the three separate incidents that Mr. Lowcock described are very troubling, and we want to express our sincere condolences to those who have lost loved ones to that violence. The recent air strikes against civilians and humanitarians in north-west Syria about which we just heard are only one of many examples that demonstrates without a doubt that Syria remains a country at war. The regime's failure to address the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), coupled with the continued politicization of United Nations aid deliveries, cannot just be ignored, and neither can it be rewarded with reconstruction projects, capacity-building or the normalization of relations with Damascus. Therefore, the United States calls on the United Nations to fully uphold its principles and its parameters and maintain its focus on humanitarian relief operations inside Syria until a political agreement is reached. Conditions inside Syria, I believe as we heard, are not yet conducive to the safe facilitation of the large-scale return of refugees. That is the position of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. It is also the position of the United States Government and of the other major donors that provide the overwhelming majority of funding to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people. Therefore, the United States calls on the Al-Assad regime to stop targeting Syrians who have returned to regime-held areas and signed reconciliation agreements, and we call on the Al-Assad regime to create the conditions that would allow for the safe, voluntary, dignified and timely return of refugees to the country. We believe that it is important to be clear about the United Nations assessment of conditions for returns because that must be our guiding principle, not Syria's or Russia's political priorities. The Russian Ministry of Defence announced plans to host a conference in Damascus next month on international refugee returns, as many members know. It is the strong belief of the United States that such a conference is counterproductive and that it is totally inappropriate for any military organization to manage refugee returns in Syria - be it Russia or any other. The conference does not address in any way the root causes of the conflict that has created millions of refugees in Syria. The conference aims to discuss refugee returns, which is completely premature given the lack of conditions on the ground for any large-scale refugee returns. Prematurely encouraging refugee returns will lead only to instability and a revolving door of displacement. We also note that the conference was not coordinated with the United Nations or with the countries that are hosting the largest number of Syrian refugees, such as Germany and Turkey. In April, the Secretary-General's board of inquiry report for north-west Syria (S/2020/278, annex) found it highly probable that the Syrian Government and its allies, meaning the Russian Ministry of Defence, were responsible for conducting attacks that damaged hospitals and other civilian infrastructure, wreaking further devastation on the Syrian people. The Russian Federation formally withdrew from its deconfliction arrangements with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs last year, and that placed hospitals, civilian internally displaced person (IDP) camps and medical workers in its crosshairs, with a devastating effect throughout north-western Syria. Quite frankly, the United States Government does not believe that the Russian military is a credible host for convening a meaningful discussion on the returns of refugees. For those reasons, the United States will not attend the conference. We strongly urge the United Nations and all others to also forgo attendance at this conference, which has been orchestrated by those responsible for the refugees fleeing in the first place. Aid deliveries to areas recently back under Al-Assad's control in the south-west and the Damascus suburbs, as well as the north-west and north-east, are still insufficient, as we have heard, to meet humanitarian needs and respond to COVID-19. Thousands of civilian residents of the Rukban IDP camp have been denied humanitarian access to the United Nations for 13 months due to non-approvals by the regime and by Russia. We therefore call on the Al-Assad regime and Russia to immediately allow unfettered humanitarian access to the camp, including United Nations humanitarian deliveries and a needs assessment mission into Rukban so that the United Nations can work to find solutions for those remaining in the camp. Let me end by saying that the Trump Administration and the United States Government will continue to pursue a whole-of-Government approach, including through the implementation of the United States Caesar Act, to maintain the economic and diplomatic isolation of the Al-Assad regime until that regime makes concrete and irreversible progress towards a political resolution of the conflict. That is the only way forward to protect the Syrian people and ensure that they have the future they deserve - a future that they control.
