Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, allow me to extend our welcome to the new
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
Ambassador Vassily Nebenzya. We would also like
to thank China for the remarkable way in which it
conducted itself during its presidency of the Council in
July. I would also like to thank Egypt for assuming the
presidency for the month of August. We thank Egypt
for having organized today's important meeting and
for having taken the initiative to put forth resolution
2370 (2017), which tries to tackle the problem of
preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons. Lastly,
I would also like to thank the representatives of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, INTERPOL and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their
informative briefings.

Current events constantly remind us of the
urgency and severity of the problem of the illicit arms
trade, which, besides constituting a serious threat to
international peace and security, fuels terrorist groups
and provides them with the means to act that they need.
France has had to confront it directly in the form of the
terrorist attacks that have been occurred on its territory
in the past few years, several of which were committed
with small arms obtained through illicit transnational
trade, and many other countries have been similarly
affected. Beyond that, we are dealing with threats to the
stability and development of many entire regions 4 the
Sahel and the Middle East, to mention only two - as
well as the viability of national reconciliation processes
and people's full exercise of their human rights.

There are two types of such materials that have
turned out to be particularly sensitive because they are
well suited to the commission of terrorist acts - small
arms and light weapons and improvised explosive
devices (IEDs). Resolution 2370 (2017), which we have
just adopted unanimously, emphasizes them. France
is taking special action regarding these weapons at
various levels. The first is in the framework of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, whose third
Review Conference, which France will chair, will be
held in New York in 2018. The Programme of Action
is an appropriate framework for guiding our collective
action that has already resulted in significant progress
whereby many States have improved their small-
arms legislation, assistance programmes have been
established and regional organizations are taking
better account of the problem. Despite those advances,
however, many challenges remain. The Review
Conference will provide an essential opportunity
for making concrete progress in the fight against the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, including
by ramping up the mobilization of all stakeholders in
the security, arms control and development sectors,
and by exploiting all the potential synergies between
existing instruments.

We are also working within the framework of
the Arms Trade Treaty to improve regulation of the
legitimate arms trade, and also through the Palermo
Convention - under which France has begun its
process of acceding to the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition - as well as
through the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the European Union and bilateral cooperation.
With regard to IEDs in particular, France has also been
very active in the General Assembly and in the context
of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons,
as well as through bilateral cooperation.

It is in the interests of all States Members of the
United Nations to promote comprehensive mobilization
on the political and administrative fronts, and of all
civil-society stakeholders, with a view to combating
the spread of small arms and light weapons in as many
States as possible. That commitment is essential if we
are to do as much as we can to prevent terrorist groups
and individuals from acquiring the means for violent
action. We should work on a number of different kinds
of action on trafficking, both upstream of it - in order
to prevent the distribution of weapons in the first
place 4 and downstream, so as to interrupt existing
flows. Such measures include developing adequate
national legislation, reducing illicit stocks in circulation
through collection and destruction campaigns,
improving the security and physical management of
arms and ammunition stocks and strengthening police
and customs controls. Importantly, resolution 2370
(2017) encourages States to redouble their efforts in
this area. At the international level, it is crucial to
ensure that countries accede to and ratify the principal
related international instruments, and France urges all
countries to accede to the Arms Trade Treaty as soon
as possible.

I would like to conclude, Mr. President, by thanking
you once again for giving us the opportunity to have this
enriching and complex exchange on an issue that is a
big priority for my country. France will continue to play
its full part in the international community's efforts to
prevent terrorists from acquiring their means of attack.
That means, among other things, that we must continue
to be absolutely determined in the fight against every
kind of traffic that is fueling terrorist groups, whether
in weapons, narcotics or human beings.

