Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I thank both of our briefers. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has a front-row seat to the damage that the illicit trade in small armsand light weapons can cause. Although the Caribbean does not produce arms itself, the illicit traffic in small arms profoundly affects our region. Resolution 2220 (2015) underscored that small arms and light weapons are the most frequently used weapons in the majority of recent armed conflicts. The illicit flow of small arms fuels conflict, terrorism and crimes around the world, and thereby threatens international peace and security. Let us cite a recent example. In August 2019, the Government of Chad closed the border that it shares with the Sudan in response to the illegal entry of small arms and light weapons. Those weapons are easier and cheaper to access in the Sudan. Their presence in Chad contributed to the escalating intercommunal violence in the region. Unfortunately, such situations are not isolated events. Around the world, we see that the increased presence of small arms and light weapons is directly related to increased violence. The Secretary-General puts it best in paragraph 9 of his report (S/2019/1011), when he states that the illicit trade in small arms continues to exacerbate ongoing conflicts and contribute to the outbreak of others. Trafficking in small arms and light weapons cannot be divorced from other forms of trafficking that provoke tensions between rival groups that compete for power and profit. The illegal exploitation of, and trade in, natural resources and wildlife form part of the same political economy as the illicit arms trade. Such complex webs of criminality operate across borders, as they often thrive on the fringes of State authority. The strength of those networks, however, begets their greatest weakness. They can flourish only in the absence of a well-organized governance framework. Regional and subregional organizations and their member States must work collectively to manage their shared borders and regulate the movement of people. On the African continent, the illicit flow of small arms and light weapons has taken its toll on far too many generations of people. Our delegation welcomes the ongoing initiatives towards silencing the guns in Africa. We recall, however, that key mechanisms like the Nairobi Protocol and the Kinshasa Convention will be successful only if they are accompanied by structural economic developments. We cannot pursue sustainable development where we do not have peace. Increasingly, armed conflicts in destabilized regions are moving out of battlefields and into villages, towns and cities, where civilians are deeply affected. That creates humanitarian crises that endanger those who are most vulnerable. Indeed, the gendered implications and violence occasioned by small-arms use cannot be ignored and should not be minimized. We cannot sit idly by as those disturbing trends continue. As a State party to the Arms Trade Treaty, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines appreciates that Member States have the right to order their internal affairs as they see fit, including in the area of arms control. However, that right is not absolute when domestic policies have negative implications beyond borders. Given the nature of small-arms trafficking, regional cooperation is critical. As a member of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), we reiterate CARICOM's 2011 declaration on small arms and light weapons. The Caribbean Community has vowed to support the implementation and enforcement of policies and legislation against the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We encourage the efforts that are being made at the regional level around the world. Small arms and illicit weapons have been a concern of the international community for years. However, now is the time for concerted action. Across the world, small arms find their way into countries that do not even produce them and wreak havoc on vulnerable communities within them. It is time to enforce greater accountability.
