Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me join others in
congratulating Egypt on assuming the presidency for
the month of August. We wish Egypt all the best.

I would also like to thank the Chinese delegation
for an impressively effective presidency in July.

I would also like to take the opportunity to
welcome our new colleague, Ambassador Vassily
Nebenzia as the new Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation.

I would like to thank Egypt for organizing today's
briefing. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
valuable presentations.

International terrorism is clearly one of the greatest
threats to international peace and security. The fight
against terrorism requires greater cooperation across
national borders and across policy areas. In that regard,
we thank Egypt for introducing resolution 2370 (2017),
which was just adopted. A coordinated response is
necessary in order to eliminate the supply of weapons
to terrorists and to prevent the illicit trade of weapons.
The relevant national law enforcement agencies need
to cooperate and share information in order to combat
illicit firearms trafficking, as well as to ensure adequate
marking and tracing procedures for weapons. The full
implementation of existing multilateral agreements,
such as the Arms Trade Treaty; the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects; the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons; and
the United Nations Firearms Protocol are also essential
in preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons.
Moreover, Security Council arms embargos must be
fully respected and properly implemented, in accordance
with relevant resolutions and legal instruments.

Today, we would have liked to see the Council
urge all Member States to accede to the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) . The ATT is the first legally binding
instrument for the regulation of the international arms
trade. In order to achieve the effective control of arms
flows, it is important that all arms-producing countries
accede to the Treaty. Illegal arms are usually start off
as legally produced and traded weapons. However,
their irresponsible export can cause as much damage
as and lead to illegal flows. Furthermore, it is crucial
that importing countries join the ATT, as inadequate
control leads to the diversion of arms to the illegal
market. Transit countries should also join, as they risk
becoming unwitting links in the physical shipment of
arms to conflict areas.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is also a very important
resolution in that context. It aims to stop non-State
actors, notably terrorists, from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. Resolution
2370 (2017) constitutes an important complement
to resolution 1540 (2004), since it encompasses
conventional arms and the illicit flows of small arms
and light weapons, as well as explosive elements for the
manufacture of improvised explosive devises.

In conclusion, let me underline that all counter-
terrorism measures must be carried out in accordance
with international law, including international human
rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law, as
reiterated in numerous resolutions. Human rights
and fundamental freedoms, online as well as offline,
and open societies are critical for fostering resilience
against terrorism. Member States working together,
based on these agreed norms and standards, is the only
and most effective way to counter the great threat of
international terrorism. Our hope is that resolution 2370
(2017), which we have just adopted, and this meeting
will contribute to those efforts.

