Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): We are very grateful to
you, Sir, and to the Vietnamese presidency for
convening today's open debate. We share with other
speakers the desire to make our views known to the
Council, because the issue of children in armed conflict
has been a priority area of our foreign policy and
especially of our commitment within the United
Nations. We understand your advice and will follow it
as we present a shortened version of the text that is
currently being circulated.

You have invited us, Sir, to express our views on
how the Security Council, the United Nations as a
whole and the international community can better
deliver on the protection of children affected by armed
conflict. Austria fully agrees that we need to look at the
root causes of conflict in order to find sustainable
solutions. Our interventions, I think we all agree, must
be comprehensive and effective.

We also agree that there is an imperative need to
improve support for and protection of children. The
effective reintegration of children associated with
armed groups is of particular concern. Therefore, the
situation of children must be systematically included in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. The specific needs and capacities of girls
have to be given special attention. The Austrian
Government is committed to further contributing to
efforts in support of affected children and is, as
members are aware, supporting a number of projects
implemented by United Nations partners and at the
bilateral level.

The protection of children in armed conflict is not
only a humanitarian concern, but also a significant
peace and security issue. The protection of children
must therefore be systematically considered in peace
agreements and in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and political missions. Austria
welcomes the increasing deployment of child
protection advisers over the past few years. We also
actively support ongoing efforts within the United
Nations system to further develop good practices and
guidance for their work.

Indeed, the Security Council has an important
role to play in providing effective protection to
children in conflict situations. We wish to congratulate
the Working Group, under French chairmanship, on its
outstanding work, which is documented in the annual
report now before the Council. Over the past six
months, much time and energy has been spent on
procedural issues. Therefore, we hope that the Working
Group can now return to a greater focus on effective
measures to protect children. More resources are
needed for all actors concerned.

Austria would like to encourage the Council to
ensure respect for its resolution 1612 (2005) and for all
its previous resolutions on this issue. The fact that
there is a long list of persistent violators is of
increasing concern. We raised that concern at the last
open debate on this subject, held in February, and we
feel that we must do so again today.
This situation demands further action by the
Security Council to strengthen the rule of law and to

end impunity. We support the Secretary-General's call
to make full use of the range of measures and tools
available to the Council. We also call on the Security
Council and on Member States to fully use
accountability mechanisms, including the International
Criminal Court, to bring to justice perpetrators of
Violations against children.

In this context, I would like to draw attention to
the final report of the Austrian Initiative on the
Security Council and the rule of law, which contains
17 concrete recommendations on how the Security
Council could strengthen the rule of law in its various
fields of activity. The report was recently issued as a
document of the United Nations (S/2008/270) and is
available in all official languages.

Austria also supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that equal weight be given to all
categories of grave violations against children. As a
first step, the crime of rape and grave sexual Violence
should be introduced as an additional element to
trigger the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
Together with many other speakers, we have laid out
the reasons for that approach. Those reasons have
gained even more weight in the meantime with the
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) on sexual violence
during and after armed conflict.

Austria believes that the Security Council should
therefore carry forward its intention to further
strengthen the framework for the protection of children
by reviewing the relevant provisions of its resolutions
and initiating work on a new resolution to increase the
efficiency of its actions.

The future of our children depends on our
response to the challenges before us today. Austria will
continue to work closely with the United Nations and
all our other partners to improve the situation of
children, especially those affected by armed conflict.

In concluding, I would like to commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict for her activities,
dedication, engagement and for the many endeavours
she has undertaken to improve the plight of children in
armed conflict.

