Ms. Gunnarsdottir (Iceland): In her briefing
to the Security Council earlier this month on the
situation in Syria, Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos said, "We are watching the destruction of not
only a country, but also its people" (S/PV. 7000, p. 2).
With 100,000 people dead and millions who have fled
from the violence and become refugees or internally
displaced persons, and with a breakdown of vital
education and health services, the situation can only
be described as a tragedy. The Government of Syria,
along with all other parties to the conflict, must abide
strictly by international humanitarian and human
rights law, including by affording immediate access to
humanitarian assistance.

We strongly urge the Security Council to overcome
its internal differences and focus on exercising its
leadership role in fostering a political and peaceful
solution to the civil war in Syria. The parties have
demonstrated that they are not going to lay down arms
without external interference, and the Council has
yet to demonstrate that it is doing all in its power to
prevent further human tragedy. Before the conflict
escalates further, with even more serious consequences
for regional peace and security, we ask that the Council
please take action.

In the meantime we welcome the briefing to be given
in the General Assembly next Monday by Mr. Pinheiro,
Chair of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic. As long as the
Council is not living up to its responsibility regarding

the conflict, it is important that the wider membership
engage in the matter. Earlier this month, when
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited Reykjavik and
spoke at the University of Iceland, he said, "The people
of Syria need peace, but all they have for the moment
are talks about talks. We must do better." Indeed, we
must do better.

Last week, we celebrated Mandela International
Day to pay tribute to Nelson Mandela's legacy and what
he stands for. Mr. Mandela once said that we are not
truly free if we take away someone else's freedom, just
as surely as we are not free when our freedom is taken
from us.

I now turn to the Palestinian question. The
occupation affects all Palestinians as well as the
Israelis. They are affected in different ways, since one
is the occupied and the other the occupier, but both are
affected. The security of the Palestinians is greatly
affected, not least for young men, but also for those
who now live at close quarters with the settlements, and
with settlers becoming increasingly violent towards
Palestinians in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
The security of Israelis is also affected, including by
the firing of rockets from Gaza, indiscriminately and
in clear violation of international law, threatening and
terrorizing the civilian population in southern Israel.

Iceland believes in a peaceful solution to the
conflict, and we believe it is urgent and possible that
the parties come to an agreement. We therefore very
much welcome the renewed engagement of the United
States in reviving the peace process. We particularly
welcome the announcement last Friday by Secretary of
State Kerry that an agreement has been reached that
establishes a basis for resuming direct final status
negotiations. We hope that this time the negotiations
will result in two States, living side by side in peace
and security, which is the only way forward for
both parties and the only means by which relations
between Israel and its neighbours can be normalized.
Until an agreement is actually reached, however,
the international community must continue to do its
utmost to prevent and address ongoing violations of
humanitarian law and international human rights law
on the ground.

