Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
am pleased to welcome Mr. Ramos-Horta to the
Council Chamber. We listened attentively to his
statement, and we thank him for it. Our thanks go also
to Mr. Hasegawa for his most interesting and thorough
briefing.

I wish at the outset to convey my condolences to
Mr. Ramos-Horta and to the Timorese people in the
wake of the recent rioting, which claimed five lives.
Such tragic events show that, notwithstanding the
success of the democratic transition in Timor-Leste, the
situation remains fragile. It is regrettable that it took
such painful circumstances to make us realize that Mr.
Ramos-Horta, Mr. Alkatiri and Mr. Gusmao have been
right to underscore the fragility of the security situation
in their country and, in recent letters to the Secretary-
General, to request that a United Nations political
mission be maintained.

The Permanent Representative of Austria will
soon make a statement on behalf of the presidency of
the European Union, which I fully endorse. For my
part, I wish to make a number of comments.

I note first of all that, in spite of what I have just
said, the situation in Timor-Leste appears to be
generally stable, and that the successive United
Nations missions seem to have been an outstanding
success for the Organization. We welcome the
approach of a gradual United Nations drawdown,
which made possible a smooth transition without any
break in continuity. That approach, which is consistent
with the international consensus on the peacebuilding
phase, needs to continue. At the same time, the gains
need to be preserved.

Uncertainties remain with respect to the future,
including in the following areas: preparations for the
2007 elections; demonstrations of frustration, including
within the armed forces; the fight against impunity;
and border control issues.

Thus, it is clear that international support
continues to be necessary, as shown by the recent
events to which I have referred. We cannot ignore the
request by the Timorese authorities for continuation of
this support.

We have carefully studied the Secretary-General's
proposals on maintaining a United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste. We believe that those proposals are
consistent with the requests made by the Timorese
authorities, and we can endorse them. Thus, we favour
the establishment of a follow-on United Nations office
with electoral, political, security and civilian
components and a human rights section. We view that
latter aspect as being of particular importance, in
particular to ensure follow-up of issues related to
reconciliation. In that regard, we look forward to the
Secretary-General's recommendations on solutions in
the areas of justice and reconciliation; we hope that the
new United Nations office will be able, if necessary, to
provide follow-up on such questions.

Finally, I believe it important to stress that, in this
peacebuilding phase, the United Nations should not act
alone. First of all, the Timorese authorities must
maintain their commitment, without which there can be
no peacebuilding. The many bilateral, regional and
multilateral partners - I am thinking in particular of
the international financial institutions - must
strengthen their support so as to facilitate a smooth
transition to complete stability.

In conclusion, as UNOTIL prepares to finalize its
withdrawal, we must acknowledge the tremendous
progress that it has made possible since its inception a
year ago. The stabilization process is not yet fully
complete, but it is well under way. It is certainly true
that much remains to be done, and a United Nations
presence will be necessary for some time to come. But
Timor-Leste is clearly another example of United
Nations success in peacebuilding, and I would like that
to be noted.

