Mr. Afufo-Addo (Ghana): We are here as a result
of a mandate given to us by the Mediation and Security
Council of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) to try to advance the peace process
in Cote d'Ivoire.

On 7 April, the Council mandated a team of
Foreign Ministers of five ECOWAS countries -
Guinea, a member of the Security Council, Senegal,
Nigeria, Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana - to come to the
West to apprise Governments and the Security Council
of the measures that are being taken to try to
consolidate the process of peacemaking in Cote
d'Ivoire and to seek the Council's support for those
measures.

As the Council knows, since the crisis broke out
in Cote d'Ivoire, ECOWAS has been active, within its
means, to try to contain and stabilize the situation in
cote d'Ivoire. It has done so principally, first of all, by
negotiating a ceasefire among those who are fighting,
and also by contributing to the negotiations on a new
Government of national reconciliation in Cote d'Ivoire.
That Government is now in place, and the
developments that have taken place since it came into
being are convincing all of us that, indeed, Cote
d'Ivoire is now returning to the path of normalcy and
peace. It is, therefore, essential on the part of the
Community to give the new Government and that
process the maximum amount of support.

It is in the light of that that the Defence and
Security Commission of ECOWAS decided that it
would be necessary to expand the force that was put
into cote d'Ivoire from a force of 1,200-odd soldiers to
a force of some 3,200 soldiers. The mandate given to
the original force was essentially a role in monitoring
the ceasefire. It has now been decided that that
mandate should be transformed to include several other
elements: first, the protection of the new Government;
secondly, the ability to patrol the borders, especially
the western border of Cote d'Ivoire, which is a source
of great concern; thirdly, responsibility for the
demobilization and disarmament of the various militias
in Cote d'Ivoire; and, lastly, the creation of the
conditions that would allow the new Government to
have full control of the national territory.

Clearly, the redefinition of this mandate and the
expansion of the force have obvious financial
implications. Despite the willingness of ECOWAS to
find a home-grown solution to the problem, the means
available to the Community are not what they should
be. It is for that reason that the Mediation and Security
Council decided to mandate this group that is before
the Council today to tour certain capitals and to come
to this body to seek its support for the financing of this
expanded force in Cote d'Ivoire.

We began our journey yesterday in Washington,
where, in our view, we had an extremely fruitful
interchange. We have come here today, and from here
we shall be going to Europe - principally to Paris,
Rome, Berlin, London, The Hague and Brussels - to
press the case for assistance in financing the force. The
intention is to conclude our tour at Brussels on 12 May
with a meeting of those who are interested in
assisting - a donors' conference.

We are very grateful to the President and the
other members of the Council for the opportunity they
have given us to present our case and to say one
fundamental thing: Cote d'Ivoire is an extremely
important nation within the West African region. Both
economically and politically, it is one of the most
important States in West Africa. The Ivorians
themselves have shown a willingness to try to find
accommodation and understanding among themselves
within the context of the very difficult circumstances in
which they have found themselves during the last six
months. It is our belief that it is the duty of the
Community - and, indeed, if I dare say so, the duty of
the international community as assembled here in the
Council - to support the process that the Ivorians
themselves have initiated. The most concrete support
that can be given to that process is to enable this force
to operate and to create the conditions that will allow
Cote d'Ivoire to return to full normalcy and peace and
to be able - at the end of the process, in October
2005 - to conduct credible, free and fair elections,
which we believe will be the most effective way of
bringing this crisis to an end.

I am grateful for the opportunity to have
addressed the Council.

