Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to express my delegation's sincere thanks and gratitude
to you, Mr. President, and to the entire Kuwaiti

delegation for presiding so effectively over the Council
during the month of June. Of course, we would also like
to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his comprehensive
briefing. My delegation really appreciates his hard work
in engaging with the various parties to the conflict.

Two days ago, during the Syria humanitarian
briefing (see S/PV.8561), Indonesia stressed that we
cannot let the escalation in north-western Syria continue
to undermine the Special Envoy's efforts to reinvigorate
the political process, as the Secretary-General stated
in his report (S/20l9/508). Respecting the ceasefire
and de-escalating tensions must therefore be the main
priority. Much is at stake. At this juncture, the Council
must provide its strong support to the ongoing work
on establishing a constitutional committee, within the
framework of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard,
Indonesia would like to focus on three points related to
advancing the Syrian political process:

First, we want to reiterate the key words "Syrian-
led and Syrian-owned". They should not be merely
the catchphrase in every Council meeting on Syria
but the main foundation that guides us in the entire
process of finding an inclusive political solution,
with full respect for the country's sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity. That is obviously easier said
than done.

That brings me to my second point. While we
recognize the obvious challenge, it is critical to sustain
open lines of communication between the relevant
parties and to establish and nurture confidence. The
Council must create an atmosphere that is conducive
to sustained negotiations. We therefore welcome
Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts, with the support of
key countries, to finalize the composition and terms of
reference of the constitutional committee. Indonesia is
fully aware that a constitutional committee is not the
only objective. However, a first meeting of members
of the committee in Geneva would definitely be a first
tangible step in unlocking the door for political process
in Syria and would also send a strong and positive
signal not only to the international community but most
importantly to the Syrian people.

Lastly, I want to highlight the importance of
compromise and urge all sides to avoid any actions,
activities or statements that could obstruct the political
process. It has been a painful and prolonged conflict.
Any delays on the political front will only bring more
suffering to the Syrian people and cost more lives.
Indonesia fully believes that as long as we promote
peaceful ways rather than violence, and dialogue
rather than confrontation, we will be able to achieve
our end goal. In that context, we appreciate the crucial
role of the Astana guarantors on both the political and
humanitarian fronts in seeking a peaceful solution to
the conflict. The Council might also want to consider
the possibility of having a closer, informal discussion
with the guarantors in order to pursue a more tangible
road map on the future of the ceasefire agreement.
Again, much is at stake.

