Mr. Verdier (Argentina): I have the honour to
take the floor on behalf of the following States, which
have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration: Albania,
Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic,
Cyprus, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway, Paraguay,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, the State of Palestine, Sweden, the
United Kingdom, Uruguay, Yemen and my own
country, Argentina. We welcome the holding of today's
open debate on "Protecting children today to prevent
conflicts tomorrow", organized by Sweden, given the
urgency of ending the vicious cycle of conflicts and
protecting children from their effects.

The Safe Schools Declaration is an intergovernmental
political commitment aimed at protecting and
continuing education during armed conflict. It includes
a pledge to implement the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict. Education is not just a human right
but an essential protection mechanism for children
living in conflict, helping them to reach their potential
and contribute to building stronger, more resilient and
more peaceful communities. Continued access to safe
education can help protect children and young people
from the worst effects of armed conflict and can also
help to prevent the emergence of new conflicts, while
protecting the education sector as far as possible from
the effects of war can also help countries recover in the
post-conflict phase.

Since the first International Conference on Safe
Schools was held in Oslo in 2015, 76 States have
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. We welcome
Djibouti, Mali, the United Kingdom, Germany and
Peru, which all recently endorsed the Declaration to
join the Safe Schools community. At the Buenos Aires
Conference in March 2017, representatives from States,
international organizations and civil society had the
opportunity to share experiences, raise awareness, and
exchange expertise in an effort to find practical solutions
to the real problems faced by students and teachers in
conflict situations. Numerous States shared examples
of implementation that demonstrated the Declaration's
tangible impact, highlighted in the Conference's
outcome report. We welcome the announcement made
by Spain that it will host the third Conference on Safe
Schools in 2019, and look forward to seeing all Member
States represented there.

We take note of the latest report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2018/465) and
wish to convey our profound concern about the ongoing
grave violations against children in conflict, including
threats, attacks and the military use of educational

infrastructure, which leave children vulnerable. We
therefore echo the report's recommendation for all States
to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration - a call that
has also been made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, as well as the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We take this opportunity to express
our special appreciation for the Secretary General's
support for the Safe Schools Declaration.

At the same time, we note the analysis of the
report by Human Rights Watch, which demonstrates
that there has been a global decrease in the military
use of schools. The report shows that, among the States
that have endorsed the Declaration, the military use of
schools has decreased significantly, by almost 50 per
cent on average since 2015. We are encouraged that the
Declaration makes such a difference on the ground and
that endorsing States are implementing it. However,
among States that have not endorsed the Declaration,
military uses of schools have actually increased.

In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all Member
States, and particularly on all members of the Council,
to recognize the Declaration as a tool to protect children
and to join the Safe Schools Declaration community by
endorsing and implementing the Declaration.

I shall now deliver a few brief remarks in my
national capacity as representative of Argentina.

(spoke in Spanish)

Argentina would like to thank the Government of
Sweden in particular for organizing this open debate
and its work at the helm of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We also are grateful
for the briefings by Special Representative Virginia
Gamba, Executive Director Fore and Ms. Londofio. In
that regard, I would like to express our appreciation and
firm support for the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, and express our gratitude
for the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465).

We share the deep concern about the significant
increase in the number of violations recorded in 2017
by State actors and non-State actors alike as part of
the intensification and changing dynamics of armed
conflicts. In that regard, Argentina reaffirms its
unwavering commitment to all initiatives to prevent,
avoid and halt serious Violations of children's rights
in armed conflicts. We are pleased to note that, since
the previous open debate of the Security Council on
the issue (see S/PV.8082), in October 2017, we have
endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers, and co-sponsored today's resolution
2427 (2018).

In conclusion, Argentina reiterates once again the
urgent need for the international community to agree
and implement measures to increase pressure on State
and non-State actors that commit violations against
children so as to demobilize, disassociate, rehabilitate
and reintegrate children associated with such groups, in
cooperation with their respective communities within
the framework of absolute respect for international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
refugee law.

