The President (spoke in Arabic): As members are
all aware, this meeting has been convened following a
particularly tragic set of events. May I invite all
participants to stand and observe a minute of silence in
tribute to the memory of the United Nations personnel
and all others who were killed in Baghdad in the
pursuit of peace and recovery for Iraq, as well as to
express our deep solidarity with all United Nations
personnel and all humanitarian workers in the field
everywhere.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council unequivocally
condemns the terrorist attack that took place on
19 August 2003 against the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad and thereby against the
international community as a whole, causing
numerous deaths and injuries among international
personnel and Iraqi people.

"The Security Council condemns also in the
strongest terms the perpetrators of such attack
and underlines the need to bring them to justice.

"The Security Council pays tribute and
expresses its deepest admiration to all those
among the United Nations personnel who have
lost their lives or have been injured in the service
of the United Nations and of the Iraqi people,
including the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira de Mello.

"The Security Council expresses its deepest
sympathy and condolences to the victims and
their families.
"The Security Council reaffirms the
imperative to respect, in all circumstances, the
safety and security of United Nations personnel
and the need for adequate security measures to be
taken in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
determination to assist the Iraqi people to build
peace and justice in their country and to
determine their own political future by
themselves. It welcomes in this regard the
determination of the United Nations to continue
its operation in Iraq to fulfil its mandate in the
service of the Iraqi people, and will not be
intimidated by such attacks."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2003/ 13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

