Mr. Vukasinovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on
your delegation's assumption of the presidency of the
Council, and wish you every success in leading the
Council this month.

I would like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals for their reports and informative
briefings today. I also wish to take this opportunity
to congratulate Judge Carmel Agius on his election
as President of the ICTY, and to convey my thanks to
Judge Theodor Meron and Judge Vagn Joensen for their
work.

The work and practice of both Tribunals have had
a significant impact on and launched a new dynamic
within international criminal law and the national
legal systems of the concerned countries. Since the
very beginning, Bosnia and Herzegovina has fully
cooperated with the ICTY and implemented all its
decisions and rulings. We emphasize the importance
of the successful completion of the work of the ICTY,
and we encourage the Tribunal to make every effort to
meet the targets of its completion strategy and forecast
delivery dates of judgements in order to avoid any
further delays.

Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to cooperate
with the ICTY and will continue to do so with the
Mechanism. The completion of the ICTY mandate does
not mean the end of the fight against impunity in my
country. We remain committed to strengthening the
national justice systems at all levels in order to bring
to justice persons responsible for atrocity crimes.
The National War Crimes Strategy has improved the
consistency of juridical practices throughout the entire
country at all levels, and ensures the protection and
support of victims and witnesses.

The implementation of the Strategy is a complex
process in which many institutions, at all levels of
authority, in Bosnia and Herzegovina participate.
Despite numerous challenges, important results have
been accomplished. As of June, we had reduced the
number of unresolved cases of war crimes in the
Prosecutor's Office by 15 per cent. Some progress
has been made in resolving Category II cases. A
centralized database of war crimes cases has been
established by the Prosecutor's Office at the state level.
The Prosecutor's Offices in Bosnia and Herzegovina
dealing with war crimes at all levels of authority can
use the database, which promotes more effective case
management and prevents overlapping investigations.
The evaluation and selection criteria to determine case
priority have been harmonized. The harmonization
of court practices in cases of war crimes prosecuted
before the courts in my country has been strengthened
through closer cooperation among the Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the entity-level Supreme Court and
the Appellate Court of Breko district.

Lack of funding has jeopardized the progress that
has been made in the implementation of the National
War Crimes Strategy. We welcome the support of the
European Union in the implementation of the strategy
and the support of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations
Development Programme, particularly in connection
with witness protection activities and the appropriate
assistance and support to victims.

In September, the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina adopted a justice sector reform
strategy for the period from 2014 to 2018. The strategy
will contribute to the long-term reinforcement of the rule
of law. It will further consolidate the judicial system,
including measures to improve judicial independence
and efficiency. Furthermore, the strategy will support
the effective implementation of the National War
Crimes Strategy.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains committed to
promoting regional cooperation, which plays a key role
in rebuilding trust in the region. A good step in that
direction would be the conclusion of the cooperation
protocols in the prosecution of war crimes between
the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Prosecutors' Offices of neighbouring countries.
Intensified regional cooperation in the prosecution of
war crimes enables more efficient work on cases that
involve suspects, victims or evidence located in two or
more countries.

Finally, I would like to underline that the legacy
of both Tribunals should serve as a constant reminder
in the fight against impunity, both now and for future
generations. Bosnia and Herzegovina is dedicated to the
fight against impunity. We underline the importance
of justice for achieving true reconciliation, as well
as political stability and socioeconomic development
within the country and in the whole region.

