Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to extend to you, Mr. President, and the
United Kingdom delegation our congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would like to thank
Ambassador Rugunda and the Ugandan delegation for
their effective leadership of the work of the Council in
July.
I thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Ms. Susana Malcorra
and General Martin Luther Agwai for their detailed
briefings, and the force commanders who have left the
Chamber for their presence. Viet Nam supports the
statement of the Non-Aligned Movement, to be
delivered by the Ambassador of Morocco.

Through more than six decades that witnessed
radical transformations in the international security
environment, United Nations peacekeeping operations
have evolved into a versatile tool and a credible
response of the Organization to deterring or reversing
protracted conflicts and to helping the affected countries
move towards a steady state of stability. Today, with
116,000 personnel deployed in 15 missions,
peacekeeping is shouldering a unique spectrum of
integrated, multisectoral and multifaceted mandates
that extend far beyond the traditional task of ceasefire
monitoring and involve a wider partnership of
international and national stakeholders.

Since the beginning of the new millennium,
however, the exponential growth in the number, scope,
size and cost of peacekeeping operations has
overstretched the United Nations capacity to deliver on
all tasks. The prolongation of intra-State conflicts and
their transboundary dimensions have brought about
challenges associated with personnel management,
logistical support, quality assurance, oversight and
political engagement, while there is little sign that the
demand for complex, multidimensional missions is
decreasing. Against the backdrop of the global
financial crisis, the mismatch between costs and
capacities, which vary across operations, and the
disconnect among those who take decisions on
peacekeeping operations, those who implement them,
those who allocate resources, those who have to
implement decisions on the ground and recipient
countries are factors that, in varying degrees, add to the
complexity of the problems faced.

For the shared objective of making United
Nations peacekeeping work better, over the past couple
of years Member States have come up with several
important initiatives on policy issues and capacity-
building, including the Brahimi report (S/2000/809),
the 2010 reform agenda, the restructuring of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
establishment of the Department of Field Support.
Efforts are also being undertaken by the Fifth
Committee, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Peacebuilding Commission, United

Nations agencies and programmes, and the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations. As an internal
review to help configure United Nations peacekeeping
to meet the challenges of today and tomorrow, the New
Horizon non-paper calls for a global partnership in
purpose and action for the future and proposes
recommendations that cut across the entire life cycle of
amission.

In the context of the multiplication of proposals
already available, we consider that the merit of any
new initiative or process should be carefully gauged in
the context of the ongoing reforms and discussed in an
open and transparent manner. Thus, we can ensure
coherence and the best possible results and, in
particular, gain a correct understanding of and
appropriately carry out such cross-cutting tasks as the
protection of civilians, robust operations and
peacebuilding activities.

We underline the importance of ensuring the best
possible unity of command, lines of accountability,
integration of efforts, and the safety and security of
United Nations peacekeepers through every phase of
the relevant reforms. In that process, the establishment
and performance of mandates should always be carried
out in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter and such universally
recognized principles as the consent of the parties, the
non-use of force except in self-defence, total
impartiality, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, and non-interference in their
internal affairs.

The wider United Nations membership and
international partners can also have a role to play in
such endeavours. Troop- and police-contributing
countries, most of which are non-aligned and
developing nations, should be involved early and fully
in all aspects and stages of peacekeeping so as to
contribute their expertise and experience to the
decision-making process both at Headquarters and in
the field. The comparative advantages and inputs of
regional organizations could be further exploited within
the framework of Chapter VIII in order to reinforce the
effectiveness and synergies for peacekeeping.

As part of a comprehensive approach to latent
conflicts, peacekeeping can be neither a panacea for
the problems related to international peace and security
nor a substitute for the local political process, which
should be strengthened by national reconciliation

efforts and the full realization of peoples' potential.
That in turn would alleviate the situations of already
overburdened missions.

Peacekeeping operations are not intended
primarily to engage in reconstruction or to rebuild the
countries in which they are deployed, as other
specialized organizations and institutions can carry out
such activities more efficiently. In order to achieve
sustainable peace, the root causes of conflicts must be
resolved by engaging all involved parties on the basis
of dialogue and peaceful dispute settlement and by
finding long-term solutions to the comprehensive
political, security, economic and humanitarian
dimensions of the problems in question.

Depending on the specific circumstances and
context, preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and
resolution, and peacebuilding, if used appropriately,
can have more desired effects and less-costly solutions.
Accomplishing that will mean integrating the New
Horizon initiative with the recently issued reports of
the Secretary-General on mediation and early recovery,
strengthening the relationship between peacebuilding
and peacekeeping, and enhancing the critical role of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

Finally, we thank you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for the draft presidential statement, which
we support.

