Mrs. Nl'lfiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba firmly condemns and rejects terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, including State
terrorism. We consider that all terrorist acts, methods
and practices wherever, by whomever and against
whomever they are committed to be totally
unjustifiable, whatever the motive invoked to justify
them. The recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai are new
and clear proof of the danger that terrorism represents
for us all. Cuba expresses its sincere condolences to the
people and the Government of India with regard to the
victims of those criminal acts.

We urge all States to fulfil the obligations they
have undertaken to combat terrorism by prosecuting or,
where appropriate, extraditing the perpetrators of
terrorist acts; by preventing the organization,
instigation or financing of such acts against other
States from within or outside their territories or by
organizations based in their territories; or by refraining
from supplying arms or other means that could be used
for terrorist acts in other States, among other actions.

Cuba also rejects acts, measures and the use or
the threat of the use of force that violate the United
Nations Charter and international law and that any
State imposes or tries to impose against others under
the pretext of combating terrorism. Likewise, our
country categorically rejects the unilateral drawing up
of lists accusing States of allegedly supporting
terrorism, which are inconsistent with international
law.

We are convinced that multilateral cooperation,
under the auspices of the United Nations, is the most
effective way to combat international terrorism. We
stress the importance of the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by
all Member States. In that respect, we consider it
appropriate to convene an international conference,
under the auspices of the United Nations, so as to
define terrorism and adopt comprehensive and
effective measures for joint action against it. We
support the conclusion, as soon as possible and within
the framework of the United Nations, of a
comprehensive convention on combating international
terrorism that includes the definition of terrorism.

For years, our country has been submitting to the
Security Council detailed information on the terrorist
acts against Cuba by various individuals and
organizations, as well as on the conspiratorial
protection that the United States Government offers
them. To date, our denunciations have not received any
concrete response from the Council.

It has been over a year and a half since the
release in the United States of the terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles, who is rightly designated the most notorious
terrorist of the Western hemisphere. Despite having all
the evidence against him for his countless terrorist acts,
the United States Government has never done so. Cuba
believes that that case is a clear and flagrant violation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, as well as a number of international legal
instruments pertaining to the fight against terrorism.
Once again, the Cuban Government demands that the
United States authorities return the terrorist to the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which has requested
his extradition, or that they try him on their territory.

While it lets self-confessed and unscrupulous
terrorists go free, for over 10 years the United States
Government has been keeping in high-security prisons
five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters political prisoners,
who were only trying, with great self-sacrifice and
courage, to obtain information on Miami-based
terrorist groups, so as to prevent their violent acts and
save the lives of Cuban and United States citizens.
Once again, we demand their immediate release.

Double standards cannot prevail. It is impossible
to eliminate terrorism, if some terrorist acts are
condemned, while others are silenced, tolerated or
justified. Cuba has never allowed, nor will it allow its
territory to be used for terrorist acts against any State,
without exception. As we have until now, we will
continue firmly to fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.

