Ms. ankato-Diseko (South Africa): We thank
Germany for facilitating this important debate. We are
grateful for the very useful statements made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herrve Ladsous; the UNICEF Executive Director,
Mr. Anthony Lake; and the President of the International
Centre for Transitional Justice, Mr. David Tolbert.

We congratulate Ms. Zerrougui on her appointment
and we wish to acknowledge the significant contribution
of the former Special Representative, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, to the protection of children in armed
conflict. We also welcome resolution 2068 (2012), just
adopted.

The plight of children in armed conflict remains
an issue of deep concern to South Africa. Armed
conflict continues to disproportionally affect children,
who remain the most vulnerable to attacks, forced
recruitment and deprivation of their basic rights.
Children involved in armed conflict are deprived of an
opportunity to grow up in a secure environment where
they can realize their full potential. The international
community's response to the plight of the most
vulnerable in situations of conflict is a direct reflection
of its commitment to protecting children caught up in
armed conflict.

South Africa is pleased that the issue of children
and armed conflict continues to receive the attention
it deserves on the agenda of the United Nations in
general and the Security Council in particular since
the compilation of the first United Nations report by
Ms. Graca Machel in 1996 on children affected by
armed conflict (A/51/306 and Add.l).

We have noted that the Security Council has
identified six grave violations committed against
children in armed conflict. South Africa believes that
each must be given equal priority and attention by the
Council. In this regard, we welcome the expansion
of the trigger mechanism for punitive measures. It is
imperative that all parties to armed conflict refrain
from any action that could violate the rights of children.
We call on all parties involved in conflict to abide by
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and refrain from attacks against civilian targets,
particularly those wherein children would be present.

We have noted that the efforts employed by the
Council, including the threat of being listed in the
reports of the Secretary-General, has led to some
actors modifying their behaviour. However, despite the
commendable work of the Council, and in particular the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
there remain State and non-State entities that continue
to persistently perpetrate violations and abuses against
children.
We should note that State actors in most cases
have been cooperative and have worked constructively
in preparing and implementing concrete, time-bound
action plans to cease and prevent abuse and violations
against children. The major challenge, however, has
been bringing armed opposition and rebel groups
into compliance. Thus, when considering compliance
measures, we need to ensure that they will be effective
against non-State parties in particular.

Despite our efforts to address these persistent
violators in a non punitive way, there has been a
dramatic increase in their number from 13 to 32. We
therefore need to assess whether the actions we have
taken thus far are sufficient and effective to deal with
these cases, because clearly they are not, as the numbers
attest. We therefore share the concern of the Secretary-
General about the unacceptable, high and growing
number of persistent perpetrators of grave violations
against children, as well as his call that further decisive
and immediate action is needed to halt such violations
and to ensure that persistent perpetrators are brought
to account.

It is therefore imperative that we consider
appropriate action; otherwise, we would be rendered
ineffective and unable to assist some of the most
vulnerable victims of armed conflict. The report
(S/2012/26l) ofthe Secretary-General provides us some
concrete recommendations for addressing this matter.
It is the responsibility of the Council to take positive
action in that regard.

Resolution 1612 (2005) reaffirmed the Council's
intention to consider imposing, through country-
specific resolutions, targeted and graduated measures
against those in violation of applicable international law
relating to the rights and protection of children in armed
conflict. The expansion ofdesignation criteria for listing
by some Sanctions Committees - including those on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, the
Sudan and Cote d'Ivoire - of those committing grave
violations against children is a welcome development.
The Council should therefore consider the expansion of
the criteria when contemplating sanctions measures. In
that regard, the Council could receive recommendations
from the Working Group on listing individuals involved
in gross violations against children in armed conflict.
That would necessitate a close working relationship
between the Working Group and the country-specific
sanctions committees.

Another recommendation offered by the Secretary-
General is closer cooperation with national and
international courts to address persistent perpetrators
who continue to commit grave violations against
children in conflict situations. In that regard, we
welcome the recent decision by the International
Criminal Court in respect of Mr. Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo and the decision of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone in respect of Mr. Charles Taylor for their crimes
against humanity, which include violations related to
children.

It is also regrettable that a larger number of persistent
perpetrators are on the African continent, with the
Lord's Resistance Army in particular continuing to
devastate the lives and the livelihoods of communities,
including the security impact thereof. That should of
course come as no surprise, as most conflicts are on the
African continent. It is therefore vital for the United
Nations to work with the African Union and subregional
organizations on the African continent in addressing
this challenge. That will ensure effective coordination,
monitoring and reporting mechanisms, in addition to
galvanizing political will.

It is vital that we do not forget the long-term needs
of children who have been affected by armed conflict.
South Africa therefore underscores the importance of
adopting a broad strategy regarding conflict prevention.
It should address the root causes of armed conflict in
a comprehensive manner and create an environment
conducive to the protection and promotion of children's
rights.

In conclusion, South Africa commends the work
of the Working Group, especially its role to review
progress in the development and implementation of
time-bound action plans by parties to conflict to halt the
recruitment and use of children, which are violations
of international obligations. We would like to express
our continued commitment to work with Council
members and international community to ensure that
the protection of children remains our priority.

