Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
Special Representative Patten and Ambassador
Wronecka, Chair ofthe Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, for
their briefings.

At the moment the situation in South Sudan remains
generally stable. The parties are working to implement
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and have
made progress. The ceasefire has taken hold in most
areas. In recent months, the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism, the
National Pre-Transitional Committee and the National
Constitutional Amendment Committee have begun their
work. The Joint Defence Board, the Joint Transitional
Security Committee and the Strategic Defence and
Security Review Board have also been established as
security mechanisms. The South Sudanese Government
has mobilized resources and allocated funds to support
the implementation of the Agreement. Activities for
raising awareness about the Revitalized Agreement are
continuing across the country.

China welcomes the efforts and progress made by all
parties, including the Government. In the meantime, we
note that some opposition factions have not yet agreed
to support the Revitalized Agreement. Intercommunal
tensions persist and the humanitarian situation remains
serious. All of those issues pose challenges to long-term
peace in South Sudan. The international community
and the Security Council should be fully aware of the
complexity of the situation in South Sudan and should
provide the country with constructive assistance in
addressing the problems on the ground. The task now at
hand is implementing the Revitalized Agreement, and
the Security Council and the international community
should focus on the following two points to that end.

First, the political will of the South Sudanese
parties must be maintained, as it is critical to the
implementation of the Agreement. On the one hand, we
should fully respect the prerogative of the leadership
of South Sudan to deal with its own issues, encourage
the parties to use their initiative and avoid imposing
solutions on them. On the other hand, we should
continue to support the mediation efforts of regional
organizations such as the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and
focus on helping the South Sudanese parties build
mutual trust, take on their commitments in earnest and
achieve a full cessation of hostilities. We agree with
the recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/1103) that establishing the transitional security
arrangements and forming a transitional Government
should be priorities for the pre-transitional period.
That will be conducive to confidence-building and
maintaining the political will of the parties.

Secondly, international partners should work
quickly to provide South Sudan with assistance and
support. There is a great deal to be done in a country
emerging from a prolonged conflict. Implementing
the Revitalized Agreement and relaunching economic
development require a great deal of money and
support. We call on the international community to
provide funding for the Revitalized Agreement as
soon as possible. At the same time, we should step up
humanitarian assistance and economic support to South
Sudan, enhance its recovery and development capacity,
help it to rebuild and prioritize investments in sectors
such as agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education
and health so that people can enjoy peace dividends as
soon as possible.

China commends the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan for its significant contribution to
maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan and
supports the Mission in its continued implementation
of the tasks mandated by the Council's resolutions in
support of South Sudan's political and peace processes.

It has been China's consistent position that
sanctions are a means, not an end. The Security
Council should be prudent in its use of sanctions
to ensure that the measures taken are helpful to the
political settlement in South Sudan. China has always
supported South Sudan's peace and development. In
line with our commitment made at the Beijing Summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, China has
provided the country with ¥300 million in aid and the
equivalent of ¥100 million in emergency humanitarian
food assistance. As always, China will continue to be
an active supporter and constructive participant in the
South Sudan peace process, and will play a constructive
role in South Sudan's achievement of lasting peace and
sustainable development.

