Mr. Barkin (United States ofAmerica): We wish to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari and Ms. Marcaillou for their
sobering briefings.

The United States welcomes yesterday's
announcement that Turkey would halt its offensive
actions in north-eastern Syria and agree to a permanent
ceasefire. As a result, the sanctions imposed by the
United States Treasury on 14 October have been lifted.
Unfortunately, as noted in the briefings, the events of
the past week have resulted in the displacement of as
many as 180,000 people in a country in which more than
11 million people already depend on international aid.
Nearly 10,000 have become refugees in northern Iraq.

The United States remains committed to ensuring
the security and stability of Syria. That is precisely why
last week, Vice-President Mike Pence and Secretary of
State Mike Pompeo travelled to Ankara, where, after
intense deliberations, Turkey committed to a five-day
pause of its operations in north-eastern Syria to enable
the withdrawal of the Kurdish People's Protection Units
from the Turkish border.

The joint statement made on 17 October paved the
way for a permanent ceasefire. We are hopeful, based
on assurances from the Turkish authorities and the
Syrian Democratic Forces, that the permanent ceasefire
will be honoured, civilian lives will be protected and
the hard-fought territorial defeat of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) will be preserved. That is a
solution that will save lives and contribute to long-term
stability in the region.

As President Trump has made clear, Turkey must
protect civilians in north-eastern Syria. We also expect
Turkey to abide by its commitments to preventing ISIS
from regaining a foothold in Syria and to ensure the
secure, humane detention of ISIS fighters. We remain
deeply troubled by reports that Turkish-supported
opposition forces have deliberately targeted civilians. If
verified, those actions may constitute war crimes, and
we urge our Turkish partners to immediately investigate
those incidents and hold accountable any individuals or
entities involved. Turkey is responsible for ensuring
that its forces and any Turkish-supported entities act in
accordance with the law of armed conflict.

While much of our attention over the past week
has been focused on north-eastern Syria, we cannot
lose sight of the fact that we may be on the precipice
of the largest individual humanitarian catastrophe
since the conflict began - one that is being driven
by the Al-Assad regime and its allies in north-western
Syria. The United States is closely monitoring reports
of the recent uptick in air strikes and shelling in Idlib
province, where more than 400,000 people have been
displaced since April. Any military escalation in Idlib
province is reckless and poses a grave threat to regional
stability, 3 million civilian lives and the United
Nations ability to deliver humanitarian assistance to a
vulnerable population.

The United States once again calls on the Al-Assad
regime and its allies to cease military operations in Idlib
and uphold the Turkish-Russian ceasefire agreement
of September 2018. The United States fully expects
attacks on hospitals and other civilian infrastructure to
cease. We fully expect all parties to support the board
of inquiry's work, and we fully expect the Security
Council's authorization of both life-saving cross-
border aid and regular humanitarian aid to reach every
single Syrian in need, regardless of their location in
the country. In order to facilitate aid distribution, the
United Nations and its implementing partners must
have the freedom of movement required to implement
cross-border aid deliveries through all agreed border
crossings, in line with resolution 2449 (2018).

Our commitment to supporting the most vulnerable
can be seen in the fact that the United States remains
the largest donor of humanitarian aid in Syria. We will
not waver in that commitment, but we must also stress
that no single donor can address all of Syria's needs. We
urge others to contribute additional funding to support
stabilization programming and humanitarian assistance.

Looking to the future, the Council cannot forget
that resolution 2254 (2015) demands that all parties
immediately cease attacks against civilian targets,
support efforts to achieve a ceasefire, provide unhindered
humanitarian access and request that the United Nations
convene the parties to engage in formal negotiations
on the political process. We are now mere days from
the first meeting of the Constitutional Committee. It is
more vital than ever to ensure that this political process
moves forward. The Council must spare no effort to
support Special Envoy Pedersen's work to convene the
Constitutional Committee so that the people of Syria
may at last find peace within reach.

