Mr. Jingree (Mauritius): I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome Judge Jorda, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Pillay, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and Chief Prosecutor Del Ponte to the Security Council
Chamber today. I thank our three guests for their
comprehensive and useful briefings on the progress of
work and the activities of the Tribunals and on the state
of the prosecutions under way against those responsible
for serious crimes committed in the territories of the
former Yugoslavia and of Rwanda.

The Tribunals were established to bring to justice
all those guilty of war crimes and they play a crucial
role in the promotion of human security by ending
impunity. Both Tribunals have historic responsibilities;
it is important that they function properly and enjoy the
highest credibility. The effectiveness of the Tribunals is
an important factor in the prevention of conflicts and
should serve as a warning to potential perpetrators that
war crimes and crimes against humanity will not go
unpunished,

Allow me to address the ICTR first. My
delegation takes note with satisfaction of the
remarkable improvement in the performance of the
Tribunal in spite of its limitations and the delays
encountered at the beginning. It is encouraging to hear
that since the first trials started in 1997, the Trial
Chambers of the ICTR have rendered eight judgements
in respect of nine accused. However, the extremely
heavy workload of the ICTR is a cause of concern for
my delegation. It is important to match the need to
respect the rights of the accused with that of meeting
the expectations of the victims, of Rwandan society
and of the United Nations.

Mauritius therefore fully supports the request for
ad litem judges for the ICTR to allow the trials of most
of the present detainees to begin in 2002. That would
greatly help to prevent any further delay in the work of
the ICTR; we should not forget that justice delayed is
justice denied. My delegation believes that Judge
Pillay's request for a pool of 18 ad litem judges for the
ICTR would help in reducing the time period for
completing the trials of all those persons who are
currently being prosecuted or who will be prosecuted
in the future before the Tribunal. We should also not
forget that, with the evolution of the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the imminent
demobilization of the members of the former Rwandan
Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe may give
added responsibilities to the ICTR.

I turn now to the ICTY, which is doing a
commendable job in serving justice and in bringing
about significant changes in the political scene in the
Balkans. The prosecutors of he ICTY recently
confirmed that they had filed a new indictment against
former President Milosevic, charging him with
genocide and other crimes allegedly committed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That clearly demonstrates the
seriousness with which the ICTY is undertaking its
responsibilities. My delegation expresses the hope that
all countries of the former Yugoslavia will cooperate
fully with the ICTY to further the cause of justice and
reconciliation in the Balkans.

We also agree with Judge Jorda that, given the
new perspectives in the Balkans, there is a need to give
serious consideration to the promotion of the new
national reconciliation processes that the Balkan States
are setting up, such as the truth and reconciliation
commissions.

The experience gained through the ICTR and the
ICTY has significantly influenced the idea of
establishing a Special Court for Sierra Leone to
prosecute persons who bear the greatest responsibility
for the commission of crimes against humanity, war
crimes and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law within the territory of Sierra Leone.

Finally, the work of the two Tribunals has
confirmed the pressing need for the early establishment
of the International Criminal Court as the competent
international forum for the trial of alleged perpetrators
of crimes.

