Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to start by thanking Special Representative Jan
Kubis for his briefing and comprehensive report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/350) on the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and for his analysis of the current situation
in Afghanistan. I thank Ambassador Tanin for his
statement today, as well as the Secretary-General for
his report.

I would like briefly to touch upon a few points
regarding the prevailing situation in Afghanistan:

First, Afghanistan is at a very sensitive juncture in
its history. There is an intense focus on issues such as
the security and political transitions that will culminate
in 2014 with the end of the presence of international
forces and the upcoming presidential election. We hope
that, through the efforts of the Afghan Government
and the United Nations, this process will help to better
preserve and strengthen peace, stability and security in
Afghanistan and the region. In that regard, we support
the regional mechanisms, including the Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan and the implementation of plans for
six confidence-building measures, as defined for the
process.

Secondly, in the area of regional cooperation, we
have continued our bilateral cooperation, particularly on
security matters, counter-narcotics efforts, developing
projects and economic cooperation in the fields of
roads, rails, energy, mining and minerals, agriculture,
and so on.

Thirdly, on the return of refugees, a tripartite
meeting between Iran, Afghanistan and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was held
in Tehran on 15 and 16 January. In this meeting, we
presented ways and means to encourage more safe
and sustainable return of refugees, and a number of
agreements were concluded. We look forward to the full
implementation of those agreements. We also welcome
the agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Afghanistan on 31 March to set up a
team to seek joint solutions and integrated approaches
for refugees. We urge the international community
to continue to strengthen and expedite its efforts
in creating conditions conducive to the sustainable
repatriation of refugees and their full rehabilitation and
reintegration in their homeland.

We welcome the beginning of the international
military drawdown and look forward to the completion
of that process. However, we are concerned about the
increase in the loss of life and the injuries inflicted
on Afghan civilians, part of which have been caused
by the military operations of the international forces
in Afghanistan. As indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General covering the period 1 February to
30 April, UNAMA documented 533 civilian deaths and
882 civilian injuries. That is a 44 per cent increase in
deaths and a 16 per cent rise in civilian injuries. Attacks
on civilians under any pretext and by whomsoever
committed are to be condemned and must be halted.

We commend the initiatives by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Afghan authorities,
in particular those relating to the elimination of opium
cultivation fields. We are concerned about the prediction,
as reflected in the 2013 Opium Risk Assessment,
with regare to the possible increase in opium poppy
cultivation, in particular in the north and north-east
of Afghanistan. As indicated in the report, if current
trends continue, the total number of opium poppy-free
provinces in 2013 would drop to 14, down from 17 in
2012 and 20 in 2010. We are sure that, with the strong
commitment of Afghani and international partners
alike, the menace of drug cultivation and trafficking,
which breeds extremism, could be curtailed.

In conclusion, the future role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan is going to be more crucial,
especially in the wake of the drawdown and withdrawal
of international forces in 2014. The role of UNAMA
should evolve on the basis of the situation on the ground,
emerging realities and, above all, the aspirations of the
people and the Government of Afghanistan. As our
officials indicated in their meeting with Mr. Jan Kubis
during his recent visit to Tehran, we support UNAMA
activities and wish Mr. Kubis the greatest of success in
fulfilling his mission.

