Mr. Feltman: Two years after the conclusion
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
the Secretary-General is immensely encouraged by
the continued commitment by all participants to the
agreement. The JCPOA - reached by the E3/EU+3 and
Iran on 14 July 2015 - is the embodiment of successful
multilateral diplomacy, political will and perseverance.
This diplomatic achievement reflects the spirit and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and gives us all hope that even the most difficult
issues among States can be addressed through dialogue,
understanding and reciprocity. As noted by the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
this agreement belongs to the entire international
community. Hence, it is imperative that all JCPOA
participants, the United Nations and the international
community at large, continue to support the full and
effective implementation of this historic agreement.

Today's meeting of the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) is taking
place against the backdrop of steady implementation,
cooperation and progress. Since implementation
day, on 16 January 2016, the International Atomic
Energy Agency has issued seven reports documenting
continued implementation by Iran of its nuclear-
related commitments. The recent 25 April meeting of
the Joint Commission of the JCPOA in Vienna - the
fifth meeting since implementation day - noted the
continued adherence to JCPOA commitments by all its
participants, and stressed the need to ensure its full and
effective implementation.

The Secretary- General believes that the comprehensive
and sustained implementation of the JCPOA will
guarantee that Iran's nuclear programme remains
exclusively peaceful, while allowing for transparency,
monitoring and verification. It will also provide Iran
with an opportunity for greater engagement with the
international community and assist in increasing Iran's
trade and economic relations. It will also bring forth
to a satisfactory conclusion the consideration of the
Iranian nuclear issue by the Security Council.

I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the third report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2017/515). The report was submitted to
the Council on 16 June pursuant to annex B to resolution
2231 (2015) and paragraph 7 ofthe note by the President
of the Council issued on 16 January 2016 (S/2016/44).
As guided by the Security Council, the report of the
Secretary-General focuses on the implementation
of the provisions contained in annex B to resolution
2231 (2015). Let me turn to the main findings of the
third report.

First, the Secretary-General has not received any
report, nor is he aware of any open source information,
regarding the supply, sale or transfer to Iran of nuclear-
related items undertaken contrary to the provisions of
the resolution. I also welcome the fact that Member
States are making greater use of the procurement
channel. Since 30 December 2016, 10 new nuclear-
related proposals were submitted to the Security
Council for approval, bringing to 16 the total number
of proposals submitted since implementation day. Of
the 16 proposals, 10 were approved by the Council, two
were withdrawn by the proposing States and four are
currently under review. The proposals were processed
in accordance with the timelines established by
resolution 2231 (2015), with due regard for information
security and confidentiality. The operational linkages
established between the Security Council and the
Procurement Working Group of the Joint Commission
are both effective and efficient. In that regard, I wish
to take this opportunity to acknowledge the excellent
cooperation we have with the European External Action
Service, especially its Coordinator of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission.

Secondly, regarding the implementation of ballistic
missile-related provisions, the report notes that, on
29 January, Iran launched a medium-range ballistic
missile. Letters were submitted to the Secretary-
General by Iran and Israel, and jointly by France,
Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States,
concerning the launch. The letters presented a range
of views and interpretations. As in the case of the
ballistic missile launches by Iran in March 2016, there
was no consensus in the Security Council on how this
particular launch related to resolution 2231 (2015). In
that regard, I would like to quote exactly from the third
report of the Secretary-General:

"I call upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to avoid
such ballistic missile launches, which have the
potential to increase tensions. I appeal to all
Member States to redouble their efforts to promote
peace and stability in the region." (S/2017/515, para. 9)

Thirdly, in terms of restrictions on arms-related
transfers, the report includes additional information on
the seizure of an arms shipment by the French navy in
the northern Indian Ocean in March 2016. In January
2017, France invited the Secretariat to examine the
seized arms. After examination of the weapons and
analysis of information provided, the Secretariat is
confident that the weapons seized are of Iranian origin
and were shipped from Iran.

Fourthly, the report also highlights the participation,
for the second year in a row, of the Defence Industries
Organisation (DIO) in the Iraq defence exhibition held
in March, which may again have implications regarding
the implementation of the assets freeze. Since the
D10 is an entity on the list maintained pursuant to
resolution 2231 (2015), its funds, other financial assets
and economic resources on the Iraqi territory should
have been frozen by the Iraqi authorities. The issue was
raised again with the Permanent Mission of Iraq, and
the Secretary-General intends to report to the Council
in due course. The Secretary-General's report also
provides information on additional travels by Major
General Qasem Soleimani since the second report
(S/2016/ll36). The travels were reported by Iranian and
Arab media outlets.

In addition to the findings I have just mentioned,
the report also reflects official information provided
by Member States to the Secretary-General, including
from Israel, Lebanon, South Africa, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates, the United States of
America and Yemen. The Secretariat has not been
able to independently corroborate those reports and
will provide further updates, as appropriate, should
additional information become available.

As we are about to enter into the third year of the
implementation of the JCPOA, the Secretary-General
would like to once again reaffirm the particular
responsibilities of JCPOA participants in carrying
forward the full and effective implementation of this
agreement. The Secretary-General is hopeful that all
participants will continue to make progress in the
implementation of the agreement and, in the process,
secure its durability.

In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the
leadership of His Excellency Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi of Italy in his role as Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I would
also like to convey our fullest support to him, as well
as to the Security Council, in the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

