Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): On behalf of the
African Union, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your accession to the presidency of
the Security Council. I join previous speakers in
extending to you our gratitude for having organized
this meeting.

Our thanks also go to your predecessor and to
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Representative of the Secretary-
General in Guinea-Bissau, for having presented the
Secretary-General's exhaustive report (S/2009/552).
We would like to express to Mr. Mutaboba how pleased
the African Union is to see him at the head of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS). The African Union also
welcomes the personal role he has played in
strengthening cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations in the field. This has been
carried out, inter alia, through regular contacts with
Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, Special Envoy of the
President of the African Union Commission, who
would have liked to participate in this meeting, but was
not able to do so, as he is on the way to Bissau with the
joint mission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union.

As Council members know, the African Union, in
backing the efforts of ECOWAS, and in cooperation
with the United Nations and other partners, remains
deeply involved in promoting positive developments in
the situation in Guinea-Bissau, which has been marked
for some time now by troubling instability, a critical
economic situation, an army that is far larger than
warranted, given the country's real needs, and the
negative impact of illicit drug trafficking. The
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime has just referred to this last matter.

I would recall that, since the events of July 2003,
the efforts undertaken jointly by ECOWAS and the
African Union have dissuaded the former junta, or
Military Committee for the Restoration of Democratic
Constitutional Order, from holding on to power. At that
time, you will recall, the interim president of the
Committee sent a special envoy, Mr. Francisco
Madeira, Minister of the Presidency for Parliamentary
and Diplomatic Issues of Mozambique.

Since then, the African Union has spared no
effort in assisting Guinea-Bissau to extricate itself
from the various crises it has experienced, including by
sending special envoys and deploying observation
missions during the elections held in the country, so
that it might once again take its rightful place in the
community of nations.

More recently, the President of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, appointed Mr. Joao
Bernardo de Miranda, former Minister for External
Affairs of Angola, as his special envoy to Guinea-
Bissau. Shortly after his appointment, he undertook a
number of missions to Guinea-Bissau.

In the light of the early presidential elections held
following the assassination of President Nino Vieira,
and given the tensions that arose before the second
round, Mr. Miranda visited Bissau with the objective of
meeting with Mr. Malam Bacai Sanha and Mr. Kumba
Yala to promote conditions conducive to a successful
election.

It is in this context that he obtained the signature,
on the eve of the election, by his two interlocutors, of
the memorandum of understanding on the results of the
second round of the presidential election. In this
agreement, the two candidates committed themselves
to abide by and enforce the results of the elections of
26 July 2009, to utilize legal avenues in cases of
possible challenges and to act in a dignified and

09-5946]
respectful way in their dealings with the unsuccessful
candidate.

The Council will recall that this memorandum of
understanding, which entered into force on the date of
its signature by the relevant parties, will remain valid
for the duration of the presidential mandate resulting
from the presidential election of 26 July 2009. As
Mr. Mutaboba painted an exhaustive picture of the
elections, I will not dwell on them.

In the context of consolidating that momentum, a
joint African Union-ECOWAS consultative meeting on
Guinea-Bissau was held in Addis Ababa at African
Union headquarters on 4 and 5 August 2009.
Participants engaged in fruitful exchanges on the
nature of the collaboration and the contribution of the
African Union and ECOWAS in Guinea-Bissau, the
financing of that effort and the relationship between
the African Union-ECOWAS contribution and other
efforts underway in Guinea-Bissau. The meeting then
recommended the convening of a high-level
preparatory meeting in Guinea-Bissau prior to the
donor conference that the President of Nigeria, the
current chairman of the ECOWAS Authority, is
proposing to convene before the end of the year.

The objective of that meeting is to afford the
Government and the people of Guinea-Bissau an
opportunity to express their needs and their priorities
for security sector reform, especially at the moment
when a new Government is being set up. It should also
be an opportunity to discuss with the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau the forms of assistance that the AU and
ECOWAS can provide and the modalities of that
assistance.

As an extension of the consultative meeting, the
heads of State and Government, gathered in Tripoli on
31 August in the framework of the special session of
the African Union Assembly, also addressed the
situation in Guinea-Bissau and made concrete
recommendations on consolidation of peace and
stability in Guinea-Bissau, the finalization of
consultations with the authorities of Guinea-Bissau on
the means of creating conditions favourable to the
conduct of a credible inquiry into the political
assassinations in that country in 2009 and the
organization, before the end of 2009, of a regional
conference on post-conflict reconstruction,
stabilization, security sector reform and drug
trafficking.

As I am here addressing this Council, the joint
AU-ECOWAS mission has been at work in Guinea-
Bissau since 2 November 2009. That mission is to
study how to implement the Tripoli recommendations.
It is clear from its first contacts that Guinea-Bissau has
already undertaken substantial efforts, even though a
great deal remains to be done. However, the political
will and commitment of the authorities are clear.

Here, it behooves me to note that the new
Government is sparing no effort to improve public
finances in order to meet basic needs, including the
payment of salaries, which considerably reduces its
ability to contribute to the pensions funds, which
everyone knows is the key to success of security sector
reform.

We welcome the initiative of the National
Assembly to hold a national conference to study the
underlying causes of the conflict and strategies to set
up to prevent future tension.

This is the place to invite the partners in the
international community as a whole to become
resolutely involved in the post-conflict reconstruction
and development of Guinea-Bissau in order to extricate
the country once and for all from the cycle of
instability and violence in which it has been trapped in
recent years.

The African Union welcomes the progress being
made in setting up the integrated office of the United
Nations in Guinea-Bissau, as well as ongoing efforts of
the Peacebuilding Commission. That new momentum
underway in Guinea-Bissau is worthy of everyone's
support.

