Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
welcome the five new Council members among us. I
would also like to commend you, Sir, and the Chinese
delegation on your assumption of the important post of
the presidency for the month of January. Allow me also
to express our deep gratitude to Ambassador Kafando
and his delegation for their excellent work in
December.

On the question of Afghanistan, the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Kai Eide, gave
us very useful briefings this morning. Ambassador
Tanin also made a contribution to our discussion.

On behalf of my Government, I should like to
take this opportunity to commend Mr. Eide on his very
difficult work, especially on the handling of the
delicate process of the presidential election in the past
few months. I assure Ambassador Eide of our deep
appreciation and full support.

There can be no doubt that for those engaged in
Afghanistan, including us, last year was the most
challenging one since 2001. Exceptional time and
energy were spent handling the complicated electoral
process. To all of us, the guest house attack in October
was a shocking reminder of the treacherous situation
on the ground in which men and women are working to
implement tasks that we mandated them to do.

Regrettably, it seems as though we have been
repeating the same New Year's resolution in the past
several years. But it seems to me that this is more
serious than the previous two years. This moment at
the beginning of 2010 is critical to reversing the
negative trends of the previous year and to ensuring
future success in Afghanistan. Although the current
political situation surrounding the formation of the new
Cabinet has been a concern to us, we expect that the
new Administration of President Karzai will soon start
to work on the reform agenda, nation-building and
uniting people.

It should also be noted that all of us in the
international community are strengthening assistance
for Afghanistan in both the military and the
development fields. Japan very much welcomes the
new United States strategy announced on 1 December.
For its part, Japan announced a new assistance package
for Afghanistan of up to appropriately $5 billion over a
five-year period beginning in 2009. That package will
include assistance for the enhancement of the police
force, the reintegration of former insurgents and
sustainable and self-reliant development. That
announcement was timed to coincide with the
completion of the presidential electoral process and
five years of President Karzai's presidency, as well as
to demonstrate Japan's unchanged support during this
challenging period for the people of Afghanistan. We
hope that Japan's assistance will provide impetus for
further concrete international assistance to the country.
But I would also like to emphasize here that it is
important not just to make pledges, but also to
implement them. The track record in that regard is not
necessarily very good. It is time to honour the many
pledges that have been made and to accelerate their
implementation.

Likewise, we expect the same degree of strong
commitment from the Afghanistan Government. We
welcome the commitment shown in the inaugural
address by President Karzai, including his
determination to promote national reconciliation and to
fight corruption. I have full confidence that President
Karzai's determination will be translated into concrete
actions. We will stand by the Afghan Government to
assist in that effort. Against that backdrop, the
upcoming London Conference will be an opportune
occasion to reaffirm the commitment on the part of the
new Afghan Government to implement reforms, and on
the part of the international community to lend support
and provide resources.

Among the most important items on the agenda
of the new Afghan Administration will be the
reintegration of former insurgents. We should
encourage political outreach towards those former
insurgents who have forsaken violence and are
committed to live peacefully within the framework of
the Constitution. In parallel with the military effort to
maintain security, a political agenda including
reintegration must be pursued to help stability to take
root. Let me emphasize that such a plan must be led by
the Afghan Government. We are ready to lead
international efforts in assistance for reintegration as
one of the three pillars of a new strategy, based on our
experience in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts and in the disbandment of illegal
and armed groups. We hope that the London
Conference will add further momentum to consolidate
these efforts.

In the past few years, Japan has consistently
argued the importance of enhanced aid effectiveness
and donor coordination in Afghanistan. However, the
situation is far from satisfactory, as Kai Eide has told
us. We should definitely do more to avoid waste and
enhance impact.

Japan's assistance priorities of agriculture and
rural development, infrastructure and basic human
needs are in line with the areas that the Afghan
Government has prioritized. We concur with the
Secretary-General that measures for donor
coordination must be taken in partnership with the
Afghan Government, with the ultimate goal of
Afghanization in mind. The United Nations should
play an important role in coordination efforts.

The capacity of the United Nations Assistance
Mission (UNAMA) in that regard is important. We
should look into concrete measures to improve
UNAMA's coordination structures, as well as to
expedite the recruitment of experienced staff. I think
that it is very clear that we need to streamline
recruitment procedures, including broader delegation
of authority to UNAMA. At the same time, I stress that
effective coordination cannot be achieved without the
cooperation of donor countries and their willingness to
be coordinated by the United Nations. That is a point
that the Secretary-General has emphasized. We need
political will at the highest level.

Security is the biggest challenge and prerequisite
in all those efforts. We pay a high tribute to troop-
contributing countries, many of which have lost
precious lives of their personnel. We also commend the
Afghan security forces. But it is very clear that much
more needs to be done to further strengthen their
quality and numbers to ensure long-term stability.

The role of the United Nations has been, and will
remain, indispensable in helping to stabilize and
reconstruct the country. We pay a high tribute to the
continuing courageous work of United Nations staff on
the ground. We will continue to support the work of
UNAMA to the maximum extent possible. The security
of staff is of the utmost concern to us all. We should
provide every possible support for additional security
measures by the Secretary-General to enable relocated
staff to return as early as possible.

In addition, the mandate of UNAMA will be the
subject of discussion among us in the coming months
to ensure that it meets the expectations of both the
Afghan people and the international community. We
very much look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendations in his next report.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Japan's strong
commitment to helping the Government and people of
Afghanistan and to supporting UNAMA. I also wish
Turkey well in its role as lead country on Afghanistan.

