Mr. McKechnie: The President of the World
Bank, Mr. Robert Zoellick, is unfortunately unable to
be here today, and I wish to transmit his greetings and
convey his appreciation for this important report and
for inviting the World Bank to address the Council.

The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(8/2009/304) recognizes that the efforts of the
international community immediately post-conflict
have been less than fully effective.

The World Bank was deeply involved in the
preparation of the report. We welcome its findings. We
applaud the critical leadership role that the United
Nations can provide in post-conflict situations. We
support the report's efforts to resolve the inherent
tensions that arise between the need for speed in
responding to fragile situations and the need for
compliance with a coherent strategy that is nationally
owned.

Such tensions often result from different
perceptions of priorities by the international
community and partner countries, which paradoxically
may want a greater emphasis on building their
institutions and sustainable development that reduces
poverty. We should not forget also the demands for
quality, the effectiveness of our support, and the need
for financial accountability to maintain long-term,
predictable financial support.

The report rightly recognizes that we should seek
the views of the partner countries on what they
consider to be their priorities. Often we will find that
the highest priorities are personal security, justice and
the ending of impunity, not the easier public services
that the international community can readily provide.
There is also a need for clear and agreed priorities
around which recovery efforts can coalesce.

But the inevitable challenge remains: how can
priorities be set when everything seems to be a
priority? We support the recommendations of the report
for more effective planning based on a post-conflict
needs assessment. However, we would suggest the
following five points when setting priorities.

First, priorities should be driven by country
demand, not by what we think is best or what we are
able to deliver. Secondly, they should provide some
short-term results, preferably consistent with mid-term
priorities and, at the same time, should lay the basis for
sustainable development, growth and employment.
Thirdly, they should aim to strengthen the legitimate
authority of the State by enabling it to set and enforce
rules and laws, manage its budget, deliver services
effectively and embody national traditions and values.
Fourthly, priorities should not aim to replace the State
but to be its facilitator and enabler. And fifthly, they
should consider an exit strategy, namely, how to
transfer responsibility to the legitimate State as early as
possible.

The Paris Declaration and the Accra Agenda for
Action articulate a framework for delivering aid.
Experience has shown us that aid is most effective and
most supportive of State-building when it is provided
under national leadership and through country systems.

In the context of peacebuilding, how do we
increase our effectiveness? Effectiveness is often as
much about how foreign assistance is provided as it is
about the volume of that aid. Experience suggests some
guidelines for effectiveness. First is to tailor our
assistance to the country context. Second is to avoid
taking a linear approach to our response, as support for
State-building needs to take place during the
peacekeeping phase, not only after it. Third is to
develop institutions and policies and the preparation of
investment in parallel with peacebuilding. Fourth is to
sequence reforms for economic stability with political
cycles, to avoid triggering governance crises that will
make economic reform impossible. And fifth is to
reduce the administrative burden that donors impose on
weak States by aggregating projects into national
programmes and pooling finance through trust funds.

Finally, we need to recognize and manage risks,
not only the risks that money will be misappropriated
but also the risk that peace fails because we are too
bureaucratic and too slow. There are ways to manage
risks in high-corruption environments, including by
contracting fiduciary agents and giving voice to
citizens. But we need to recognize that things will go
wrong and deal with problems quickly and decisively.

The report refers to the agreements signed last
year between the Secretary-General and the President
of the World Bank to strengthen our partnerships in
post-crisis situations. That is supported by a fiduciary
principles accord that has now been signed with
11 United Nations agencies to facilitate the timely
transfer of financial resources under trust funds
administered either by the World Bank or the United
Nations Development Group, when that is appropriate
in the country context.

We see synergies and complementarities in the
operation of the World Bank's State- and Peace-
building Fund and the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund. Both instruments provide predictable, adaptive
and responsive financing mechanisms specifically
tailored to meet the needs of countries emerging from
conflict. But the United Nations and the Bank are only
elements of a wider set of agencies that work to assist
countries recovering from conflict. Last year, the
European Commission, the United Nations
Development Group and the Bank issued a joint
declaration on how they will provide assistance and
support in post-crisis situations and plan recovery
efforts.

Greater coherence requires strengthening other
partnerships as well, particularly with regional and
bilateral political, security and development
organizations. The demand for speed and effectiveness
dictates that international cooperation is centred and
anchored in the field at the country level. Context
matters, and time and directives from the centre may
fail to capture the realities of a dynamic post-conflict
environment. We therefore endorse the proposal that
the integration steering group explore the development
of mutual accountability measures at the country level.
We hope that those efforts will encourage greater
acknowledgement by other international actors that aid
effectiveness is born of coherency, coordination and
joint mechanisms for funding and implementation.

While Government leadership is a critical
ingredient in guiding post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction efforts, so too is the ability of the
international community to coordinate its response. In
most post-conflict situations, it is the office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General that
offers the key to that coordination. The wider the
leadership role provided by the Special Representative
for the international effort, the greater the level of
delegation by agencies to senior management in the
field and the better aligned agency support is to the
demand of those officials. The more funding for United
Nations agencies that is programmed through the office
of the Special Representative, the more likely we are to
achieve the levels of coherence, coordination and
effectiveness we seek.

The World Bank is ready to consider more formal
roles within the specialized missions, including staff
secondments or better integration of conventional aid
coordination mechanisms. The World Bank also stands
ready to participate in joint consultations and planning
on post-crisis and crisis-affected countries, so as to
ensure early and effective preparations of our joint
response. Let me add that we are currently working on
an exchange of staff between the United Nations and
World Bank headquarters to strengthen our joint
response to situations of fragility and conflict.

The international community should also
recognize comparative advantages arising from
different mandates and capacities. Division of labour
will depend upon what the country requires and the
capacity of organizations to respond. The agreements
between the United Nations and the World Bank set out
the process for quickly agreeing our responsibilities.

The report also highlights one of the most
difficult areas of development and proposes new ways
of working, such as the establishment of deployable
civilian capacity, which will be challenging to
implement. The report card on the quality of
coordination by the international community is mixed.
We should not confuse capacity building with technical
assistance. In his report, the Secretary-General
challenges us to do better.

Going forward, we need to recognize how little
we know about the effectiveness of the instruments we
have to avoid a relapse into violent conflict. We need
to learn as we go forward. We encourage that the
impact of the innovations set out in this report be
monitored and evaluated, and that we commit to
continue to seek out new ways to improve our speed
and effectiveness.

The current budgetary constraints faced by donor
countries as a consequence of the global financial crisis
must be seen as an opportunity to rationalize the
international community's interventions and make
them more effective. We now need to move forward
expeditiously to support country efforts to consolidate
peace and to lay the foundation for development that
reduces poverty. We need to continue our work
together to make that happen.

