Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Reena Ghelani,
Director of Operations and Advocacy Division in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), for her valuable briefing, which confirms the
continuation of the dire humanitarian situation in Syria.
I would also like to pay tribute to all humanitarian and
medical workers for their efforts in the field to alleviate
the human suffering in Syria.

Ideliver this statement onbehalfofthe co-penholders
of the Syrian humanitarian file, Sweden and Kuwait.
I will focus on two points: the overall humanitarian
situation in Syria and access to humanitarian aid.

With regard to the overall humanitarian situation,
the Syrian crisis is entering its eighth winter. We
must take a moment to review the humanitarian
situation on the ground. The statistics of the United
Nations confirm that the humanitarian situation in
Syria continues to deteriorate. There are 13 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance, of whom
more than 5 million are children. There are more
than 5.6 million registered refugees in neighbouring
countries, including 2.5 million children. More than
1 million people live in hard-to-reach areas. Behind
those alarming numbers are countless stories of human
suffering of Syrian civilians - children, women and
elderly persons 4 who have become victim to one of
the worst conflicts of our time.

The past few days and weeks witnessed a military
escalation following a period ofrelative calm as a result
of the Russian-Turkish agreement on Idlib. We reiterate
our call on the Astana guarantors to ensure that the
ceasefire in Idlib holds. The increase in military
actions and hostilities - as we have seen in Aleppo,
Hamah, Idlib and Deir ez-Zor - and reports of the use
of chemicals again, this time in Aleppo, remind all of
us of the fragility of the situation in Syria.

We renew our condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons, anywhere, at any time and by any party as it
constitutes a violation of international law and relevant
conventions. The use of chemical weapons in armed
conflict constitutes a war crime, and we stress that
those responsible for such crimes, whether they be
individuals, entities, non-State actors or Governments,
must be held accountable.

We also reaffirm that all parties must comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and ensure respect for it in all circumstances, including
by protecting civilians and civilian targets. This year
there have been over 130 attacks on hospitals and
health-care facilities in Syria. We strongly condemn
attacks against hospitals, as well as attacks targeting
vital civilian facilities. We also call on all parties to
respect international human rights law. There must be
accountability for those who have committed serious
violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law.

We are concerned by the continued danger of
explosives, mines and improvised explosive devices
in a number of areas in Syria, which poses a threat to
civilians and hinders the work of humanitarian actors.

With regard to access to humanitarian aid, there
are still significant challenges for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in Syria, as stated in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1041). While
we welcome the delivery of aid several weeks ago
to Rukban Camp and the 50,000 people living there,
after nearly 10 months since the last delivery, we stress
the need for sustained and unhindered humanitarian
access all across Syria, using all existing modalities,
including cross-border, cross-line and humanitarian
programmes. When it comes to the latter, we regret that
no inter-agency humanitarian convoys were deployed
in October and that the bimonthly inter-agency convoy
plan for September and October was not approved
by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. We
still see a situation where more than 1 million people
face a denial of access to humanitarian assistance,
which should be provided based on human principles
and needs.

Cross-border humanitarian assistance remains an
indispensable lifeline to millions of people throughout
Syria. It is a vital, important and complementary part
of the humanitarian response in the country. The
United Nations monitoring mechanism that monitors
international humanitarian activities is robust and
continuously strengthened.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment in
his monthly report on the importance of the renewal
of the provisions set out in resolution 2165 (2014) and
subsequent resolutions. They support the provision
of assistance to those in need through the most direct
routes - including across borders - especially as the
United Nations does not have an alternative means of
reaching people in need in those areas.

For the reasons I have mentioned here, and
because the reality on the ground confirms that the
humanitarian situation in Syria continues to be dire,
Sweden and Kuwait, as co-penholders, intend to
work to renew the resolution on humanitarian access,
including the cross-border assistance modality. We will
circulate the draft resolution soon and look forward
to having the cooperation of all Council members in
that regard. There is a critical humanitarian need for
a renewal of the provisions of resolution 2165 (2014),
which represents the difference between life and death
for many people in Syria. The Council must not fail
those Syrians in need.

We stress the importance of ensuring a lasting
ceasefire in Idlib, and indeed throughout Syria, in
order to enable access for humanitarian assistance
and for evacuating the injured, in accordance with
international law and as stipulated in resolution 2401
(2018). We welcome the fact that many people who had
been detained by Government or opposition forces were
released on 24 November. That is an important first
step towards building confidence between the parties
to the conflict.

Lastly, without a political solution to the conflict
in Syria in line with the provisions of resolution 2254
(2015), the humanitarian situation there will continue
to deteriorate. As the last month of the year is almost
upon us, we emphasize that every effort must be made
to reinvigorate the political process, including the
establishment of a constitutional committee before the
end of the year.

