The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

At the outset, I thank High Representative Inzko
for his briefing.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a major country in the
Balkans. General elections were held there recently.
Maintaining the peace, stability and development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the common interests of
the region and of the international community at large.

China respects the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the choice made by its people
for the future of their country. We support the peaceful
coexistence and common development of the various
ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope
that they will commit to dialogue and consultation to
seek common understanding, implement the Dayton
Peace Agreement, promote economic development and
achieve greater progress in nation-building so as to
ensure that the dividends of peace and development are
shared by all.

The international community should increase its
support for the economic development of the country
and create favourable conditions for achieving national
reconciliation and lasting peace. The international
community should pay special attention to the
views and concerns of all affected parties in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and take a balanced and prudent
approach. China welcomes the efforts made by High
Representative Inzko in facilitating the political process
in the country and hopes that he will continue to play a
constructive role in the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement, in accordance with his mandate.

China supports the Council's adoption of
resolution 2443 (2018), which renewed the mandate of
the European Union-led Operation Althea. We hope
that the European Union force will continue to play a
positive role in maintaining security and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Together with the rest of the
international community, China is ready to do its part
in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve long-term
peace, development and prosperity.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

