Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on
peacebuilding, and I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and his report (S/2012/746), which takes
stock of the progress made since the previous report
of 2009 (S/2009/304) and identifies those areas where
renewed efforts are necessary. I welcome the briefing
by the Chair of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and I would like to
highlight the quality of the presidential statement just
adopted (S/PRST/2012/29).

I fully associate myself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to raise the following points in
my national capacity, by focusing on the three
priority areas highlighted in the report: inclusion,
institution-building and improving partnerships. My
experience as Chair of the Guinea country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission has
shown me the importance of these areas among the
efforts undertaken to support post-conflict countries
on their paths towards sustainable peace.

Concerning inclusion, it is indispensable that all
peacebuilding stakeholders of a given society have
the means to be heard. More substantial efforts must
be undertaken to ensure full participation by women
and girls in peacebuilding and state-building processes,
be it in peace negotiations, in efforts for national
reconciliation or when it comes to equal representation
at all levels - legislative, executive andjudiciary - ofa
State's institutions . We need to pay particular attention
to the material conditions allowing women to play a
more complete role in society. We also need to engage in
a relentless fight against all forms of violence targeting
women and girls. The inclusion into peacebuilding
processes of all segments of a population, in particular
the most vulnerable groups, is in our view the best way
to prevent, both in the short and in the long terms, the
flaring up of frustrations that could lead to a relapse
into conflict and violence.

In the same vein, we call for the efforts to establish
fair and sustainable state institutions to be redoubled.
This is not just a question of capacity-building for
public administration, but also of harmonizing the
State's responsibilities - in particular its sovereign
functions - and the means to exercise them in a
responsible and inclusive manner. We must approach
State reform in a comprehensive manner, respecting
the separation of powers. There can be no effective
Government without legislators to which it is accountable
or without courts to which citizens can turn to have
their rights enforced. That is where the Peacebuilding
Commission has real added value, because its approach
to peace is comprehensive and because it recognizes
and reinforces the intrinsic links between promoting
sustainable socioeconomic development, maintaining
international peace and security and respect for human
rights and the rule of law.

Concerning the improvement of partnerships, we
see the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States
as a perfect example of ownership and leadership
from the South, having been elaborated by the Group
of Seven Plus. Luxembourg welcomes, in particular,
the endorsement of the New Deal by the Republic of
Guinea, as well as by the five other Member States
that are on the PBC agenda. These countries have the
courage to address difficult questions of State-building,
which implies a revision of the social contract in order
to place the State at the service of its citizens.

My delegation believes that, since we will soon
be one of the elected members of the Council, it is
opportune to further strengthen the relationship
between the PBC and the Security Council. Its role in
maintaining international attention on the countries on
its agenda gives the PBC a unique capacity in the United
Nations system, as does its ability to link subjects
of interest to this Council, on the one hand, and the
other main bodies of the United Nations, on the other.
It would appear particularly useful to benefit from the
knowledge and analysis of the Chairpersons of the
country-specific configurations during consultations
of the Council, as well as throughout the mandate
cycles of United Nations missions. While the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General inform the
Council about activities of the United Nations system,
the Chairpersons ofthe country-specific configurations
can inform it about the peacebuilding activities on the
part of a much wider array of stakeholders, including
bilateral, multilateral and regional partners, as well as
those from civil society and the private sector.

The Security Council can count on Luxembourg's
continued commitment to deepening and improving
partnerships for peacebuilding, be it in the Guinea
configuration of the PBC, in the Security Council or in
other relevant forums of our Organization.

