At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and valuable efforts. The Security Council made it clear in its various previous resolutions that the establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has no legal validity, constitutes a flagrant violation under international law and is a major obstacle to the achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. The Security Council and the international community have further unequivocally emphasized that no changes to the 4 June 1967 lines will be recognized, including with respect to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through negotiations. In line with this longstanding and firm common position, over the last few months the international community has strongly rejected the illegal Israeli plans to annex parts of the Palestinian territory and reaffirmed once again that there is no alternative to the two-State solution, which, based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and the internationally endorsed terms of reference and parameters, remains the only viable solution to ending the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In this context, Tunisia calls upon the Security Council and the entire international community to remain actively engaged against the looming threat of annexation. We further underline the imperative to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to abide by its obligations under international law and put an end to its long-lasting illegal occupation of Palestinian territory and aggressive policies and practices against the Palestinian people. Despite committing serious violations of international law, Israel has over the decades enjoyed impunity, which is one of the major reasons behind the country's continued challenge to the international community and the universal legal system. Tunisia stresses the importance of providing international protection for the Palestinian people, lifting the unjust blockade imposed on Gaza and ending all other forms of discrimination and collective punishment. We call upon the international community to continue to support the Palestinian Authority's efforts to confront the growing economic, social and humanitarian challenges as a result of continued occupation as well as of the heavy impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We highly value the efforts of the humanitarian community undertaken in support of the response by the Palestinian Authority to the pandemic and stress the necessity of enhanced international aid in this regard. We also call for broader mobilization to ensure the continuity of delivery of essential services by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to Palestinian refugees across all its fields of operation, thereby preserving its important role as a stabilizing factor in the region. In closing, Tunisia reiterates its firm and principled support for the brotherly Palestinian people in its struggle to regain its legitimate rights, establish its independent and sovereign State on its land, within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and resolve all final status issues on the basis of international legality resolutions, the two-State vision and the Arab Peace Initiative. Tunisia also reaffirms that the real problem and major cause of this long-lasting conflict, which has kept the region in a state of tension and instability, is indeed the occupation, which must be brought to an end. In this regard, we stress both that Palestinian rights are not time-bound and that Israeli actions and measures affecting the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people are null and void and with no international legal effect. It is a widely shared belief that the situation on the ground is no longer sustainable and that the negative trends must be reversed. We therefore underline the need for collective concerted action towards the re-engagement of the parties in negotiations based on the internationally endorsed terms of reference and parameters. In this regard, the Middle East Quartet must assume its share of responsibility for achieving a more stable and peaceful Middle East.
