Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to convey the warm congratulations
of the delegation of Mali on the Kingdom of Spain's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October. At the same time, I commend the
delegation of the Russian Federation for its outstanding
leadership of the Council's work last month.

On behalf of the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, and the
people and Government of Mali, I wish to pay a ringing
tribute to the men and women of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), under the leadership of Mr. Mongi
Hamdi, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of MINUSMA.

In the framework of the search for a solution to
the crisis in Mali, we are always extremely pleased
to recognize the efforts of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, as well as those of Algeria, leader of the
international mediation process and Chair of the Comite
de suivi de l'accord, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Western African States, the European
Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
France, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, Nigeria, the Niger,
Chad and the United States of America.

Before proceeding any further, I wish to pay my
deepest respects to the memory of all victims - civilian
and military, national and foreign - of the Malian
crisis.
The delegation of Mali takes note of the report of
the Secretary-General before us (S/2015/7321), which is
devoted to the situation in our country, and commends
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
introducing it.

Since the signing in May and June ofthe Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the Government
of Mali, with the support of its partners, has set about
its implementation. Among the accomplishments to
date, I would like to mention the following actions.

First, the adoption in June by the Council
of Ministers of documents establishing regional
development agencies, in application of article 40 ofthe
Agreement; secondly, the establishment of a national
coordination mechanism for implementation of the
Agreement under the auspices of the Prime Minister,
our Head of Government, in order to better coordinate
the action of the various State authorities involved
in implementing the Agreement; the provision of a
headquarters for the Comite de suivi de l'Accord, with
renovation work to begin shortly and the Government
contributing to the relevant costs; the Government's
decision to postpone local and regional elections
with a view to promoting calm and to allowing for an
inclusive preparatory process with the participation
of all concerned stakeholders, in response to a strong
request from our political parties and civil society; and
the appointment in August of the Chair of the Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission, in accordance
with article 46 of the Agreement, with the remaining
members of the Commission to be named shortly.

Also in the context of the initiatives and action
undertaken by the Government, I would like to stress
the pursuit and strengthening of dialogue within and
outside the Comite de suivi de l'Accord. In that regard,
the Government has held numerous meetings with
all stakeholders in the process in order to anticipate
the difficulties ahead and to assist in resolving
those that arise. To give just one example, with the
agreement of all concerned parties, three members of
the Government traveled to Anefis, in the region of
Kidal, between 25 and 29 September with the aim of
putting an end to clashes on the ground and to establish
outreach commissions for the population and armed
groups aimed at re-establishing peace and advancing
the reconciliation process among the three regions. A
meeting for the signing of a peace agreement between
and within communities is expected to be held in
the coming weeks and to be countersigned by the
Government. Moreover, in September, the Government
held a meeting in Bamako with representatives of the
Mbera refugee camp in Mauritania to discuss possible
mechanisms for their return to Mali.

Alongside the actions I have just mentioned, the
Malian Government has worked to share the dividends
of peace with the populations that were hardest hit.
Schools in Gao and Timbuktu reopened on 1 October.
I am especially pleased to announce the reopening of
schools in Kidal, scheduled for mid-October, just a few
days from now, after three long years during which
classes in that region were suspended. In addition, the
anti-malaria campaign resumed on 1 October in the
region of Kidal.

Moreover, again with a View to advancing progress
and promoting peace, the Government has taken a
number of confidence-building measures, including
an exchange of prisoners with armed movements, in
partnership with MINUSMA and with its support,
along with that of France's Operation Barkhane and
human rights organizations. That exchange involved
16 soldiers from the Malian armed forces and 32 from
armed groups. Another wave of releases is expected in
the next few days.

In addition, in application of article 38 of the
Agreement, the Government has moved ahead with the
development and presentation to the Comite de suivi de
l'accord of a global action plan for the implementation
of the Agreement and an emergency plan for the
interim period, both of which detail the entirety of the
activities provided for by the Agreement as well as the
coordination and implementation mechanisms for those
action plans. The implementation of the emergency
plans, which have already been finalized with the
armed movements and Mali's technical and financial
partners, begins this month.

Finally, with a view to making better use of the
peace process for the people of Mali as a whole, the
Government has embarked on a communications
campaign targeting institutional and non-institutional
actors through a number of campaigns aimed at
disseminating information and raising awareness.

The optimism created by the signing and the
first phase of implementation of the Agreement has
unfortunately been dampened for several months by
the persistence of a number of threats and challenges
that remain to be addressed. The challenges include
terrorism, drug trafficking and all other forms of
organized crime in the region of the Sahel-Sahara.
The criminal activities of terrorist groups and drug
traffickers indiscriminately target peaceful civilians,
the Malian armed forces and the international forces
of MINUSMA and France, with a toll of fatalities,
casualties and material damage. Such threats, which
are frequently cross-border, concern all the countries
of the Sahel and beyond. It is therefore time to urge the
Security Council once again to support the decision of
the Heads of States member of the Nouakchott Process
to create a rapid response intervention force.

The delays observed in the implementation
of the Agreement derive essentially from ongoing
incidents on the ground and from multiple violations
of the ceasefire by certain actors who are nonetheless
signatories of the Agreement. The Government has
consistently condemned all violations of the Agreement
and has called for independent investigations in order to
identify those responsible and punish the perpetrators.
However, I would like to stress emphatically that
such incidents should not serve as a pretext for armed
movements that have signed the Agreement to hold the
peace process hostage.

On the contrary, such incidents underscore the need
and the urgency to move forward with the activation of
the security mechanisms provided for by the Agreement
with regard to overseeing and monitoring violations of
the ceasefire. This concerns in particular the activation
and launch of the Operational Coordination Mechanism
and the Commission technique mixte de securite.

These incidents are a clear reminder of the pressing
need for the implementation of the provisions of the
Agreement on cantonment, security-sector reform, and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, whose
subcommittee is co-chaired by the United Nations.

Another major challenge lies in mobilizing the
resources necessary for the effective and comprehensive
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. To that end, the Government
has planned, as part of its 2015 budget, to allocate
the sum of 11.4 billion CFA francs, that is, more than
$19 million, including for emergency action during the
interim period such as humanitarian work, the return of
refugees and displaced persons, and so on.

Similarly, the Government, in order to meet its
commitments stemming from the Agreement, has
planned over the next five years a budgetary allocation
that would be considerably more significant; the exact
figure will be announced during the conference that is
to take place at the headquarters of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris
on 22 October.

I would like to take this opportunity to call on
all partners, bilateral, multilateral and private, to
participate in large numbers in the mobilization
conference for financing-for-development partners in
Mali and to make pledges that are commensurate with
the pressing needs in the area of peace and security in
Mali, in the Sahel and the rest of the world.

By way of conclusion, I would like to reiterate
the need to accelerate the implementation of the
measures provided for by the Agreement in the area of
security and to invite the international community to
strengthen the leadership of the Government of Mali
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.

