Mr. Jagne (Gambia): The United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic has been very
instrumental in the search for peace in that country. It
should also be recognized that the people of the Central
African Republic made it possible for the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA) to
be largely successful in the execution of its mandate. In
fact, following his recent trip to Bangui, Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi informed the Council that all
his interlocutors, including President Patasse, unanimously
agreed to keep MINURCA. The President's letter to the
Secretary-General recommitting himself to the reforms is
a clear testimony to this commitment.

Let us also remember that those reforms are not only
political but also economic and financial. Vital
international institutions such as the World Bank are
also involved. It is needless to refer to the letter of the
President of the Bank to this effect. MINURCA's role
and those of the other international institutions are
mutually reinforcing.

Furthermore, it goes without saying that without the
presence of MINURCA, the progress made so far would
not have been possible, and therefore we can state with
guarded optimism that with the continued assistance of
the rest of the international community, the problems of
the Central African Republic could be resolved
satisfactorily. In this connection, the continued
cooperation of all the parties in the Central African
Republic is absolutely necessary.

Considering the fact that the overall situation is still
volatile, exacerbated by the conflict in the neighbouring
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and in the light of all
the issues raised by the Secretary-General in his report,
my delegation is of the strong view that it would be
premature to wind up the mandate of MINURCA.
Consequently, we agree with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of MINURCA
until 15 November 1999, mindful of the fact that such an
extension is tied to a number of conditions and
conditionalities. In any case, at this crucial stage when the
country is engaged in a process of painful reforms, the
least that the Council should do is to support that process.

 

