The President (interpretation from Russian): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Russian Federation.

Russia, a member of the troika of observers to the
Angolan settlement and a troop contributor to the United

 

Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), is
keenly interested in the successful progress of the peace
process and the speedy restoration in that country of lasting
peace and national reconciliation.

The draft resolution to be adopted by the Security
Council on the transition from UNAVEM. III to the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) is of
significant importance for achieving these goals. The draft
resolution is specifically targeted, focusing the attention of
the Angolan parties on the priority political and military
questions of the settlement that they must resolve.

Of particular concern here to all members of the
Council is the tense situation in the north-eastern regions
that has arisen as a result of the penetration into the
territory of Angola of armed soldiers of UNIT A, the former
Rwandan Government Forces and the former Mobuto army
and of attempts by UNITA to achieve, despite the Lusaka
Protocol, significant military potential.

Against this background, we attach particular
significance to the provisions of the draft resolution
concerning the unimpeded extension throughout the national
territory of the country of the State administration
established in April of the Government and Unity and
National Reconciliation, and the demand that UNITA
immediately provide complete information regarding all
armed personnel under its control for the purpose of
verification, disarmament and demobilization, in accordance
with the Lusaka Protocol.

The peace process in Angola could long ago have
reached the finish line had the leadership of UNITA taken
a more constructive position and conscientiously
implemented the obligations that it had undertaken. The
coming months will be decisive for the fate of the peace
process as a whole. There must be no let-up of the carefully
measured pressure on the parties to a settlement, above all
on UNITA, to prompt them fully to implement the Lusaka
Protocol and the agreements they have reached.

The draft resolution provides both opportunity for
effective monitoring of the course of the peace process and
also for the adjustments necessary for the planned schedule
of withdrawal of United Nations troops from Angola.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/ 1997/498.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (interpretation from Russian): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1118 (1997).

The next speaker is the representative of Zimbabwe.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.


