Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): We too have
been following with heavy hearts the reports of the
devastation wrought by Hurricane Matthew in the
Republic of Haiti. We extend our deepest sympathy to
those who have lost loved ones, suffered injury, had
property damaged and their livelihoods disrupted.

There is no doubt that the hurricane has greatly
exacerbated Haiti's humanitarian situation, which was
already challenged by severe drought and the cholera
epidemic. Food, shelter and medical care are required
urgently. Longer term, Haiti will need support in
rebuilding damaged infrastructure and in containing
the spread of disease. Our thoughts are with the people
of Haiti in these difficult days.

It is unfortunate that Haiti was forced to postpone
last week's first round of elections in the wake of the
hurricane. That is yet another setback for a country
that is in dire need of political certainty and stability
following the failure of the electoral process earlier this
year. The latest Secretary-General's report (S/2016/753)
makes clear the impact that the political uncertainty
in Haiti continues to have on its development towards
a stable and prosperous future. Progress towards
consolidating the rule oflaw has been slow. We urge all
Haitian political actors to do everything in their power
to ensure that the electoral process commences as soon
as is feasible, in stable conditions and without violence.
We also call on all relevant actors to spare no effort
to ensure that the elections are free, fair, inclusive
and transparent.

The capacity of the HaitianNational Police continues
to improve, and we commend its determination to
provide for the safety and security of the Haitian
people. But there is still work to be done before it will
be operationally independent. Progress in that area is
vital for the eventual reconfiguration of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

Against that background, MINUSTAH continues
to play an important role. New Zealand appreciates the
work of the Special Representative and of MINUSTAH-
contributing countries in the aftermath of Hurricane
Matthew and in supporting Haiti more generally. We
welcome the renewal of MINUSTAH's mandate for six
months. However, we all recognize that MINUSTAH
cannot stay forever and that it needs to evolve as the
situation on the ground allows. It is important that we
lay the foundation now for that to happen smoothly
and responsibly. We are reassured that MINUSTAH
and the United Nations country team are continuing
preparations for the Mission's transition by developing a
transition plan. We also support the Secretary-General's
call for a strategic assessment mission to be undertaken
by the end of MINUSTAH's next mandate period.

For MINUSTAH's transition to be successful, it must
have genuine national ownership. Its implementation
will be the responsibility of the Government that
emerges from the forthcoming electoral process. We
therefore hope that the strategic assessment will be
completed after a new Government is in place and
that it will adequately reflect the Government's views
and priorities. That adds further urgency to the need
to ensure that a duly elected and legitimate President
is inaugurated early in 2017. In any event, we urge
the United Nations to do all it can to engage relevant
Haitian stakeholders when assessing its future presence
in Haiti.
We regret the impact that cholera continues to
have on the people of Haiti. The United Nations has
a responsibility to help address and end the outbreak
and to provide appropriate support to the victims of
cholera. We thank the Secretary-General for his efforts
to improve the United Nations response to the cholera
crisis and look forward to the new United Nations
approach having a direct and positive impact.

Haiti is once again at a critical point on its path to
restoring an inclusive and representative democracy. We
hope that in the coming months Haiti will recover from
Hurricane Matthew and complete a peaceful political
transition. We also hope that the Council will remain
united in supporting Haiti through this critical period.

