Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome the presence
among us of the Deputy President of the Republic of
South Africa, Mr. Jacob Zuma. We thank him for his
briefing on the current situation in Burundi, prospects
for peace in that country and the efforts deployed by
the African countries with a view to bringing peace to
Burundi.

The presence of Deputy President Jacob Zuma in
the Security Council today is testimony to his country's
commitment and to his personal engagement in the
search for a lasting solution to the conflict in Burundi.
The role played by South Africa in the Burundian
peace process has indeed been outstanding. By
facilitating the inter-Burundian negotiations and by
taking a leading role in the African Union mission, it
has given continuity to the efforts of those Burundians
committed to a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

The latest developments reflect the efforts
deployed to put an end to a conflict that, in 10 years,
left more than 100,000 people dead and resulted in
hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced
persons.

In the framework of the United Nations, South
Africa, by adding the advisory group of the Economic
and Social Council on Burundi, is pushing the
international community to look at Burundi beyond the
conflict and to lay the foundations for sustained
international assistance to the country. The recent visit
of an Economic and Social Council assessment mission
to Burundi is a demonstration of such commitment.

We regret the fact that the Nairobi negotiations
between the Government and the National Liberation
Forces (FNL) failed to produce the expected results. As
the Security Council has done on a number of
occasions, we also urged the FNL immediately to stop
the hostilities and to enter into serious negotiations
with the Transitional Government without further
delay.

It is our View that the positive trend of events in
Burundi will become sustainable only when the
international community shows its unquestionable
readiness to assist Burundi in facing the social and
economic problems and other consequences derived
from the armed conflict.

In this regard, the United Nations is called on to
play a decisive role, together with the African Union,
in the consolidation of peace and in post-conflict
recovery and reconstruction.

The presence of the African Union reflects the
important engagement of Africa in peace-building in
Burundi, in accordance with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. Such a decisive step should
therefore be complemented by the deployment of a
United Nations mission, in due time, as foreseen in the
Arusha Agreement, and, in this regard, we would like
to call the attention of the Council to the need to apply
equal standards to Burundi as in Liberia, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and, we hope -
and as seems to be the case - in Cote d'Ivoire in the
near future.

The Security Council has reaffirmed on various
occasions its support for the African mission in
Burundi; commended the progress it helped produce so
far in the cantonment of rebel combatants; and called
on all concerned to provide, as a matter of urgency,
adequate financial and logistic assistance to the
mission.

The African countries, and in particular South
Africa, which are presently carrying the main burden of
the peacekeeping operation in Burundi, have limited
resources, and a sustained effort by the entire
international community is needed to ensure the
mission's full operational capacity and its
strengthening in order to meet the challenges that the
Burundian peace process still faces.

It is agreed that a lasting solution for Burundi
will depend in large measure on advances in its
economic life. We welcome the willingness by the
Bretton Woods institutions, the United Nations
Development Programme and the European Union to
assist Burundi in meeting its economic needs.

However, a matter of great concern is the very
low rate of disbursement of the pledges made by the
international community for the economic recovery and
reconstruction of Burundi. Of the $981 million
pledged, only 36 per cent has been effectively
disbursed so far.

In our View, the most critical issues facing
Burundi at the present time are: the unwillingness of
the last rebel group, the FNL, to join the peace process;
the need for financial and logistical support for the
African mission deployment, and its further
transformation into a United Nations operation; and
sustained economic assistance to the Government of
Burundi, allowing it to consolidate the peace process.

To end, I would like to say a word on the regional
dimension of the conflict in the countries of the Great
Lakes region. The advances in the peace processes in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi
have set the stage to move forward in the search for a
comprehensive settlement of the problems in the region
based on good-neighbourly relations, security and
cooperation among all the countries in the region.

