Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM). I wish to convey the
Movement's appreciation to your delegation, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine, at this
crucial time. We also wish to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing to the Council today and
to express the Movement's appreciation for his tireless
efforts to uphold the Charter of the United Nations
and promote peace, including his recent participation
in the Cairo Conference and his visit to the occupied
Palestinian territory, where he visited the Gaza Strip
and witnessed at first hand the horrific tragedy and
massive destruction inflicted on the Palestinian people
during the Israeli military aggression of July and
August. I must also not fail to say that NAM. strongly
welcomes the convening and the success of Cairo
International Conference on Palestine "Reconstructing
Gaza", co-hosted by Egypt and Norway on 12 October.

The Non-Aligned Movement takes this opportunity
to reaffirm its long-standing solidarity with the
Palestinian people and to reiterate its support for the
realization of their legitimate national aspirations
and inalienable rights, including their rights to self-
determination and freedom in their independent State
of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as for a just solution for the plight of the Palestinian
refugees in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948.

In this International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, NAM. reiterates its call for
intensifying international efforts to actively advance a
peaceful, just and lasting solution based on the long-
standing parameters rooted in the relevant United
Nations resolutions and major initiatives undertaken in
the past decades. There is international consensus that
the status quo is unsustainable and that the realization
by the Palestinian people of their freedom and human
rights is long overdue, and all efforts must be exerted to
end the Israeli occupation and the prolonged conflict.

We meet at a time when our memories are still
freshly filled with images from the Israelis' latest
onslaught in Gaza. NAM. strongly condemned the
military aggression by Israel that traumatized the entire
Palestinian population and shocked the whole world.
The international community witnessed with horror the
more than 50 days of criminal military aggression that
caused massive human devastation, with thousands of
injured and lives that perished and widespread physical
destruction throughout Gaza.

The humanitarian disaster persists today as urgent
and comprehensive recovery and reconstruction efforts
continue to be delayed due to the ongoing Israeli
blockade. Homes and entire neighbourhoods remain in
ruins. More than 100,000 people remain homeless. Food
insecurity is rampant. And injured civilians continue to
die due to the severity of the wounds they sustained
and the lack of lifesaving medical treatment and basic
medicines in Gaza.

NAM. condemns the Israeli blockade, which
constitutes gross and systematic collective punishment
of the Palestinian people, and urges the international
community to persist in demanding that Israel, the

occupying Power, end the blockade and all illegal actions
against the Palestinian people under its occupation and
abide by international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law.

In that regard, NAM. expresses its strong
condemnation of Israel's continuing and escalating
settlement construction throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory, in violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and United Nations resolutions, including
those of the Council. We especially condemn the series
of illegal actions in recent weeks, including the seizure
of 1,000 acres of land near the Palestinian town of
Bethlehem and the advancement ofplans to build 2,600
settler units in and around occupied East Jerusalem.
Those and other ongoing violations, including the
demolition of homes, forced displacement of Palestinian
civilians, the arrest and detention of Palestinians,
including children, and incessant violence, terror
and provocations by Israeli settlers and extremists,
including vis-a-vis sensitive religious sites, particularly
Al-Aqsa Mosque, have worsened conditions on the
ground, deepening already grave doubts regarding
Israel's claimed commitment to the two-State solution
and peace.

Despite serious international efforts and repeated
calls for a peaceful and comprehensive solution in
conformity with international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, Israel's military occupation
of Palestinian and Arab lands continues, as does
the denial and violation of the inalienable rights
and freedoms of the Palestinian people by Israel,
the occupying Power. The failure to resolve the
question continues to undermine the credibility of
our international system and the rule of law at the
international level.

The Security Council cannot remain on the sidelines
in the quest to find a just and peaceful solution to the
question of Palestine, especially while the situation
continues to deteriorate dramatically. The Security
Council must play its rightful role in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. NAM. therefore urges
the Council to act forthwith to put an end to the plight of
the Palestinian people and to undertake resolute action
towards bringing an end to the Israeli occupation and
the decades-long injustice.

The question of Palestine has been on the United
Nations agenda now for more than 66 years, yet there is
not a glimmer of hope among the Palestinian people in

realizing their right to self-determination and freedom.
Despite their decades of good-faith participation
in peace efforts, the plight and predicament of the
Palestinians has worsened on all fronts due to Israel's
illegal policies and practices that have entrenched the
occupation and undermined all peace efforts.

It is time for the Council to take a historic step
towards putting an end to the occupation of the
Palestinian land and paving the ground for peaceful
resolution of the conflict. In doing so, the Council
would fulfil its Charter duty for the maintenance
of international peace and security and genuinely
contribute to a solution of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, which
remains a source of grave concern for the region and
for the international community as a whole and for the
prospects of global peace and stability.

Lebanon continues to suffer from consecutive
Israeli violations of its borders and incursions against
its territory, followed by subsequent years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel continues to
violate Lebanese airspace, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are blatant violations of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006), whose
provisions should be implemented in a manner that
guarantees the consolidation of the foundations of
stability and security in Lebanon and that will prevent
Israel from carrying out its daily violations of Lebanese
sovereignty.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified after the outbreak of the Syrian crisis.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

Let me say a few words in my national capacity,
in response to the statement made by the Israeli
representative today in the Council. He once more
repeated the nonsense and baseless rhetoric along the
same lines as that which was recently stated before the
General Assembly and then refuted, derided or ignored
by those present.

The words stated by the Israeli representative today
were objectively wrong at the core. It has not been Iran,
but the Israeli regime that has been the root cause of
every crisis and predicament in the Middle East in the
past seven decades. That regime's continued occupation
of other people's lands and its periodic aggressions
to support that policy lie at the heart of the current
situation in the region. Displacing and imprisoning
people, besieging Gaza, creating terror networks, target
murdering and terrorist acts in the region and beyond,
including in Iran, stockpiling nuclear weapons, using
prohibited weapons against children and women in
Gaza, et cetera, are all consequences of the policy of
occupation and aggression pursued by that regime.

There should be no doubt that such Israeli policies
are the most important factor in creating a space for
terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria, Al-Qaida and Jabhat Al-Nusra in the region.

The statements replete with baseless allegations
against my country that the representatives of that
regime read out from time to time are designed only
to justify the aggression and atrocities they commit
against other people in the region and the apartheid
policy they implement within their borders on a
continuing basis. While my Government is trying to
resolve the misunderstanding about its peaceful nuclear
programme, it is preposterous that the same regime
with a highly known record of stockpiling hundreds of
nuclear weapons ventures to falsely accuse others of
trying to acquire similar weapons.

It is also well known that this regime has always
done its best to sabotage and disrupt earnest and
serious negotiations between Iran and the P5+l group,
as the negotiations could deprive them of an excuse to
continue the occupation and aggression.
