Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine co-sponsored
and voted in favour of the draft resolution contained
in document S/2016/846. We commend the hard work
carried out by the French and Spanish delegations in
drafting and negotiating it.

We are extremely dismayed, but not surprised, by
the fact that all these efforts were, in the end, derailed by
the veto power ofRussia. This is the fifth veto exercised
by Russia with respect to draft resolutions concerning
Syria over the past years. Had the draft resolution seen
the light and been adopted, it would have been a real
meaningful step by the Council towards exercising
preventive diplomacy. It would have helped to prevent
what is about to become one of the gravest humanitarian
tragedies of our times. History will hold accountable
those who did not let the Council discharge its duties.
Bearing in mind the clear humanitarian character of the
draft resolution aimed at stopping the razing of eastern
Aleppo by the end of the year, we acted fully in line
with the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, which Ukraine joined last year.

We are extremely disappointed that the political
statement on the suspension of the veto in the case of
mass atrocities, an initiative designed to curb the use
of veto by the permanent members of the Council, has
yet to gain traction. Here again, the Russian Federation
is more interested in safeguarding its privileges than
in fulfilling its responsibilities before the international
community. For Ukraine, that is nothing new; we have
seen Russia exercise its veto quite recently, in March
2014 and July 2015. In those cases, the Council's action
would have saved thousands of human lives and sent

a powerful messages to perpetrators of heinous acts
against civilians, and their crimes would not have
gone unpunished.

What we see today has a meaning - Russia's
policies remain unchanged. If the current dynamics
of the Syrian conflict continue and the logic of war
prevails over the voices ofpeace, we, as the international
community, face a real risk of a protracted deadly
conflict lasting many more years. The repercussions for
such a scenario are a Pandora's box that is easy to open
but nearly impossible to close 4 more refugees flowing
to Europe and other places, more destabilization
in neighbouring countries, a rising death toll and a
deepening humanitarian crisis. If Russia is not waging
hybrid warfare to reassert itself in the world at any
price, then black is white and white is black.

Those who oppose peace and prolong war risk
setting the wider region ablaze in a fire of sectarian war
and radicalization, giving more space for the extremist
to exploit. Finally, I want to echo the words of Special
Envoy for Syria Staffan de Mistura, that we do not want
to live through another Srebrenica or Rwanda. To that,
I would add that we also do not want to live through
another Grozny.

