Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia presented the initiative to swiftly
adopt a Security Council resolution on establishing the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria, in order
to pave the way for a United Nations presence with a
2

stabilizing influence in that country. Resolution 2043
(2012) is of fundamental importance in pushing
forward the process for a peaceful settlement in Syria
and enshrines the Council's consensus on supporting
the six-point proposal of Joint Special Envoy Annan.
We now believe the main aim to be the unwavering and
clear respect by all parties for the provisions of the
resolution. Any deviation, whether from the
resolution's provisions or in their interpretation, will be
unacceptable. The Libyan model should remain forever
in the past.

The resolution establishes clear parameters of
responsibility for all Syrian parties on the cessation of
violence and on the need to cooperate with United
Nations observers and the mission of the Joint Special
Envoy. However, that is not all.

In order to achieve comprehensive
implementation of the resolution, it is very important
for the external players involved in the Syrian issue to
also act very responsibly. They too should take action
while bearing in mind the provisions adopted by the
Security Council so that all Syrians may participate in
an inclusive political process with respect to the
establishment of a democratic, pluralistic system in
Syria, for all Syrians, irrespective of ethnic or religious
background. Only through that process will Syrians be
able to take their own decisions on their country's
future political situation. Any external influence
imposed by us on that process could risk exacerbating
the crisis.

We call upon all Syrian parties - both the
authorities and the opposition - to refrain from
violence and to fully uphold the provisions of the
Annan plan and the requirements of the resolution.
Once again, we issue a call to all States with influence
on the opposition to encourage them to do the same. In
that context, we will continue to work with Damascus.

The resolution sends an important international
legal signal, namely, that only the Security Council has
the prerogative to take a decision regarding the
settlement of a regional crisis, including the Syrian
crisis. Any other forum, such as a group of friends or a
coalition of mutual interests, should clearly uphold the
resolutions of the Security Council and not undermine
its activity. The Russian Federation will closely follow
those developments.

