Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let me
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and the Force Commanders of the four missions for
their informative briefings.

China would like to pay tribute to the Force
Commanders and peacekeepers of all United Nations
peacekeeping forces in active service for their
extraordinary courage and dedication. We also extend
our condolences to the families ofall those peacekeepers
who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty.
The current international situation is undergoing
profound change. Peacekeeping operations face ever
increasingly complex environments and mandates, and
we face serious challenges in carrying out effective
peacekeeping operations. Informative briefings enable
the Security Council to have a broad understanding of
peacekeeping operations in the field and of the efforts
made by peacekeepers to deliver their mandates. I would
like to make the following four points in response to the
briefings made by the Force Commanders.

First, the basic principles of peacekeeping
operations are still of great relevance as guidance in
the new context. The purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the consent of the
parties concerned, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in self-defence and for the defence of mandates,
are the irrepressible constants of peacekeeping
operations. Such operations should properly handle the
relations with the host country, respect its sovereignty
and heed its views and suggestions. In line with the
wishes of the host country, the Security Council should
appropriately address the issues of an exit strategy for
peacekeeping missions.

Secondly, peacekeeping operations are tasked
with proactively taking forward the process of seeking
political solutions to regional hotspot issues. Some of
those issues are protracted and persistent and lead to
the steady deterioration of the security situation in the
region concerned and in some mission areas, there is no
peace to keep. That has had a serious and adverse impact
on the fulfilment of other peacekeeping functions and
responsibilities. The international community should
therefore have a greater sense of urgency and redouble
its efforts to promote political solutions to regional
hotspot issues. Peacekeeping operations should
achieve synergy and coordination to create an enabling
environment for achieving political solutions to the
hotspot issues.

Thirdly, it is important to improve upon the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, making them
realistic and actionable. In recent years, the protection
of civilians has become one of the mandates for the
relevant United Nations peacekeeping missions. The
implementation of that mandate should be predicated
upon respect for the ownership of the host country
and should articulate the scope, conditions and
terms of reference of implementation, so as to be a
useful supplement to the actions by the host country.
Given the limited material resources, at the level of
implementation and policy, we should develop specific
rules governing the protection of civilians.

Fourthly, we must ensure a smooth transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, development
and reconstruction. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should make timely adjustments to the
mandates and size of missions, in the light of specific
conditions and developments in the situation on the
ground. They should strengthen coordination with
actors such as countries in the regions concerned,
regional and subregional organizations, United
Nations development agencies, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. Peacekeeping operations
should also undertake efforts to meet the needs of the
host country, provide tailored support to help with
security capacity-building and assist the host country
in achieving self-reliant development at an early .

Nine out of sixteen United Nations peacekeeping
missions are in Africa. The first 12 top troop-contributors
are African countries. Strengthening communication
and coordination with African countries in the area
of peacekeeping is an inevitable requirement for
effectively improving peacekeeping operations. China
supports the United Nations in carefully listening to the
views, suggestions and concerns of African countries
in the area of peacekeeping operations. China strongly
supports African peacekeeping capacity-building.

China has been a staunch supporter of and an active
participant in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
It is the largest troop-contributor among the permanent
members of the Security Council and second largest
contributor to the peacekeeping budget. China is
fully implementing the commitments announced by
Chinese leaders concerning our support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We will increase our
communications with the Force Commanders in the
field, and we stand ready to join other Member States
in efforts to improve peacekeeping operations.

