Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African States members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). We extend warm greetings to Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and we thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and Ms. Clemencia Carabali Rodallega for their briefings. Today's meeting is taking place six days prior to the celebration of a significant day in Colombia's history - Independence Day - which is an auspicious occasion when Colombians everywhere are filled with unbridled elation, reflect on the past, acknowledge the present and contemplate a prosperous future for their country. In Colombia's journey towards a prosperous future, the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace is very integral. We believe it is the only viable, sustainable solution to resolving the conflict, which must be nationally led and in the interests of the Colombian people. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic wreaks havoc across the globe, challenging our ideas of the world as we know it and testing the resilience and tenacity of Governments and peoples, countries emerging from difficult conflicts, such as Colombia, are faced with additional challenges. The A3+1 remains in solidarity with the Government and the people of Colombia and commends the efforts by Colombians in responding to the pandemic. We also encourage the international community, including the United Nations and the Security Council, to continue providing support. Since the conclusion of Colombia's final peace agreement, there have been setbacks as well as progress. The A3+1 urges all parties to continue advancing with the comprehensive implementation of the 2016 agreement. It remains key for the security and prosperity of all Colombians and, by extension, of the region of Latin America and the Caribbean. We are mindful that there will be impediments along the way. But Colombians must remain enterprising and prudent, as the circumstances demand the same spirit that saw them move forward on a path to sustained peace in order to overcome encumbrances and new challenges with the same tenacity. The A3+1 acknowledges the progress highlighted in the Secretary-General's recent report (S/2020/603), including the inclusion of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in processes to formulate regional and local development plans. However, it is of concern that the COVID-19 pandemic is delaying progress in the implementation of the peace agreement. Therefore, the A3+1 urges all parties to address more assuredly the lingering challenges outlined in the report. We take this opportunity to highlight the following. First, we are pained by the senseless killings of former combatants, human rights defenders and indigenous and Afro-Colombian leaders. The persistent violence against these most vulnerable groups, including women and children, is particularly troubling. We encourage the National Commission on Security Guarantees to regularly convene meetings to address security issues. It is also imperative that the authorities redouble their efforts, strengthen institutions and enhance coordination to robustly tackle this scourge of violent killings and ensure that perpetrators are held accountable. Security protection mechanisms to guarantee the safety and protection of former FARC combatants and their families must also be efficaciously applied, as they remain crucial for the proper reintegration of former combatants into Colombian society. In addition, the protection of those particularly vulnerable groups will be an important yardstick for the effectiveness of the security measures in general. In that regard, we echo the call by the Secretary-General for strengthening efforts towards longer-term reintegration with benefits for all former combatants, which will ultimately determine the long- term sustainability of peace in Colombia. Similarly, we continue to call for the cessation of hostilities of armed groups and organizations, which continue to exacerbate the suffering of Colombians through violence. We regret that the unilateral ceasefire ended and urge full compliance with the recently adopted resolution 2532 (2020), which is especially necessary during this time as the country battles the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We further encourage the Government and the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional to engage in a constructive and inclusive dialogue to that end. Secondly, the implementation of the development programmes with territorial focus are crucial to the peace process. We therefore urge the Agency forReintegration and Normalization and the National Reintegration Council to address delays in the implementation of productive projects of the national comprehensive programme for illicit crop substitution. We also call for the resolution of the situation pertaining to the allocation of lands and for the situation concerning former combatants residing outside of the territorial areas for training and reintegration to be addressed urgently. Those residual issues are indispensable for the collective reintegration of former FARC combatants, especially since economic and housing projects are vital safeguards for lives and livelihoods that facilitate successful reintegration. While we acknowledge that the spread of COVID-19 is an additional obstacle, it is all the more reason for redoubling efforts to promote the livelihoods and development of former combatants to ensure sustainable integration and overall peace. Thirdly, we welcome the advances within the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition, especially within the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, particularly to ensure that communities and victims of the conflict are prioritized in the peace process. The adjustment in the working modalities to adapting to current realities is testament to the decision by the Government to continue implementing the agreement despite the pandemic. We therefore encourage the Colombian Government to continue in that vein, and we emphasize the fundamental importance of the reconciliation process, as many of our countries today have benefited from the positive aspects of such processes. Equally, we commend the efforts of the Special Investigation Unit of the Attorney General's Office in bringing peace to victims, and urge the authorities to expedite remaining cases. Likewise, we appreciate the progress within the tripartite mechanism on transition to legality of former FARC combatants. We encourage continued cooperation to resolve outstanding issues. We are cognizant that Colombia is tasked with implementing the final agreement under extreme and difficult circumstances, but we believe that the same spirit that Colombians displayed through the fever of its history will aid them in moving forward. We are therefore confident that the resolve and tenacity exhibited by Colombian forebears in laying the solid foundation for the country through hard work and sacrifice will be renewed and demonstrated during these challenging times. The A3+1 reaffirms its support to the Government and the people of Colombia in their pursuit of lasting peace, as well as to the United Nations verification mechanism and the country team, whose work in Colombia continues to be invaluable in supporting the comprehensive implementation of the final peace agreement. Colombia must stay the course for its sustainable development. We extend our sincerest congratulations to Minister Blum de Barberi and all the people of Colombia as they celebrate the 210th anniversary of independence next Monday.
