Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
of course like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the
presentation of the report (S/2010/463) and the briefing
on the situation in Afghanistan they have just made.

The representative of the European Union will
shortly make a statement, with which France associates
itself.
11
Two important events this summer have had a
significant impact on the political situation in
Afghanistan that should give us a degree of optimism.

The first and most recent event was the holding
of legislative elections on 18 September. It is a cause
for satisfaction that, despite their threats and violence,
the Taliban failed to prevent 2,500 candidates from
campaigning and more than 4 million Afghans from
voting. That is the first success, and it is an Afghan
success. However, the task is not yet finished. The
Electoral Complaints Commission should impartially
and professionally address the fraud complaints that
have been brought to it. The official announcement of
results, scheduled for 30 October, must not be delayed.

The second event was the holding of the Kabul
Conference on 20 July, under the co-chairmanship of
the United Nations and the Afghan Government, which
aimed to establish another milestone in Afghanistan's
transition to full exercise of its sovereign authority,
which began at the London Conference last January.
That is why our leaders so strongly emphasized that the
Conference, which brought together 76 delegations
from throughout the world, had to be held in Kabul and
nowhere else. The meeting made it possible to reaffirm
the support of the international community for the
peace, reconciliation and reintegration programme that
President Karzai launched on 29 June.

That process should be carried out by Afghans
themselves. However, the international community
cannot just stand on the sidelines. Our support must
remain undiminished, so long as certain conditions are
respected: the rejection of violence, the absence of
links to international terrorism, and respect for the
Constitution, human rights and the rights of women.

The evolution of the composition of the list of
persons and entities linked with Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, established by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), has concretely
spelled out the inter-Afghan reconciliation process. We
are prepared to pursue dialogue with Afghan officials
with a view to considering the eventual removal of the
Taliban from the list if they meet the political criteria
of reconciliation.

The Kabul Conference also made it possible to
acknowledge the work done by Afghans and NATO for
a gradual transfer of responsibility for security in
various provinces and districts. Those efforts must
continue and must lead to the gradual assumption by

Afghans of responsibility for their own security, and
they should be accompanied by our ongoing support to
train and equip Afghan security forces. That is the best
way to demonstrate to Afghans and to public opinion in
our own countries that progress is being made.
However, we must send out a clear message that
transition does not mean departure, but an increasing
handover of responsibilities to Afghan security forces
with the assistance of the international community.
Improving governance and combating corruption are
key elements of the contract proposed at Kabul
between the international community and the Afghan
State.

The Taliban, who are responsible for the
overwhelming majority of civilian casualties, as my
British colleague has just emphasized, are continuing
their attacks and extortion and are giving no sign of a
desire to engage in dialogue. The Afghan people and
the members of the international community have paid
the price. In spite of the efforts by the Government of
Pakistan, the havens that the Afghan Taliban continue
to use there remain a matter of concern.

It is in that context that we need the legitimacy,
impartiality and expertise of the United Nations in
Afghanistan more than ever before. France
unreservedly supports the work of Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura. We pay tribute to all
the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), who have carried out their
duties under difficult conditions.

We support the Special Representative's priorities
under his 3+l approach, which is in line with the
mandate provided in resolution 1917 (2010). That
re-centering is now beginning to produce results.

First, I wish to refer to the elections again in
order to commend the United Nations for its assistance
in the preparations for the poll. I should also like to
thank Mr. De Mistura for his personal involvement at
decisive points during the electoral process. That is
precisely the role of the Special Representative. He has
our full support.

Secondly, support for an inter-Afghan and
regional political reconciliation process will likely be
the most difficult and important issue to be dealt with
in the coming months. We should further work to
ensure that the United Nations plays a decisive role. In
that regard, we are prepared to consider modalities for
further involvement by UNAMA, which should remain
President Karzai's sole interlocutor on this issue.
However, the key to the stability of Afghanistan is also
a regional matter, and the United Nations, by virtue of
its impartiality, is well situated to bring together all
regional stakeholders around a common goal.

Lastly, the Special Representative and UNAMA
should continue to work on bringing coherence to
international assistance, along with the Afghan
Government and the Special Representative of the
International Security Assistance Force, with the aim
of moving towards the goal of aligning 80 per cent of
international assistance with national priority
programmes.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating my country's
commitment to Afghans in their struggle to establish a
country where the rule of law, democratic and
prosperous, prevails, while ensuring that their territory
does not once again serve as a launching pad for
international terrorism. We shall continue to be part of
collective efforts by focusing our military and civilian
forces in Kapisa Province and the Surobi district.

As the President of the French Republic has often
affirmed, France will continue to be engaged as long as
necessary - and as long as the Afghans wish us to be.

