Mr. Rana (Kenya): I would like, first of all, to
express the appreciation of the Kenyan delegation for the
efforts made by the sponsors of today's draft resolution
in an attempt to accommodate the views and comments of
all delegations. The goal of the international community
remains to ensure that the process of disarming Iraq
continues unhindered until all threats that it poses or
could pose in future are removed.

We believe that the reports of the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) provide a platform on
which our message to Iraq - to fully comply with its
obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions
and to cooperate with UNSCOM. - should have been
based. Such a message, uncompromised and unified,
would have allowed the Council to speak with one voice,
as requested by the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM.

We were encouraged, for instance, that for the most
part the reports of UN SCOM. and the IAEA indicate that
during the period under review, significant progress was
on several fronts, and particularly in the missile and
chemical weapons areas. We would like to see the
cooperation between the Government of Iraq and
UNSCOM, which made this progress possible, further
enhanced to allow UNSCOM. to carry out its mandate in
full. We believe that sending a strong message while
acknowledging progress made, however insignificant, are
not mutually exclusive actions.

The UNSCOM. report, on the one hand, points to
some issues that justifiably need the attention of this
Council. Chief among these is the biological weapons
programme, in which there has been almost no progress
recorded. The other important issue is, of course, that of
the methods of work. Here, UNSCOM. has experienced
difficulties in both the disclosure and the verification
phases. Incidents of the Iraq Government's denial of
access to certain sites, as set out in annex I to the report
(S/ 1997/774) before us, continue to concern us, and we
strongly insist that all such hindrances be removed by the

 

Government, to enable UNSCOM. to perform its functions.
The report also states that, in the overall context of the
Commission's work, inspections were conducted without let
or hindrance.

The draft before us (S/1997/816) takes on board some
of the issues we have referred to. However, it does not
clearly portray the balance and tone of the reports in
question, and it is for those reasons that my delegation will
abstain in the voting.

