Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Ambassadors of Sweden and Brazil for their
helpful briefings and for the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) on its eighth session (S/2015/174),
which covers its work during 2014.

I will speak only briefly, since the full text of my
statement will appear on the website of the Spanish
mission. I will therefore address two main points - first
what I found most interesting in the report, and then
the issues that Spain considers to be peacebuilding
priorities during its time on the Council - in other
words, how we can make a difference from our seat on
the Council.
The Ambassador of the United Kingdom said
rightly that peacebuilding takes time. That is true,
and it is very important. It can take years or decades.
I would add that it takes time and money. We need
significant financial resources in order to build
peace. I believe there is no better investment than an
investment in peacebuilding, because there is nothing
more expensive than a State's relapse into conflict.
The best investment the international community can
make in a State is ensuring its stability. The worst
investment is failing to provide the necessary resources
and thus allowing a State to relapse into conflict once
more. Unfortunately, history is littered with instances
where, due to lack of investment or attention, countries
have relapsed into conflict. I therefore believe it is
vital that we find ways to create financing systems for
facilitating something that is fundamental, but very
difficult to achieve - financial predictability and
annual commitments. The Peacebuilding Fund must
have sufficient resources to address situations where,
for one reason or another, there is instability that could
lead to a State's relapse into conflict.

That is my first point. The second, as I said, is
sharing with the Council some of Spain's objectives for
its two-year membership of the Council, of which four
are key.

The first is strengthening preventive action. The
Council is aware that Spain, together with Turkey,
launched the Alliance of Civilizations, which has
functioned splendidly as an instrument of preventive
diplomacy. Next week, we will adopt a new resolution
on it by consensus, which should be a further step
forward in consolidating the Alliance's role as a
powerful instrument for combating conflict situations.

Secondly, we will work to make greater use of
mediation. With Morocco, we launched a mediation
initiative in the Mediterranean region, and we recently
held a meeting in Madrid whose outcome will be
circulated to all of the States Members of the United
Nations so they can see the results in detail.
Thirdly, we are one of the biggest supporters there
is of the concept of the responsibility to protect. Two
days ago, a meeting of focal points on the responsibility
to protect took place in Madrid.

Another of our goals is strengthening regional
factors. In our View, when a State is emerging from
conflict, there can be no better instrument for restoring
it and preventing its relapse into conflict than the region
itself. A region is able to help, to overcome obstacles
to trade and establish a protection mechanism that can
enable a State to definitively re-establish stability.

Fourthly, we believe in the importance of justice.
The fact is that we cannot conceive of peace without
justice, nor can reconciliation be achieved without it.
All of those concepts are closely intertwined, and that
is why Spain has always been a staunch defender of the
International Criminal Court. We will spare no effort to
promote its work.

A fifth goal that Spain will promote is working to
achieve the thoughtful convergence of four mechanisms
that are already established and under way. The first
is the peace operations review process, which must,
of course, include the vital component of an exit
strategy for peacekeeping operations. The second is
the Peacebuilding Commission's review of its own
architecture. The third is the review of the important
resolution 1325 (2000), on which we are working very
productively with the delegation of the United Kingdom.
We hope that a new resolution will be adopted on
22 October. The fourth is the post-2015 development
agenda, which, we should remember, includes goals for
peacebuilding that we should be bearing in mind.

In conclusion, Spain will attempt to help, to
the extent possible, to promote the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, because we consider it to
be the body that is best positioned to provide continued
support to post-conflict countries. It is therefore also
the best early-warning mechanism for preventing such
States from relapsing into conflict or instability.

