Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too are grateful to the High
Representative, Mr. Petritsch, for his thorough briefing
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the
efforts he is making to establish normal living
conditions in that country.

We wish to note, however, that the situation there
remains fragile. On the one hand, as we have heard
today, positive changes are taking place that are a
source of optimism. On the other hand, in order to
preserve stability, multifaceted support by the
Stabilization Force is frequently required, as well as
continued, ever-stronger pressure on the Bosnian
participants in the peace process by the Office of the
High Representative and other international players.

Russia continues actively to be involved in the
implementation of the Dayton Accords. However, we
do not consider ourselves to be bound by the Brussels
Declaration, as we have serious objections to a number
of its provisions. We will in future work towards the
full and non-discriminatory implementation of the
Dayton Agreement, in keeping with the letter and spirit
ofthose agreements.

In principle, we understand how the High
Representative is establishing priorities in his work,
but it seems to us that his special powers are being
overutilized, thereby placing Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in essence, under a kind of international protectorate.
We do not believe that the use of force to push Dayton
forward creates a stable foundation for institution-
building. International structures cannot and should not
replace legally elected authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a whole and in both entities.

Following the visit of President Kostunica to
Sarajevo, we hope to see the establishment of fruitful
cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Yugoslavia, particularly the speedy implementation of
diplomatic relations between them and the resolution
all bilateral problems without the imposition of any
conditions on either side.

We believe that the international community
should focus its efforts on working with the political
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina by encouraging
them to cooperate both among themselves and with the
international community. Such an approach is
particularly relevant in the period preceding the 11
November elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

