Mr. Di Tella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, for having
convened this emergency meeting without delay. Our
participation in this meeting was not expected, but the
significance of the events and the concern they aroused in
Argentina prompted President Carlos Saul Menem to call
upon me to convey our deep concern.

Nothing that occurs in the Middle East is alien to us
because we are linked to that region by close ethnic,
religious and cultural ties.

Argentina, a land of immigration, has seen its
population nurtured and enriched by citizens of both Arab
and Jewish origin. In our territory, communities from the
Middle East live side by side harmoniously without
distinction of race or creed. Today we wish to join our
voice to those of all the Governments that in this debate
have made a solemn appeal for the preservation of peace
and security on the West Bank, in Gaza and in Jerusalem.

In various forums and on various occasions, my
country has lent its support to the shaping of the peace
programme that emerged from the Madrid and Oslo
agreements and that were widely supported by the
international community. The hopes for a lasting peace
emerging from that process have now been dimmed by
rigid and obstinate attitudes that depart from the letter and
the spirit of those agreements.

I wish to express my Government's concern about
the extremely serious incidents that have occurred. They
are capable of endangering the advance of this process.
The security of peoples depends on moderate policies,
and certainly not on extreme formulas of any kind. There
can be no doubt that the growing instability is playing
into the hands of extremist groups who do not wish to see
the peace process succeed. Terrorism should never
triumph.
 

We call on all the parties to respect scrupulously the
peace agreements that have been signed. It is necessary to
restore the requisite conditions for the dialogue that had
begun to bear fruit and solidify. It is also imperative to
resume the negotiating process. Those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security
should act with the greatest prudence and even-handedness.

We urge this body, which has ceaselessly sought a
peaceful solution in the Middle East, to continue to strive
to put an end to the bloodshed and to recreate the
conditions needed for dialogue and negotiation. On behalf
of the Argentine people and Government, I would also like
to express our condolences to all the victims of these tragic
events and to their families.

May I conclude with an appeal to all parties to deal
with this crisis that has tormented the peoples of the region,
and to do so with prudence, moderation and a spirit of
tolerance, so as to achieve a lasting peace with justice and
security.

