Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for all the good work he and his
team continue to do in Kosovo and the region. I also
welcome His Excellency the Foreign Minister of
Serbia and Her Excellency the Kosovo Ambassador to
Washington, DC.

We fully support the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) and recognize
the important role that UNMIK has played in post-
conflict stabilization and reconciliation. The situation
in Kosovo has indeed changed dramatically since the
Mission's inception, two decades ago. We believe the
Security Council needs to use its resources effectively.
It needs to refocus UNMIK's efforts so that the means
deployed by the United Nations are tailored fully to the
situation on the ground. To that end, the United Kingdom
supports and looks forward to a strategic review of the
Mission. I would recall for members that the European
Union (EU) and other regional organizations are also
very closely involved in Kosovo and in the region. The
EU's role is vital to enabling true peace, security and
stability on the ground.

With the efficiency and priorities of the Council
in mind, we welcome the reduction in frequency of
UNMIK discussions. The Foreign Minister singled
out my country, so I will take a few, brief minutes to
respond. It is important that the cycle of discussion
in the Council reflects reality on the ground. We all
agreed on that at the point when we took the decision.
It is also important that the reporting cycles of the
Secretary- General reflect the frequency of the Council's
discussion. But on the Foreign Minister's specific
points, we offered four options to reach an agreement
with his country - and all four were rejected. We also
made it very clear that we would hold a meeting on
Kosovo in the Security Council if there were progress
on normalization. Sadly, there was no progress on
normalization. Instead, I am sorry to say, the Serbian
Government orchestrated a protest outside our Embassy
in Belgrade, which is simply not an acceptable way of
conducting diplomatic relations.

As we reflect on the progress Kosovo has made
since UNMIK's installation in 1999, there is an example
of how far Kosovo has moved forward that I would
like to raise, and that concerns the Kosovo police.
The Kosovo police is a professional organization that
since its inception, in 1999, has taken responsibility for
ensuring the maintenance of the rule of law in the long
term. Its officers are well trained, and they are keen to
cooperate internationally in our joint efforts to combat
serious and organized crime and terrorism.

The United Kingdom hopes that the Kosovo police
is voted into INTERPOL during its General Assembly
session next week. We urge other members to support
the Kosovo police bid. That is not about political point-
scoring, it is about our collective security and fight
against organized crime. Kosovo's inclusion would
facilitate information-sharing among law enforcement
in the Western Balkans and beyond, and that would
enhance the stability of us all, including Serbia's. It
is time that we stop transnational organized criminals
cooperating better than our own police services.

I would just like to add the point that I knew Oliver
Ivanovic' and considered him a friend. We too hope that
the perpetrators ofhis murder will be brought to justice.
Oliver worked tirelessly to try to normalize the status
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia. I think the
greatest tribute that both countries could pay to Oliver
would be to continue his work without conditions.

We continue to encourage both Serbia and Kosovo
to make progress towards a sustainable solution
through the EU-facilitated dialogue. We agree with
both speakers that progress on the dialogue is vital for
stability, security and prosperity in the two countries
and the region. But I am sorry to say that this is not
always the way in which dialogue is approached. We
would like to see much more progress and faster, and
we would like the two sides to always keep in mind
that any proposals they put forward really do enhance
stability on the ground and the safety and security of
all their citizens.

We have had a number of rounds of dialogue in the
past. In this century alone there was an attempt in 2006
under the auspices of the United Nations, to resolve the
status issue that recommended Kosovo be independent.
that was blocked. There was an attempt in 2007 among
the EU, the United States and Russia to the same end.
That too was blocked. Now we have the EU- facilitated
dialogue. I cannot stress too strongly how important it
is that that dialogue makes real progress if the region,
and in particular Kosovo and Serbia, are to realize
prosperity, security and stability.

The people of Kosovo and Serbia have elected their
leaders to best represent their interests. We urge those
leaders to do so. Provocative acts and rhetoric from
both sides are deeply unhelpful and antagonistic and
should be stopped. They are contrary to the spirit of
normalization and they simply make finding common
ground more difficult. We believe that both countries
now need to focus on a deliverable and sustainable
normalization agreement through the EU-facilitated
dialogue, which enhances security and benefits the
ordinary people ofboth countries. The United Kingdom
stands ready to support such an agreement.

