Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): 1 would
like to thank the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), under the new and able
chairmanship of Ambassador Quinlan, as well as the
Panel of Experts, for their work in supporting the
implementation of the Security Council's resolutions
on Iran.

The United Kingdom, like others in the international
community, remains deeply concerned by Iran's nuclear
programme. The 21 February report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (see S/2013/ 103) shows that Iran
continues to enrich uranium and expand its enrichment
capacity, including with the installation of 180 advanced
centrifuges at Natanz. This development comes closely
on the heels of the full installation of the Fordow
enrichment facility, as reported by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in November 2012.
These actions are in contravention of the resolutions of
both the IAEA Board of Governors and the Security
Council.

Iran's stockpile of nearly 20-per cent enriched
uranium continues to grow and is already far in excess
of its current needs. The IAEA Director General's
report highlights yet again Iran's continued failure to
engage on the possible military dimensions ofits nuclear
programme. We are now 15 months from the IAEA's
first report on possible military dimensions. Iran
must show that it is prepared to take the urgent action
necessary to address the international community's
serious concerns and be judged on its actions, not on
its words.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
finding a peaceful, negotiated solution to the nuclear
issue. Representatives of the E3+3 Governments
met representatives of Iran on 26 and 27 February in
Kazakhstan. Those were useful discussions, and the
United Kingdom looks forward to further progress by
experts in March on the revised and credible proposal
that the E3+3 has put to Iran. That proposal is intended
to build confidence on both sides and move negotiations
forward.

Iran has much to gain from a diplomatic resolution
to the nuclear issue, but we are clear on the need for
talks to deliver results. It is vital that progress now
be made on addressing the most immediate concerns
about Iran's nuclear programme.

Turning to the work of the 1737 Committee, we
note with regret that the Panel of Experts confirms that
Iran continues to breach its international obligations. A
blatant and worrying example is Iran's ballistic missile
launches, highlighted in the Panel's 11 January report.
The evidence of this breach is compelling, and the
Panel was clear that these launches of ballistic missiles
in a military context by Iran constitute a violation of
resolution 1929 (2010).

The 1737 Committee must now act on this breach. It
should, as a first step, write to Iran to express its concern
at the violation and ask Iran to provide a response. The
Committee should issue an implementation assistance
notice regarding this incident, highlighting to Member
States the ban on transferring technology or technical
assistance to Iran regarding ballistic missile activities.
We also encourage the Panel to investigate and share
in its final report in May the names of individuals and
entities responsible.

We are also concerned by the Panel of Experts'
compilations of statements on the transfer of arms to
Gaza by Iran, which indicate that Iran has breached
resolution 1747 (2007). Iran's support to militant groups,
such as Hamas, directly undermines prospects for
peace in the region and further undermines the Iranian
Government's claim to the international community
and to its own people that it supports stability in the
Middle East. We are furthermore dismayed by the
boldness of the Iranian public statements that seek to
undermine the credibility of the Security Council and
its resolutions. The United Kingdom calls on the Panel
to continue to monitor this issue, identify individuals
and entities responsible and include recommendations
on designations in their final report.

The United Kingdom also notes with concern
the recent report from Yemen on the seizure of illicit
arms reported by the Government of Yemen as coming
from Iran. That transfer appears to be a violation that
threatens to undermine Yemen's fragile transition. We
look forward to the Panel's report of its recent inspection
visit. The Committee should be prepared to take action
if the Panel's evidence confirms the violation.

It is time for Iran's leaders to engage. They
cannot continue to ignore the serious concerns of the
international community over Iran's nuclear programme
and its violations of Security Council resolutions. IfIran
aspires to be treated as a normal non-nuclear-weapon
State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, it must now take urgent and concrete
steps to fully address those concerns. Until it makes
the choice to engage, it will face the consequences of
increased pressure and isolation.

