The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

We consider the item on the agenda of today's
open meeting to be very complex and fundamentally
important for the majority of Member States. We
welcome the engaged and candid debate, during which
it was important not only to state our positions once
more but also to try through our common efforts to
achieve the optimal and most balanced solution to the
problem in this specific situation.

On the one hand, the concerns arising for some
States parties to the Rome Statute are understandable.
The authority of the Statute, as one of the cornerstones
of international law documents, is continuing to grow,
as witnessed by the ever-increasing number of States
parties. We hope that the practical work of the Court,
which has only just begun, will be successful, and will
not only strengthen the positions of its unconditional
supporters, but will help dispel the doubts that still
exist in some countries as to its effectiveness and
impartiality.

On the other hand, the International Criminal
Court has not yet become a universal instrument.
Consequently, it is essential to bear in mind the
legitimate interests of the States that are not yet States
parties to the Rome Statute. We must also take into
account the aspects of the issue under consideration
today that have a direct bearing on the organization and
conduct of peacekeeping operations. The Secretary-
General today drew the Council's attention to that
aspect.

This is not the first time that the Security Council
has discussed this topic. Thus, in the resolution just
adopted, resolution 1487 (2003), the Council has taken
into account as much as possible its previous
discussions and the compromise solutions achieved.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.
