Mr. Olanyan: I should like to begin by
conveying to you, Mr. Foreign Minister, the warm
greetings of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, His Excellency Mr. Alpha Oumar
Konare, and by thanking you for organizing this
important debate, which is vital to our organization and
to development in Africa. His inability to be here today
is due not to lack of interest, but rather to critical
official engagements on the continent.

The debate in which we are participating today
offers a useful opportunity to examine past experiences
of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations. It will enable us to highlight
those things that we have done well and those that we
have not. The lessons of successes and failures will
provide useful guidance for the consolidation of future
cooperation.

It is well known that the objectives of regional
organizations can differ in political, military, strategic
and economic ways. For us in Africa, our regional
organization is essentially for development. But our
experience has shown that development can occur only
in a peaceful atmosphere. For that reason, we have
developed an effective mechanism to address conflict
issues on the continent.

Our experience in cooperation has been very
useful. Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) is provided for in Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Constitutive Act of the African Union. On that basis,
we have put in place a significant number of
cooperative agreements and adopted several
resolutions. Our cooperation is both political and
economic. In that regard, the Department of Political
Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the United Nations have collaborated
with the AU and subregional organizations such as the
Economic Community of West African States, in
addressing conflict prevention, management and
resolution and peacekeeping operations on the
continent. At the moment, the United Nations is
working closely with the African Union and
subregional organizations on the ongoing crises in Cote
d'Ivoire, the Sudan and Somalia.

Here, I should like to refer to the sixth high-level
meeting between the United Nations and regional and
other intergovernmental organizations, convened at
United Nations Headquarters on 25 and 26 July 2005.
Among the conclusions reached at the meeting was that
the issues of abject poverty, the depletion of natural
resources, environmental degradation, pandemics and
the social ills of crime and corruption should be
resolved in order to ensure international peace and
security. More important, the meeting supported the
proposed 10-year capacity-building plan for the
African Union, which is a laudable action that could
effectively promote global peace and stability.

What are the basic elements of cooperation for
stabilization? It is necessary to state that the
stabilization process entails, among other things,
harmony and change within and among the components
of the regional system and involves regional systemic
factors. Harmony within and among those components
depends on factors inside and outside the system.
Moreover, the inbuilt capacity to absorb and convert
extraregional systemic factors can determine the
strength of regional stabilization.

It therefore follows that cooperation for
stabilization should target major weaknesses in the
institutions and operations of regional organizations
and the development problems of their member States.
Regional stabilization should be about
cooperation aimed at increased and sufficient support
for the consolidation of the African Union
Commission. The United Nations, as noted earlier, has
already been supporting the Commission's efforts in
that regard. However, it is clear that much needs to be
done to build up the institution in order to enhance its
operationalization. There are deficiencies in the area of
human resource capacity-building. That is evident in
various departments of the organization, including the
Political Department and the Peace and Security
Council. Support for long-term consultants and training
programmes is necessary to correct those deficiencies
and to enable the Commission to fully carry out its
administrative responsibilities. The organs of the AU,
including the Peace and Security Council and the Pan-
African Parliament, should be strengthened, and
specialized committees, the Court of Justice and
financial institutions should be established to enable
the AU to perform effectively in the area of regional
stabilization.

Regional stabilization in Africa is about conflict
prevention. The United Nations has a track record of
cooperation with the AU in that respect. As it is,
however, the AU is far from having a full complement
of mechanisms in place to address this complex issue,
which has several dimensions. The AU is resolved to,
among other things, establish an early warning system
to provide information about the development of
political and economic crises in African countries.
Analytical information from such an early warning
system is vital so that the AU can, in collaboration
with the United Nations and with relevant subregional
organizations, take necessary preventive actions that
will not allow crises to degenerate into conflicts or
wars. Further cooperation with the United Nations is
desirable for the full establishment of an effective early
warning system, which would constitute a major
stabilizing factor in regional processes.

Regional stabilization is about effective conflict
management and resolution. Again, these are areas
where the United Nations has cooperated with the AU
and where a number of successes have been achieved.
Nevertheless, there is still room for further
improvement in that respect. There is a need for the
development of a mechanism for the rapid termination
of hostilities, the implementation of peace agreements
and the transition to democratic governance in
countries in crisis. The more effective those
mechanisms are, the better the chances of regional
stabilization.
Regional stabilization is about peacebuilding. In
that area, the support of the United Nations is very
important for countries emerging from conflict, but the
United Nations and the African Union do not have such
a mechanism at the moment.

The African Union welcomes the decision by
heads of State and Government at the 2005 summit in
New York to establish the Peacebuilding Commission.
Peacebuilding entails redressing political, legal,
economic, social and infrastructural problems at the
end of a war. We welcome the efforts of the President
of the General Assembly to immediately put in place a
mechanism for establishing the Peacebuilding
Commission, and we urge that an appropriate role be
assigned to regional organizations, which are
indispensable partners in the peacebuilding process.
Sound post-conflict peacebuilding is a requirement for
the prevention of the reactivation of conflict and for
laying the foundation for economic growth,
development and, therefore, stability.

Regional stabilization implies support for the AU
in its efforts to consolidate democracy and good
governance. At its summits, the AU has adopted
several decisions in those areas. Democracy and good
governance should be strengthened in countries that
have not experienced crises. The political, legal and
economic and social framework for democracy and
good governance should be developed to ensure a
peaceful political transition. The United Nations is
already cooperating in those areas, in particular
through the Economic Commission for Africa and the
United Nations Development Programme. We
encourage increased cooperation with the African
Union and African countries in order to ensure national
and regional stability.

Regional stabilization is about sustainable
economic growth and development. We have in place
several programmes, including the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD) and the AU Strategic
Plan. Currently, Africa is lagging behind in the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals.
Thus, Africa welcomes the proposals on development
and the recognition of the special needs of Africa
contained in the 2005 High-level Plenary Meeting
outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1). The stabilization of the continent requires the
swift implementation of those recommendations, in
particular those relating to an increase in official
development assistance and foreign direct investment,
the expansion of foreign trade, the cancellation of
external debt and the halting and the reversal of the
spread of pandemic HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis
and other infectious diseases.

Stunted development is one of the root causes of
crises and wars in Africa. Cooperation on
implementation should ensure coherence and
harmonization. Cooperation should be sustainable and
lead to equitable economic growth in countries. In the
absence of sustainable and equitable economic growth
and development, economically weak countries in the
continent will be more susceptible to crises and
internal conflict.

Furthermore, regional stabilization implies
regular consultation by the United Nations with the
leadership of regional organizations. The dynamic
nature of issues in the various regions suggests that
there should be regular meetings to discuss issues and
reorder priorities in order to effectively resolve them.
The United Nations, as already noted, has further
developed that arrangement. Its decision at the sixth
high-level meeting between the United Nations and
regional organizations, held in July 2005, on a
mechanism for coordination and implementation
should be speedily implemented to facilitate regional
stabilization.

Finally, the regional stabilization process is about
sound political support for the leadership of regional
organizations. In the day-to-day activities of regional
organizations, the leadership provides direction and
responses to issues as they arise in the region. Those
actions are generally carried out in consultation with
the United Nations and other stakeholders. Cooperation
for stabilization should focus on that important area.
The cooperation of the United Nations gives regional
leaders significant legitimacy. The more cooperation
there is with the leadership of regional organizations,
the better will be their ability to provide solutions vis-
a-vis the forces of destabilization in the region.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that global stability
derives from regional stability. It is also an irrefutable
fact that regional organizations have the capacity to
meaningfully address regional issues if they are
adequately empowered through sufficient cooperation
with the United Nations. The African Union has the
leadership role in the continent's stabilization process
for peace, security and sustainable economic growth
and development. Now is the time for the United
Nations to build on its achievements in cooperation
with regional organizations.

