The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
the delegation of France for having organized this
important debate, which is being held at an appopriate
moment. The world's children are increasingly under
threat in theatres of war. Last year seems to have been
one of the worst ever for children in areas affected by
conflict. An estimated 230 million children live in
countries and areas where armed groups are fighting.
Up to 15 million children were directly affected by
the violence. The perpetrators of violations against
children in armed conflict are increasingly diverse and
brutal. It is our responsibility to bring these issues into
the spotlight for discussion and action.

I would like to acknowledge the presence with us
today of Mr. Junior Nzita Nsuami, a former child soldier
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Junior's
example teaches us that, with appropriate assistance, a
chance at education and continued support, it is possible
to overcome the violence of a childhood spent fighting
an adult war. Junior now dedicates his life to helping
underprivileged children in Kinshasa, and his goal is to
build a better future for them and for his country.

(spoke in English)

Globally, in conflict situations the main perpetrators
of grave violations against children are armed groups.
These groups constitute the vast majority of parties
listed in the annexes of my annual report on children
and armed conflict. Since I last addressed the Council
on this issue one year ago (see S/PV.7129), hundreds
of thousands more children have been confronted with
the emergence or intensification of conflict, and have
endured new and grave threats posed by armed groups.
Sadly, this includes some of the worst human rights
violations a child can experience, including death,
injury, imprisonment and torture, sexual abuse, forced
recruitment and abduction. There is rarely anyone to
hear their protests or advocate for their rights. The rise
of Violent extremism in conflict areas is particularly
disturbing.

The tactics of groups such as Daesh and Boko
Haram make little distinction between civilians and
combatants. These groups not only constitute a threat
to international peace and security, but often target
girls and boys. No cause can justify such acts. Children
have the right to be protected in their schools, in
their homes and in their communities. Increasingly,
children are snatched from a normal life of school
and family, abducted by armed groups and thrown
into a life of Violence and horror. From north-eastern
Nigeria to Iraq, from South Sudan to Syria, we have
witnessed a wave of such abductions used to terrorize
and humiliate entire communities. How can we forget
the images of the girls from Chibok, stolen from their
school dormitory and still missing? Our agencies on the
ground tell us that they are verifying more and more
cases of child abductions. That is why I urge Member
States to work with us to strengthen our prevention and
response mechanisms.

We agree that we cannot tolerate a world in
which children are killed and maimed, where they are
abducted, subject to sexual Violence, forced to become
soldiers, and where schools and hospitals are attacked.
That is why we engage not just with Governments but
also with armed groups to stop grave violations against
children. My Special Representative has worked with
many such groups, and will work with more, to ensure
that we are doing our utmost to protect children in these
most difficult environments.

The resolutions adopted by the Council over the
past 16 years have built a solid framework and given us
tools to better engage with Governments and non-State
actors not only to end but also to prevent these violations.
We have seen concrete outcomes of our efforts that
have translated into thousands of children now going to

school instead of battle, and playing in fields instead of
fighting on them. By protecting children, we contribute
to building durable peace and to helping countries reach
their full potential. But we must act collectively, and
expeditiously. I call on the international community to
continue supporting this work and this mandate, and to
always ensure that the children's best interests are at
the heart of any response we undertake.

Allow me to end on a positive note. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend my Special
Representative and UNICEF for their campaign
"Children Not Soldiers", which they launched a
year ago to end the recruitment and use of children
by Government forces by 2016. The progress they
have accomplished to date is encouraging. With the
support of the United Nations, Chad completed all
the requirements to make its army child-free. Six of
the seven countries involved in the campaign are now
engaged with the United Nations to end and prevent
the recruitment of children in their security forces, and
some of them are making commendable progress. That
would have been unthinkable just a few years ago, but
we still have a long road ahead of us to transform those
commitments into reality for thousands of children.

I count on all the members of the Security Council,
the members of the international community and
all stakeholders to assist in those efforts wherever
possible. The children of the world should be students,
not soldiers. They deserve to grow up in communities
that offer them safety and a chance to reach their full
potential. Those are fundament rights of all children,
not aspirations. Member States have the obligation to
take all the necessary measures to fulfil them.

