Mr. Toure (Guinea) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to underscore that I am speaking
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), in my capacity as its New York chair, in this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.

Today's meeting bears a special significance as
it coincides with the end of the well-intentioned and
much-appreciated efforts ofthe United States Secretary
of State to move the Middle East peace process
forward. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation
believes that the renewed suspension of the peace
talks and the indefensible status quo underscore the
need to step up progress towards peace and stability
in the region, which is undergoing rapid change. At
this decisive moment, if the kind of credible political
process to which the OIC remains fully committed
is to continue successfully, certain conditions must
be met. This means serious commitment on the part
of the international community to bringing all illegal
acts on the ground to an end, and to demanding respect
for internationally agreed parametres, as defined by
United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Madrid terms of references and the Quartet road
map; and for the establishment of an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State based on the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and for the
settlement of all core issues.

The OIC has repeatedly drawn the international
community's attention to Israel's recent actions,
especially its continuing settlement activities, which
threaten to undermine the two-State solution and to
exacerbate the situation on the ground. These actions
constitute a grave breach of international law, seriously
detract from the credibility of the peace efforts,
undermine the contiguity and viability of the State of
Palestine, andjeopardize the prospects for realizing the
two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders.
In this regard, the OIC stresses that the international
community, in particular the Security Council, must
ensure that its resolutions are respected and assume
its full responsibility to address the illegal situation
that Israel, the occupying Power, has created in an
attempt to further entrench its occupation and further
its de facto annexation of Palestinian land. The Council
must take binding action to put an immediate end to
Israel's construction of settlements in all of their
manifestations, reverse all of Israel's attempts to distort
reality, and eliminate the grave repercussions thereof
on the Palestinian people, their land and resources.

The fragile situation on the ground resulting
from Israel's fait-accompli policies are of profound
and legitimate concern to the OIC. These illegitimate
and illegal policies seek to alter the historical,
religious and demographic composition and character
of the city of Jerusalem, isolating it from its natural
environs, compromising the status of its holy sites and
undermining the status of East Jerusalem as the capital
of the State of Palestine through illegal and aggressive
acts, including attempts to enact illegal laws to impose
Israeli sovereignty over the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

In this regard, the OIC reaffirms that such acts
may have extremely dangerous and far-reaching
consequences that would not only jeopardize the
progress and credibility of the peace process, but also
destabilize the entire Middle East region. The OIC also
condemns the recent escalation of acts of provocation
and incitement by Israeli extremists, including settlers,
Government officials and religious zealots, notably at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif.

The OIC therefore reaffirms the centrality of the
Palestinian cause to its member States, stresses the
Islamic, Arab and Palestinian identity of occupied
East Jerusalem, and reiterates the need for full respect
of the sanctity of its Islamic and Christian holy sites.
Moreover, the OIC reiterates that East Jerusalem
remains an integral part of the Palestinian territory
that has been occupied by Israel since 1967, the illegal
annexation of which by Israel remains unrecognized
and condemned by the international community.

The OIC continues to monitor with great concern
the plight of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails and
detention centres, which reflects the flagrant injustice
and oppression to which the Palestinian people have
been subject for decades. We express our deep concern
over the hunger strikes carried out by detainees in
protest of their abuse and captivity without charge or
trial. In this regard, we underline the responsibility of
the Security Council to ensure that Israel complies with
the rules of international law and to protect the human
rights of Palestinian prisoners.

The OIC welcomes the recent announcement on
23 April regarding Palestinian national reconciliation,
which is a prerequisite for achieving Palestinian
national aspirations and a just and lasting peace. The
OIC wishes the Palestinian people the greatest of
success in this important endeavour. The OIC also
welcomes Palestine's recent accession to international
humanitarian and human rights law treaties, stressing
the critical importance of respect for international law,
including for the attainment of a just and lasting peace.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to reaffirm
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation's support for
and solidarity with the Palestinian people as they seek
to reclaim their alienable national rights, including the
rights to return and self-determination, and to establish
an independent and sovereign State of Palestine on the
land occupied by Israel since 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, as well as to reach a just solution to
the question of Palestinian refugees in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 194 (III). It is the
hope of the OIC that 2014, as the International Year
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, will see
the occupation and oppression brought to an end and
freedom and independence become a reality for the
Palestinian people.

