Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
I join others in thanking you for scheduling today's
debate. We welcome the opportunity to hear later in the
meeting the views of the Member States that play a
leading role in making United Nations peacekeeping a
reality. I would like to thank Under-Secretaries-
General Le Roy and Malcorra for the important work
under way in their Departments and for the executive
summary of their Departments' recent work. Their
briefings today cover some important plans for reform.

The United Kingdom fully supports a new effort
to ensure a meaningful dialogue between the Secretariat,
which plans and manages peacekeeping operations; the
Security Council, which agrees to political objectives;
and the troop- and police-contributors, which provide
the personnel. The enhanced consultation will help
ensure that, together, we have a shared understanding
of the purpose of each mission; we set realistic,
achievable and manageable mandates, we ensure more
coherent and integrated mission planning; and we make
best use of the resources available.

This year has seen a number of initiatives on
United Nations peacekeeping launched across the
United Nations community. I believe that the various
initiatives reflect the concern we all share that
peacekeeping in ever more complex environments
demands greater efforts to ensure that we achieve the
effect we want and that the current initiatives are
complementary and mutually supportive.

Ambassador Ripert of France spoke of the United
Kingdom/French initiative in the Security Council. Our
objective is to improve the Council's own approach to
the process of mandating and reviewing peacekeeping
missions. We have made progress and we plan to
reflect on that during the United Kingdom presidency
of the Council in August. Our goal is to ensure that the
Security Council plays its part in improving the strategic
management of peacekeeping. We are not seeking to
infringe upon those parts of the wider debate that remain
the prerogative of the General Assembly. Peacekeeping
is an important resource that belongs to all of us, and
we have a shared responsibility to ensure that the huge
resources and effort that go into peacekeeping produce
the best possible results.

The Security Council has examined in the past
how to strengthen consultations with countries outside
its membership which contribute the personnel and
resources to peacekeeping operations. The topic was a
feature of the Brahimi report, and resolution 1327
(2001) established an improved system of consultations
with the troop-contributing countries, with the goal of
building a common understanding of a mission's
mandate and its implementation.

The evolving nature of peacekeeping requires that
we look again at the way we do this and, in particular,
at the involvement of the troop-contributing countries.
Member States reiterated this point in meetings of the
Japan-chaired Security Council Working Group. The
United Kingdom would like to see more profitable use
made of the structures and meetings established by
early resolutions.

Engagement between contributors, the Secretariat
and members of the Council early on as to the
challenges and opportunities a mission faces, well in
advance of Council decisions, will mean that those
decisions on the extension, adaptation or termination of
a peacekeeping mandate will be better informed and
more fully considered.

The consultation should also embrace the
thematic challenges facing peacekeeping. For example,
we need greater clarity and consensus on what can
reasonably be expected of peacekeeping operations
with respect to the protection of civilians. We had an
opportunity to consider some of these issues in our
debate last week and we will have further opportunities
to address the issue during the Austrian presidency. We
hope that this subject can also be an issue for
discussion during next year's session of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

The Council has seen first-hand the importance of
building local capacity in countries with peacekeeping
operations, particularly the local police and security
services. It has become evident from the recent Council
visits to Haiti, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Liberia that too little emphasis is being placed on
this issue, and that there remains a high dependence on
United Nations peacekeepers to provide local security.
If we are to achieve the national ownership we all
strive for, we must concentrate on ensuring that
peacebuilding objectives, particularly for local capacity
in the security sector, can be established at the outset.

In the executive summary of the forthcoming
New Horizon report, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) proposes that the Security Council
consider ways to mobilize coalitions of States and
other parties to ensure political and practical support to
United Nations missions. We welcome this proposal.
One possibility would be for a lead nation to be
identified within a core of contributors that could be
involved in the planning and development of a specific
mission from the outset.

The United Kingdom firmly supports the goals of
the New Horizon project set forth by the DPKO and
the Department of Field Support (DFS). We now need
to agree on a new agenda for partnership across
Member States to ensure efficient and, above all,
successful peacekeeping operations. I was particularly
struck by Ms. Malcorra's proposals to combine support
packages for missions in the same region, to seek more
local staff and local and regional suppliers, to tailor the
United Nations approach to the different needs of the
various stages of peacekeeping operations and to
shorten the procurement timelines to allow for more
rapid deployment. We look forward to working with
both DF S and DPKO to assist in delivering on these
demanding but important objectives as part of our wider
goals on strengthening United Nations peacekeeping.

