Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I am delivering this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security Council:
Cote d'Ivoire, South Africa and Equatorial Guinea.

At the outset, we express our gratitude to the
Peruvian presidency for convening this important
debate on the implementation of resolutions 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018), on youth, peace and security.
We are also grateful for the informative briefings made
by Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth, Ms. Muganda and Ms. Sofia
Ramyar, who reminded us that most of the world's
young people want to contribute and are contributing to
achieving lasting peace and development for all.

We welcome the initiatives of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, which, during its membership in
the Security Council in 2015, presided over the adoption
ofthe historic resolution 2250 (2015), and the important
role played by Peru in promoting the youth, peace and
security agenda, especially with regard to the adoption
of resolution 2419 (2018). Both resolutions demonstrate
the prioritization of young people in the adoption of an
international governance framework and recognize and
legitimize the efforts of young people in peacebuilding
and conflict resolution.

We recall that the first International Symposium
on Youth Participation in Peace Processes, held earlier
this year, highlighted critical issues on how to advance
youth participation in peace processes. In that regard,
we also emphasize the participation of young people in
innovative projects that help them in large measure to
remainactivelyengagedandfarremovedfromvulnerable
situations, such as those involving exploitation,
radicalization and recruitment by extremist, criminal
and armed groups. One such example involves a pilot
project with the participation of former combatants in
ecotourism initiatives in Colombia. It is imperative that
the Council discuss in depth how national Governments
and interregional bodies can be supported to ensure
the full implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2419 (2018) at the national level.

It is estimated that more than 600 million young
people worldwide, of whom a large number live in
Africa, currently live in fragile and conflict-affected
areas. The African continent has the world's youngest
population, with more than 400 million young people
between the ages of 15 and 35. Putting young people
at the centre of our development commitments and
priorities is critical, as youth networks across the
continent are mobilizing youth groups and ensure their
full and active participation in the work being done to
harness the demographic dividend.

The African Union has developed various
youth development policies and programmes at the
continental level to ensure that the continent benefits
from its demographic dividend. The policies include
the African Youth Charter, the African Youth Decade
2009-2018 Plan of Action and the Malabo Decision on
Youth Empowerment, which are implemented through
various programmes under the African Union Agenda
2063. Through those instruments, the African Union has
emphasized the importance of the inclusion of young
people at all levels to ensure their effective participation
in every effort to promote peace and security.

Our leaders are working hand in hand to prioritize
the well-being of our young people by providing them
with access to and opportunities to receive adequate
education that will afford them with the necessary
knowledge and skills to enter an increasingly globalized
and competitive labour market, minimize barriers
created by unemployment and underemployment and
empower them to become positive agents of change.
The Continental Strategy for Technical and Vocational
Education and Training to Foster Youth Employment
perfectly exemplifies Africa's firm commitment to
quality education for young people so that they can
contribute to the fight against poverty in that vulnerable
sector of society.

With regard to issues concerning the impact of
conflict and instability among young people, the
United Nations Population Fund has collaborated with
several African countries, including the Niger, Chad,
Cameroon and Nigeria, with a multisectoral approach to
supporting the development of youth initiatives with a
view to reducing the risk of radicalization and ensuring
that young people can contribute to the development
of their countries. Moreover, within the framework of
the Africa-European Union partnership, special focus
is placed on the issue of young people, in particular
through the Africa-Europe Youth Summit. The fourth
edition of the Summit, held from 9 to 11 October 2017,
was endorsed by the Abidjan Declaration, in which
young people from both continents called for the urgent
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) on the role
of young men and women in promoting peace and
combating violent extremism.

Despite those various steps forward, there is still
an urgent need to empower young people not only in the
African region, but throughout the world so that they
can be more influential and productive actors in their
societies. We commend the efforts of the United Nations
and its agencies to ensure the empowerment of young
people, including the launch of its Youth 2030 initiative,
which provides an ambitious framework for stepping up
our efforts to include and empower young people. For
the benefit of our young people, we encourage leaders
to promote an integrated approach to all development
settings, including ongoing investments in basic
services, such as education, health care, water, the
rule of law, justice, security, human rights, inclusive,
accountable and responsive socioeconomic and political
institutions, and conflict prevention mechanisms.

Governments, development partners and other
influential people are called upon to adopt policies that
promote the development and human rights of young
people and assess the progress being made through the
Sustainable Development Goals concerning adolescents
and young people. Young people should be involved as
full partners in achieving those Goals.
In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea
and South Africa call for greater recognition of the
place of young people in society. In that context, the
three African members of the Security Council support
common efforts to encourage greater participation of
young people in decision-making processes, which
will undoubtedly help to maintain international peace
and security.

