Mr. Motoc (Romania): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for
his solid progress report on ways to combat
subregional and cross-border problems in West Africa
(S/2005/86). We appreciate the presence and the
valuable contributions of the Special Adviser to the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa.

Romania associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by Ambassador Hoscheit of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
West Africa still presents a mixed picture. Encouraging
news of progress and prospects for peace and
development are counterbalanced by chronic and
pervasive socio-economic problems and worrisome
political developments. We are all alarmed by the
recent developments in Togo, and we are fully behind
the actions taken by ECOWAS and the African Union.

Lingering crises such as the one in Cote d'Ivoire
also offer reasons for deep concern, as negative
developments in any West African country may easily
have a broader impact. West Africa is probably one of
the best examples of the need for a comprehensive and
harmonized approach to conflict situations. The
important investment the international community has
made in individual countries could be wasted if the
many cross-border problems calling for durable
solutions in the larger regional framework are ignored.
We need a long-term process, as the level of
commitment should measure up to the profile of the
region which is emerging from decades of war and
instability.

The report of the Secretary-General offers a
pragmatic view on steps already taken or still required
to tackle the cross-border problems affecting West
Africa.

Against that backdrop, we would like to make
three general points. First, we note with appreciation
the trend towards greater coordination within the
United Nations system. In that regard, we look forward
to the report of the Secretary-General on inter-mission
cooperation in West Africa.

Secondly, as Romania resolutely advocates closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, we appreciate, in particular, the
spearheading role that ECOWAS is playing in West
Africa as a relevant and successful partner of the
United Nations. ECOWAS is actively involved in the
implementation of many of the Security Council's
recommendations. We hail in particular the increased
cooperation among the United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA), ECOWAS and the European Union,
with the goal of developing a regional conflict
prevention policy. We trust that the United Nations
Office will continue to work towards ensuring the
necessary regional coherence in the wide-ranging
activities in West Africa.

International and regional efforts must certainly
be backed by fundamental political changes at the
national level in areas such as participatory decision-
making, transparent and accountable governance and
administration, and fighting impunity and corruption.
Solutions to West African cross-border issues are
ultimately a function of the efforts of the regional
countries themselves - their leaders and civil societies
alike. Efforts aimed at reactivating the Mano River
Union could be worthwhile in countering cross-border
threats. The Union could also offer new possibilities to
tackle the issue of sensitive border areas.
Thirdly, cross-border problems, such as illicit
trafficking in arms, the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, and the phenomena of child soldiers and
mercenaries cannot be truly dealt with in the absence
of viable prerequisites for development. The United
Nations achievements are more than a function of
security gains. The importance of a successful
reintegration phase in the context of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, as well as
the creation of adequate job opportunities for young
people, including ex-combatants, cannot be overstated
as critical steps towards stable and peaceful societies.
We still need to figure out better ways to articulate a
meaningful cooperation between the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council with respect to
post-conflict situations. The donor community and
such international institutions as the World Bank
should also step up their efforts to help national
authorities and regional actors in that direction.

Finally, I would like to make four brief comments
building upon the specific recommendations that the
Secretary-General made.

First, the reform of the security sector in West
African countries, as well as improved relations
between civil and military structures, are vital
conditions in order to achieve stability in the
subregion. There will be no lasting peace so long as
State policies can be dictated at gunpoint.

Secondly, we welcome the decision of the
ECOWAS member States to convert the moratorium on
small arms and lights weapons into a legally binding
instrument, and we encourage them also to consider the
setting up of a regional register of small arms and light
weapons.

Thirdly, the implementation of sanctions regimes
should be conceived in the same regional logic. A
"naming and shaming" list could also be a powerful
tool in achieving compliance with arms embargoes and
the ECOWAS moratorium.

Fourthly, in many areas of West Africa the
humanitarian situation remains a great concern, with
considerable potential to affect the stability of the
entire subregion. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's appeal to fund a regional humanitarian
response, with special emphasis on sensitive border
areas affected by conflict and on their major problems:
the recruitment of child soldiers, widespread instances
of rape, illicit trafficking in drugs and weapons, and
banditry.
With general elections planned in Liberia and
Cote d'Ivoire, and presidential elections in Guinea-
Bissau, 2005 is an electoral year for West Africa.
These are opportunities for the whole region to set a
steady course towards political stability, national
reconciliation and economic growth.

