Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank you, Mr. President,
and the Dominican Republic for your able presidency
of the Security Council this month. I also congratulate
Belgium, Germany, Indonesia, and South Africa on
joining the Security Council as non-permanent members

for the next two years. I look forward to working with
them and with all Council members to maintain peace
and security in a world that is replete with challenges
and crises. I also express my appreciation for the
serious and tireless efforts of the outgoing members of
the Security Council, namely, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands
and Sweden. I wish those countries every success. I
congratulate Palestine as well on chairing the Group of
77 and China.

I would like to express my sincere thanks and
appreciation to Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his comprehensive
briefing this morning, and I welcome Mrs. Retno
Marsudi, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
to this meeting.

By virtue of its geographical location and close
ties with the Palestinian people, Jordan has always
been close to the Palestinian cause and the suffering
of Palestinians. We have been on the side of their just
cause since the Palestinians were first uprooted from
their land and displaced until now. We have made every
effort through peaceful means to advance the peace
process and reach the noble goals of restoring all their
land for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace, so
as to meet the aspirations of the brotherly Palestinian
people and all the peoples ofthe region. That would end
their suffering and great human plight while granting
them their legitimate rights to freedom, a State and a
dignified life on their land.

The two-State solution, which guarantees the
establishment of an independent, sovereign and viable
Palestinian State on the borders of4 June 1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace and security
alongside Israel, is the only way to end the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict and bring about comprehensive regional
peace. That would require intensified efforts to
overcome obstacles impeding the resumption of direct
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis. It also
requires the cessation of all unilateral Israeli measures,
foremost of which is the settlement construction.

The most important issue is Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
which is a holy city for more than half of the world's
population, including Muslims, Christians and Jews.
We must all preserve Jerusalem, with its ancient
history and various religions, a holy city that brings
us together and is a symbol of peace. In that context,
Jordan reaffirms its steadfast commitment to defend
and protect the holy places of Islam and Christianity
in Jerusalem, within the framework of the historic
mandate of the Hashemite custodianship over those
holy sites in Jerusalem. In that regard, we underscore
Jordan's firm stance that Jerusalem is a red line, as it
is part of the final-status issues that must be resolved
in negotiations in accordance with resolutions of the
international legitimacy and while ensuring that East
Jerusalem is the capital of the Palestinian State.

The issue ofrefugees is also part of the final-status
issues that must be resolved based on resolutions of
international legitimacy, foremost of which is resolution
194 (III), and the Arab Peace Initiative, that would ensure
the right of refugees to return and be compensated. In
that regard, we reiterate the need to continue to provide
the necessary support and protection to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA). We will continue to work
with the international community in order to ensure
that UNRWA continues to provide its services to the
refugees as part of a world commitment. Any attempt
to reduce the role of UNRWA and the financial support
provided to it would have disastrous consequences.

With the beginning of a new year, we must also
turn a new chapter in dealing with the Syrian crisis. We
must all continue to work towards a political solution
to the crisis, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
so as to ensure Syria's recovery and that it becomes a
pillar of stability in the region and a component ofjoint
Arab action, while allowing for the voluntary return
of refugees and the resumption of development and
construction in Syria and the States of the region, which
have politically, economically and socially suffered as a
result of the crisis.

With regard to the crisis in Yemen, my country
welcomed the political detente during the Stockholm
negotiations, the Al-Hudaydah ceasefire agreement,
the exchange of prisoners, the access by humanitarian
convoys to besieged areas in the city and the
establishment of a framework for future negotiations.
The Kingdom of Jordan hosted a meeting between
the Government of Yemen and the Ansar Allah
group, which was convened by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen. The aim was to
discuss the exchange of prisoners. We stand by our
brothers in Yemen in order to resolve the crisis and stop
their suffering.
Wars and crises have depleted our resources,
frustrated our youth and deprived the region of the
stability and security needed to achieve economic
growth that meets the demands of developed societies.
Finding solutions for the problems in the region
requires addressing the deep-rooted causes of political,
economic and social crises, as well as establishing
policies and mechanisms so as to enable our young
people to actively participate in peacebuilding and
promoting a culture of tolerance and coexistence.

In conclusion, allow me to paraphrase the words
of His Hashemite Majesty King Abdullah II Ibn
Al-Hussein, who said that when all people, in particular
the young, see a promising future, that will bring
benefits to the international community in its entirety.
When our region, which has strategic importance,
becomes strong and successful, the whole world will
benefit from our stability, security and development.

