Mr. Kolga (Estonia): First I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate
on maintaining international peace and security. The
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations provides
us with a unique opportunity to reflect on and reaffirm
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. By the same token, I should like to offer you
our best wishes for the beginning of the Year of the
Goat.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and
with the statement that will be delivered later by
the representative of Maldives on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.

Although there is much good to say and successes to
remember about 70 years of United Nations existence,
as time is short I will comment on only some pending
issues for the future. With regard to the topic of today's
discussion, I should like to reiterate that the protection
of human life is the foremost priority that we as the
international community - we the peoples - have
been given. Carrying out this mandate of the Security
Council should be clear and understandable to us all.
In the Charter of the United Nations, the permanent
members of the Security Council were given great
power but also great responsibility to maintain peace
and security in the world. The three most important
principles that should be adhered to while maintaining
peace and security in our view are democracy, the rule
of law and the fight against impunity. I hope that all the
members of the Council are and will be guided by those
principles.

Considering the large number of crises throughout
the world and their disastrous consequences for civilian
populations in Syria, Ukraine, the Middle East, Somalia
and South Sudan, to name but a few, it is clear that the
Security Council has not always lived up to its tasks.
Several attempts to adopt resolutions on an effective
international response to end crises and ensure
accountability for perpetrators of atrocity crimes have
been blocked by permanent members of the Security
Council. Far too often, history has shown us how the
distinct privilege of the veto, or even just the threat of
using it, has been abused, leaving the Security Council
paralysed and passive on the sidelines in situations
where it is most needed.

The saddest example of that is the four-year long,
ongoing humanitarian catastrophe in Syria. Estonia
therefore stands by the French proposal to establish
a code of conduct on the voluntary restraint on the
use of the veto and firmly believes that taking such a
step would help the Security Council to live up to its
mandate. The Security Council can and should make
its contribution to the protection of fundamental human
rights through its power of referring situations to the
International Criminal Court.

From the perspective of the working methods of
the Council, one aspect that needs to be taken into
consideration is the obligation deriving from Article
27 of the Charter, which establishes the only limitation
to a Council member participating in a vote in the
Security Council, to wit: "in decisions under Chapter
VI, and under paragraph 3 of Article 52, a party to a
dispute shall abstain from voting". This applies in equal
measure to all Council members and should be adhered
to.

Furthermore, while focusing on the Council's role
in the maintenance of peace and security in the world,
one cannot ignore the seriously deteriorated security
situation in Europe. The conflict in Ukraine has
shown that one of the basic principles of international
law - respect for a country's territorial integrity and
sovereignty, and for the inviolability of its borders - can
be breached. We, the peoples of the United Nations,
should not tolerate it. With the occupation and illegal
annexation of Crimea that we do not recognize, and
the ongoing military intervention in eastern Ukraine,
one permanent member of the Security Council has
violated international law and the underlying principles
of European security, including those enshrined in
the Helsinki Final Act and Paris Charter. Despite
those violations, however, these principles are still
valid and must be fully respected. The independence,
sovereignty and territorial inviolability must remain
the fundamental right of States and nations.
Last but not least, on the broader spectrum of the
United Nations, Member States can make their own
contributions to the maintenance of peace and security
by strongly adhering to the rule of law, which also
encourages sustainable development as progress is
best guaranteed by good governance, transparency of
decision-making processes and the minimization of
corruption. Estonia firmly believes that loyalty to the
rule of law is a tool to improve the fundamental human
right of access to justice, which is inherently linked
to the promotion of a culture of accountability over
impunity and to wider security and stability.

