Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I wish to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.

I would like to begin my statement by welcoming
the conclusion of the final agreement of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
issue last week, as well as its endorsement through the
adoption of resolution 2231 (2015) this past Monday.
In a region with increasingly complex and disastrous
crises, we value this agreement as a timely testament
to the possibilities of dialogue and diplomacy. Japan
appreciates the efforts made by the parties and looks
forward to its thorough implementation. As Iran
further reintegrates into the global economy, we look
to the country to play an increasing role in the stability
of the region, one commensurate with its influence.
We therefore hope that the agreement will serve to
strengthen not only the international non-proliferation
regime, but also the region's stability.

The unabated violence and the absence of political
solutions are exacerbating the plight of millions on the
ground. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, three of the four countries
with the most severe and large-scale humanitarian
crises 4 namely, Syria, Iraq and Yemen 4 are located
in the Middle East. The international community
must not let the dire humanitarian situation become a
breeding ground for extremist ideology. We therefore
condemn the heinous acts of terror committed in Iraq
and Turkey in the past two weeks. At the same time,
we must also not lose sight of the fact that political
solutions are the only durable solutions to the ongoing
conflicts in the region.

Because of the time limitation, I will concentrate
my remarks on the Middle East peace process and leave
my comments on Syria and Yemen to my written text,
which I believe has been distributed.

The instability of the region should not divert our
attention from the Middle East peace process. One year
ago, we were reminded of the damage that the absence
of a political solution can impose on the ground. The
stagnant reconstruction process and the worsening
economic situation in Gaza are of great concern. Gaza
is an integral part of Palestine; hence the worsening
humanitarian situation there not only undermines its
precarious social cohesion but also the viability of
two States living side by side in peace and security.
We therefore call on the international community to
steadily disburse the pledges made at Cairo Conference
on Reconstructing Gaza, held in October 2014, and
strengthen its support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which faces serious funding shortages. Furthermore,
we call for the easing and eventual lifting of the Gaza
blockade, while duly taking security concerns into
account.

The worsening humanitarian situation on the
ground highlights the need for the resumption of
peace negotiations. An environment conducive to the
resumption of talks must be recreated. In that regard,
we welcome the easing of restrictions taken by the
Israeli Government during Ramadan and urge that
such measures be extended on a permanent basis. It
is imperative that both parties refrain from unilateral
measures that could undermine efforts to resume peace
negotiations. To that effect, we reiterate our call to
Israel to freeze settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law. Correspondingly, we call on
Palestine to exert efforts to advance and consolidate its
national reconciliation process.

In the light of the current impasse, Japan believes
that the international community, including the
Security Council, could contribute to the resumption
of negotiations as appropriate and when necessary. We
therefore welcome the initiatives pursued by France
to advance the process. Japan enjoys strong ties with
both sides and is a principal contributor to Palestine's
development, including through initiatives such as the
Corridor for Peace and Prosperity and the Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development, which mobilize regional
actors. Firm in our belief that we can contribute to a
two-State solution, we stand ready to play a further
constructive role in such international efforts.

We are confronting deep and complex crises in
the region. While the urgent humanitarian needs must
surely be addressed, we must also not lose sight of the
underlying factors that are fuelling instability in the
region. Prime Minister Abe, in his policy speech on
the Middle East in January, highlighted the philosophy
that the best way is to go in the middle, representing
the ancestral wisdom of the region. It emphasizes the
importance of embracing dialogue and moderation as
well as of nurturing societies to become resistant to the
allures of extremism. Although political solutions are
long and arduous, those are what are most needed at
the moment.

With that understanding, Japan has pledged and is
delivering $2.5 billion in non-military assistance to the
region. Please rest assured that Japan, in cooperation
the United Nations and the international community,
stands ready not only to address the humanitarian crises
but also to support political solutions to the conflicts in
the region.

