Mr. Djangone-Bi (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation congratulates you, Sir, on your
accession to the presidency of the Council and
commends your initiative of holding this public debate,
in particular with the participation of the countries that
were visited. We convey our deep gratitude to all
members of the Council for their concern for West
Africa in particular and, in general, for their devotion
to restoring peace, political stability and the optimal
conditions for integrated, united and sustainable
development in that ravaged part of the world.

We would ask you, Sir, to convey our gratitude to
all the members of the recent Security Council mission
to West Africa, and in particular to Sir Emyr Jones
Parry, who led the mission very successfully, as is
reflected in the high quality of the report before the
Council.

My delegation commends the ongoing concern
and sustained endeavours of the Council to promote the
close link between security and development in West
Africa, good governance, respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights, and an active,
coherent and multilateral approach to conflict
prevention.

We therefore welcome the relevant and
comprehensive observations and recommendations
contained in the report of the Security Council mission
to West Africa (5/2004/525). In particular, we welcome
its call for a progress report by the end of this year on
the implementation of the recommendations set out in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/200) on
ways to combat subregional and cross-border problems
in West Africa. We have no doubt that the report will
be regularly updated, reflecting what has already been
described as the sustained nature of that active
approach to conflict prevention in West Africa, and in
order to ensure the good conduct of the States that
produce and supply weapons, ammunition and
explosives.

With respect to my country, the Republic of Cote
d'Ivoire, I am pleased to note that since the visit of the
Security Council mission, as the President of the
Republic had undertaken, the status-of-forces
agreement has been signed and national regulatory
procedures for establishing and operating radio and
television stations are being monitored by the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).
Moreover, as the President of the Republic stated,
Parliament has resumed consideration of the draft laws
submitted by the Government. It is understood that the
work of Parliament will continue, in special session if
necessary, until the final text adopted by the Council of
Ministers is considered. We will then have to resolve
the question of those bills that the Government has not
been able to consider because the ministers concerned
have not submitted them to the Government. That is the
case with the law on the media and the decree on war
victims. Of course, the Parliament will consider those
texts in the spirit of the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra II
Agreements, but in full sovereignty and according to
its own rules of procedure, which respect democratic
principles.

My delegation welcomes with relief the fact that
the international Commission of Inquiry for cote
d'Ivoire on human rights violations since September
2002 has been established and will soon be operational.
However, we suggest that, to take advantage of the
period of the inquiry, the Commission should be
authorized to investigate crimes committed beyond the
date of 24 January 2003, the current end date of its
reporting panel, which is the date of the signing of the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. In fact, human rights
violations were perpetrated in certain parts of the
country after that date: at Guezon and Bleninminhouin
on 24 and 26 June 2003, at Kahen on 11 July and 9
December 2003, at Zou and Pinhoun on 21 November
2003, at Brodoume on 3 and 4 March 2004, at Abidjan
from 25 to 27 March 2004, at Ity and Gohitafla on 7
and 8 June 2004, and at Bouake, Boundiali, Korhogo
and Seguela during the week of 21 June 2004, at the
very time when the Security Council mission was in
Abidjan. In fact, it would be difficult to understand
how the Commission of Inquiry could turn a blind eye
to violations committed in same conflict, in the same
territory, because they fall outside its mandate.

The true perpetrators of those violations of the
fundamental rights of Ivorians and residents in cote
d'Ivoire must be identified so that justice can be done
for the people, the nation and the State of Cote
d'Ivoire, with equity and on the basis of established
proof, instead of on the basis of the assumptions and
the conjectures made by those previously responsible
for inquiry, who spent less than a dozen days in C6te
d'Ivoire despite the gravity of their mission.

I wish to conclude by commenting on a key
passage of the mission report under consideration.
Paragraph 18 of the report refers to the commitment of
the Ivorian authorities to adopt all texts envisaged by
the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement by 28 July 2004:

"[President Gbagbo] indicated, however,
that, as provided for by the constitution of Cote
d'Ivoire, the submission of the draft law on
article 35 on the question of eligibility would take
place only after the national territory had been
reunified, meaning after completion of the
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration programme and the restoration of
State authority throughout the country. The
mission challenged this assertion and, indeed, on
many occasions during its visit, expressed its
regret at the lack of trust between the parties,
which had led them to put preconditions on the
implementation of key elements of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement." (S/2004/525, para. 18)

That challenge to the commitment of the
President of the Republic to respect the Constitution is
all the more surprising as it comes from a mission of
the Security Council, which has always rightly urged
respect for legality and the rule of law. The necessity of
not holding elections so long as the territorial integrity
of the country is in jeopardy is not a precondition but a
constitutional clause accepted by the people of C6te
d'Ivoire. Above and beyond respect for constitutional
legality, how, from a practical standpoint, can one hold
a referendum and carry out a campaign in complete
freedom when former rebel groups are still taking up
arms and preventing free access to the northern half of
the country?

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the recent
appeal for the respect of constitutions made by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, before the African
Union.

My delegation once again thanks the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the international
community for their steady support for the restoration
of peace, security and stability and the conditions
needed for sustainable development in West Africa,
which is considered a homogeneous zone for integrated
and united development.

