The President: Following consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.

"The Security Council recalls the statement
by its President of 12 July 2005, in which it
emphasizes that security sector reform is an
essential element of any stabilization and
reconstruction process in post-conflict
environments.

"The Security Council stresses that
reforming the security sector in post-conflict
environments is critical to the consolidation of
peace and stability, promoting poverty reduction,
rule of law and good governance, extending
legitimate State authority, and preventing
countries from relapsing into conflict. In that
regard, a professional, effective and accountable
security sector, and accessible and impartial law-
enforcement and justice sectors are equally
necessary to laying the foundations for peace and
sustainable development.

"The Security Council underlines that it is
the sovereign right and the primary responsibility
of the country concerned to determine the
national approach and priorities of security sector
reform. It should be a nationally-owned process
that is rooted in the particular needs and
conditions of the country in question. The
Security Council acknowledges that strong
support and assistance of the international
community are important to build national
capacities thereby reinforcing national ownership,
which is crucial for the sustainability of the
whole process. The Security Council also
underlines that the United Nations has a crucial
role to play in promoting comprehensive,
coherent, and coordinated international support to
nationally-owned security sector reform
programmes, implemented with the consent of the
country concerned.

"The Security Council notes that the United
Nations system has made significant
contributions to the re-establishment of
functioning security sectors in post-conflict
environments, and that an increasing number of
United Nations organs, funds, programmes and
agencies are engaged in one aspect or another of
security sector reform support activities.
26

"The Security Council acknowledges the
contribution that non-United Nations actors, in
particular regional, subregional and other
intergovernmental organizations, including
international financial institutions, and bilateral
donors, as well as non-governmental
organizations, can bring in supporting nationally-
led security sector reform programmes.

"The Security Council recognizes the need
when mandating a United Nations operation to
consider, as appropriate, and taking into account
the concerns of the Member State and other
relevant actors, the national security sector
reform priorities, while laying the foundation for
peace consolidation, which could, inter alia,
subsequently enable timely withdrawal of
international peacekeepers. The Security Council
notes the importance of close interaction among
different United Nations system entities, and
other relevant actors, in order to ensure that
security sector reform considerations are
adequately covered during implementation of
Security Council mandates.

"The Security Council underlines that
security sector reform can be a long-term process
that continues well beyond the duration of a
peacekeeping operation. In that regard, the
Security Council emphasizes the important role
that the Peacebuilding Commission can play in
ensuring continuous international support to
countries emerging from conflict. The Security
Council takes note of the work already carried out
by the Peacebuilding Commission concerning
Burundi and Sierra Leone and requests it to
continue advising the Council on the issue of
security sector reform in the framework of its
activities related to these countries. The Security
Council requests the Peacebuilding Commission
to include consideration of security sector reform
programmes in designing integrated
peacebuilding strategies for its continued
engagement with those countries, with a view to
developing best practices regarding
comprehensive, coherent, and nationally-owned
security sector reform programmes.

"The Security Council emphasizes that
security sector reform must be context-driven and
that the needs will vary from situation to
situation. The Security Council encourages States
to formulate their security sector reform
programmes in a holistic way that encompasses
strategic planning, institutional structures,
resource management, operational capacity,
civilian oversight and good governance. The
Security Council emphasizes the need for a
balanced realization of all aspects of security
sector reform, including institutional capacity,
affordability, and sustainability of its
programmes. The Security Council recognizes the
interlinkages between security sector reform and
other important factors of stabilization and
reconstruction, such as transitional justice,
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and rehabilitation of former
combatants, small arms and light weapons
control, as well as gender equality, children and
armed conflict and human rights issues.

"In light of the above, the Security Council
acknowledges the need for a comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General on United Nations
approaches to security sector reform, to foster its
implementation in post-conflict environments,
and expresses its readiness to consider such a
report within the scope of its prerogatives under
the United Nations Charter. The report should
identify lessons learned, core security sector
reform functions that the United Nations system
can perform, roles and responsibilities of United
Nations system entities, and how best to
coordinate United Nations support for security
sector reform with national and international
activities in this field, as well as interaction with
regional and subregional actors.

"The Security Council expects the
Secretary-General's report to make concrete
recommendations on the identification,
prioritization and sequencing of United Nations
support to nationally-owned security sector
reform, with particular emphasis on post-conflict
environments. This should include
recommendations on how to improve the
effectiveness and coordination of all United
Nations system entities that support security
sector reform.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to continue to include, in his periodic
reports to the Security Council on specific United
Nations operations mandated by the Security
Council, whenever appropriate, recommendations
related to security sector reform programmes in
the countries concerned.

"The Security Council welcomes the joint
initiative of Slovakia and South Africa to further
discuss this issue with a focus on experiences and
challenges of security sector reform in Africa at a
workshop to be held in the course of 2007."
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/3.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.35 pm.
