Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): My delegation is
grateful to Judge Jorda for his briefing, for his report
on the operation of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and, most of all, for
his inspiring leadership as President of that institution.

The negotiations on the establishment of the
International Criminal Court have shown time and
again that the example of the two Tribunals - the one
on the former Yugoslavia and the other on Rwanda -
is crucial for the establishment and further
development of individual criminal responsibility for
universal crimes.

We appreciate the careful attention the Tribunal
has paid to the report of the Expert Group, which has
conducted a review of the effective operation and
functioning of the ICTY and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, and we note that it has
subscribed to several of its recommendations.

At this time, my delegation will not go into the
selected measures that could be taken to improve the
Tribunal's operation. Most of these, obviously, are to
be welcomed, but some require further reflection on
our part.

We are aware that Judge Jorda's report, presented
on behalf of the judges of the Tribunal, is before the
Security Council on account of its mix of potential
diplomatic, legal, administrative and financial
implications. I believe we can all agree that the effect
of the increasing number of indictments and arrests on
the average trial length should be our greatest concern.
The report is right in making mention of the ever-
greater expectations of the international community.
The Tribunal has undoubtedly proved itself, but the
international community seems to have suspended its
judgment until the most senior officials are arrested
and brought before the Tribunal. By then the problems
described in the report must be solved.

The report rightly points out that it is difficult to
imagine the senior political and military leaders of the
countries involved in the conflict spending many
months on remand before their trials can begin.

All the same, Judge Jorda has warned us not to
dramatize the problem, but he has also stated that the
Tribunal has reached a turning point in its history. It is,
of course, largely a matter of disposition and attitude
whether one would describe a turning point as
dramatic, but let us agree that the matter is of the
utmost importance.

During the almost seven years of its operational
existence, the Tribunal has managed to form itself into
a fully operational judicial instrument. It has already
demonstrated that universal criminal justice is possible
and feasible, and in this respect it has played a crucial
role in the inception and establishment of the
International Criminal Court.

But we are not there yet. We should not
underestimate the importance of this suspended
judgment on the part of the international community.
The belief that universal criminal justice is possible
and feasible is taking hold, but it continues to face
scepticism and disbelief. This disbelief is also reflected
in some statements heard in the Security Council.

It is for that reason that the example offered by
the Tribunal, to quote the report, "must be exemplary
to the very end". That is why, without going into the
detailed recommendations at this time, my delegation
will actively participate in the work of the legal experts
with a view to finding adequate solutions to the
problems facing the Tribunal.

