Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It would be
remiss of me, Mr. President, were I to begin without
commending the delegation of the United Kingdom for
the remarkable leadership that it has brought to the
Council's proceedings during these trying times. Syria
is also to be praised for the role that it played during its
presidency last month.

My delegation is in accord with the statement to
be made later by the Ambassador of Malaysia, which
holds the chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Bangladesh is deeply concerned about the
evolving situation in the Middle East, which, with each
passing day, is sharpening the pains of Palestine. The
spiralling violence and bloodletting are, to say the
least, very disturbing. However, a source of greater
dismay is the fact that an end to the impasse is nowhere
in sight. The road map to peace appears to lie in tatters.
The thin rays of hope that had appeared on the
horizon now seem to have been eclipsed by the
looming clouds of despair and destruction. The latest in
the series of misjudgements that have exacerbated the
deteriorating situation is the decision by Israel to expel
President Yasser Arafat.

The Government of Bangladesh issued a
statement in Dhaka strongly condemning and
denouncing that decision and urging its withdrawal. It
also demanded the immediate pullout of Israeli forces
from the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories.
That Government statement also observed that the
decision will create serious obstacles in implementing
the road map, which among other things envisages an
independent, sovereign and democratic Palestine by
2005.

The Council needs to act, and needs to act soon,
to prevent the escalation of horror and hatred. We need
to call a halt to the acts of terror, provocation,
incitement and destruction. The efforts of the Quartet
must be relentlessly pursued, and confidence in the
efficacy of the road map must be restored. Both sides
must be persuaded to return to the negotiating table.
The appropriate climate must be created in order for
that to happen. No compromise on Palestine can be as
painful as the failure to reach one.

We all recognize that these will not be easy tasks
for us. For these aims to be realized, the international
community must take action swiftly, and justly, so that
the sufferings of the people of that region, which have
been so great and have gone on for so long, cease.

Inflammatory statements will not - cannot -
stem the tide of anger and frustration; instead, they will
only fuel negative instincts. Harsh language will not -
cannot - enhance understanding; instead, it will act as
an impediment. These must be refrained from.

We urge calm and temperance in both words and
deeds. It cannot be that - in those holy lands from
which the three great faiths of Islam, Judaism and
Christianity have emanated, as have, in the past,
messages of peace and harmony - restraint and reason
today are receding virtues. This trend must be halted.
Those values, which are the proud heritage of the
Muslim, the Jew and the Christian, must be resurrected.
Nothing would give us more satisfaction or greater joy.

Bangladesh will seek to contribute to that end in
every possible way, in cooperation with all others
within and outside the Council, to ensure the triumph
of the spirit of tolerance and the rekindling of the torch
of hope.
