Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
join others in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I wish you well in that
important task. I also wish to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their
presentations.

Malaysia is pleased with the Council's decision to
make this meeting an open debate, which allows for the
participation of the general membership of the
Organization, thereby contributing further to openness
and transparency in the work of the Council, to which
Portugal and others are strongly committed.

My delegation also wishes to associate itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Since the last open debate on this topic in May
(see S/PV.6531), the Council has established the
United Nations Organization Interim Security Force for
Abyei and the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan (UNMISS), with both peacekeeping
missions having mandates on the protection of
civilians. The presence of Malaysian peacekeepers in
UNMISS underscores Malaysia's firm commitment and
its belief that United Nations peacekeeping operations
are an indispensable instrument that has contributed
immensely to the resolution of many armed conflicts.
However, this instrument must be wielded with great
care.

While my delegation recognizes the efforts made
by the Council to prevent unnecessary loss of innocent
life, we reiterate that the responsibility to protect
civilians lies with the host Governments to
peacekeeping missions. In that regard, missions with a
civilian-protection mandate should conduct their tasks
without prejudice to that responsibility. My delegation
also wishes to stress the importance of impartiality as a
guiding principle for United Nations peacekeepers
mandated to protect civilians.

Malaysia is of the view that the successful
protection of civilians by United Nations peacekeeping
missions requires a more comprehensive and holistic
approach that incorporates the provision of resources,
support and training. That should be complemented
with the requisite key enablers, such as strong
coordinating mechanisms and an effective flow of
information. We believe that such an approach would
bridge some of the existing gaps in implementing
civilian-protection mandates.

One aspect of the protection of civilians that my
delegation particularly feels has not been given
adequate attention is the protection of journalists and
media professionals. Resolution 1738 (2006) and
resolution 1910 (2010) attempted to provide protection
for journalists, respectively, in the general context and
in Somalia. Unfortunately, that was too little, too late. I
regret to inform the Council that a Malaysian journalist
was killed recently while in Somalia to report on a
humanitarian aid mission. In that regard, my delegation
is of the view that the Council should explore the
possibility of strengthening provisions to ensure the
safety of journalists, within the framework of the
protection of civilians.

On our part, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to ensuring that our peacekeepers are trained to face, to
the best of their ability, the multitude of challenges that
are prevalent in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Last week, our peacekeeping training
centre jointly organized a course with the United
Nations Development Programme entitled "Promoting
peace through mainstreaming gender in peacekeeping
operations", which I am pleased to note included the
protection of civilians as part of its syllabus. We will
continue to enhance the quality of training for
Malaysians, as well as foreign participants, based on
United Nations best practices and our country's
51 years of experience in participating in United
Nations peacekeeping missions.

Finally, allow me also to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the work of our valiant United Nations
peacekeepers, who risk making the ultimate sacrifice
while serving to protect civilians in conflict zones. It is
only appropriate that the Council deliberates this topic
with the utmost care that it deserves, given the dangers
that our Blue Helmets face while carrying out their
mandates.

