The Secretary-General: I thank this month's
presidency of the Security Council, Ethiopia, for
being such a steadfast contributor to peacekeeping. Its
personnel are on the front lines in some of our most
challenging missions, and we are extremely grateful for
that commitment.

Today we gather to fortify this flagship United
Nations activity. Every day, peacekeepers create
conditions for lasting peace that protect civilians, such
as the hundreds of thousands in South Sudan and the
Central African Republic who have sought refuge.
Across the years and across the globe, 55 peacekeeping
operations have successfully completed their mandates.
Many political missions have done the same. Four
missions are downsizing or closing soon, their job
completed, and the strategies to ensure a smooth
transition in these situations are absolutely crucial.

Peacekeeping remains a highly cost-effective
instrument. The people of Haiti and Cote D'lvoire will
enjoy a brighter future thanks in part to the support of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. I pay
tribute to the many peacekeepers who have paid the
ultimate price in carrying out this vital work.

(spoke in French)

Despite the evident successes, peacekeeping
operations can at times be disappointing and apparently
lacking in prospects, unable to bring decades-old
engagements to an end. This prompts us to engage in
reflection about our goals, the means with which we
avail ourselves, and our ability to implement complex
mandates and to meet multiple ambitions. Peace
operations are deployed in difficult environments
where the United Nations is at times the sole party
able and willing to act. Peace operations are subject
to significant and perhaps overly weighty expectations
insofar as they must address urgent situations while
contributing to long-term solutions. Peace operations
often face situations of such complexity that it is
illusory to hope that a solution can be provided over the
course ofa few years.

(spoke in English)

The High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, whose recommendations remain at the
heart of our efforts to advance collective security,
called for four critical shifts. My reform efforts aim in
part to bring them about.

First, we must recognize the primacy of politics so
that peace operations are deployed in support of active
diplomatic efforts, not as a substitute. My proposals
for the Secretariat's peace and security architecture
seek to strengthen the link between political strategies
and operations and between peace and security and
the development and human rights pillars of our
work. If we can do better on prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding, we can reduce the unrealistic and
dangerous demands on our colleagues in uniform.

Secondly, peace operations should be properly
equipped. It is time to fill critical gaps in technology,
transportation and situational awareness. More
mobility, better equipment and enhanced training
and intelligence will allow us to do a better job and,
eventually, with smaller numbers.

Thirdly, peace operations must embody United
Nations values. Since the earliest days of my tenure, I
have sent strong signals of my determination to stamp
out sexual exploitation and abuse. In one important
sign of progress, Member States are now certifying
prior to deployment that none of their personnel has
a history of misconduct or human rights violations,
and the Secretariat also vets certain senior personnel.
We have just appointed the first-ever victims-
rights advocate, and we are taking other strong
steps to promote accountability. In keeping with an
Organization-wide plan to achieve gender parity, I am
making a push for more female officers and troops in
our operations. More women in peacekeeping means
more effective peacekeeping.

Fourthly, we must build stronger partnerships.
The Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
signed in April, is a crucial step. Beyond their troop
contributions, African States have assumed important
responsibilities for peace and security in the continent.
All across Africa, we are working closely with regional
and subregional partners, from the African Union
Mission in Somalia to the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) to the Multinational Joint Task Force in
the Lake Chad basin. I call on the Security Council
to enhance its support, including through the clarity
of mandates and predictable funding, in particular to
the G-5 Sahel, in order to operationalize the force in
the Sahel, and to the Multinational Joint Task Force
battling Boko Haram.

Our partnership with the European Union (EU) is
also crucial, and I look forward to signing a framework
agreement with the EU and to exploring the possibility
of establishing trilateral collaborative mechanisms.

These partnerships are especially important given
the multiple tasks that are being undertaken. We now face
the needs of peace enforcement and counter-terrorism,
and the precarious environments in which we operate
require additional efforts. It is clear that peacekeeping
forces are not supposed to do peace enforcement or
counter-terrorism. We need to take advantage of the
complementarity that must exist between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations. I appeal
again to the Security Council to ensure, in that regard,
clarity of mandates and adequate funding.

(spoke in French)

In the coming months, we will advance in the
implementation of these reforms, which should enable
us to better fulfil our tasks. In the short term, I have
asked for a review of peacekeeping operations to be
conducted so as to consider how our operations under
way can better respond to the numerous challenges that
I have mentioned.

(spoke in English)

With the Security Council's partnership and
support, we can adapt peace operations to meet both
the old and the new tests alike and to be more effective
and more cost-effective.

