Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to join in the welcoming words addressed to our guests
today, namely, the Secretary-General and the
Ambassadors of Haiti and Ghana, who are here
representing the General Assembly and the
Peacebuilding Commission, respectively. I also wish to
welcome the new representatives of France and the
United Kingdom.

As we know, African issues comprise a
significant part of our agenda. We therefore welcome
the President's initiative to once again place before the
Security Council the issue of its relationship with
Africa, especially as regards the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. I should like to orient our
discussion today towards the root causes of conflicts
and the tools at the disposal of the Security Council to
address and prevent them.

Poverty and ethnic, social, economic and
religious exclusion are at the primary causes of
violence, instability and the disintegration of African
States. Economic dysfunction, disputes over natural
resources - intensified by social and cultural
differences - and corruption in the management of
public affairs have served to wear away at the fabric of
societies and to undermine the capacity of States to
provide basic services and exercise authority over their
territory. In many societies that has led to violent civil
conflicts whose devastating results we are all aware of.

Peru therefore believes that effective preventive
efforts in Africa can only be sustained through ongoing
attention to the most basic needs of African
populations and the long-term sustainability of the
continent's economies. It is essential that Africa
achieve the Millennium Development Goals and begin
to benefit from integration into the global economy.
African Governments have the primary responsibility
to ensure that. International financial institutions and
major donor countries also face the challenge and
responsibility of providing African countries with
consistent and effective assistance. For its part, the
Security Council should bear in mind the underlying
causes of conflict, to which I have referred, in the
efforts it undertakes, especially with regard to
peacekeeping operations.

In addition to the powers conferred upon the
Security Council by the Charter, the Council also has at
its disposal numerous tools to ensure the effectiveness
of its capacity to prevent conflict. Resolution 1625
(2005) details those tools, which range from early
warnings provided to the Council by the Secretary-
General and follow-up to his preventive diplomatic
initiatives to the importance of considering effective

broad-based prevention strategies that not only involve
the security sector but also the economic, social,
humanitarian, governmental and human rights spheres
in countries affected by crises. We should also
underscore the need to strengthen the capacities of civil
society organizations to those ends.

On the operational level, a contribution can be
made by having programmes, funds and agencies of the
system work together with the organs that establish
their mandates in the drafting and implementation of
policies. Peacekeeping operations and ad hoc offices,
such as those set up in Liberia and Sierra Leone to
consolidate peace, can therefore provide useful lessons
for the African continent. Other examples of such a
way of doing things can be found in the conflict
mediation mechanism established by the Department of
Political Affairs, as well as in various other early-
warning instruments, including the establishment of the
post of Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities.

Those instruments should not lead us to forget
that, as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations
and as Peru has reiterated on various occasions,
regional agreements should constitute some of the most
effective tools at the disposal of the Security Council
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts. In that
regard, we appreciate the fact that the African Union
and, in particular, its Peace and Security Council have
established their relevance and value. That shows that
African countries have taken the lead in resolving their
problems. In addition to its role in attempting to ensure
that the devastating conflict in Darfur comes to an end,
we can also refer to such other contributions by African
countries in recent months as the initiative led by the
former President of Mozambique to reach agreements
between Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army and
the efforts by the council of elders in the recent
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Other African subregional mechanisms have also taken
an active part in these tasks. A recent case in point was
the mediation provided by the President of Burkina
Faso in his capacity as the Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States with regard to the
conflict in Cote d'Ivoire, as well as the signing of the
Ouagadougou Agreements.

The resolution of conflict - as well as its
prevention - also require practical measures to limit
access to the resources that make it possible for armed
violence to take root in societies in conflict. In that

regard, it is necessary that we combat more resolutely
the illegal exploitation of natural resources, which
finances armed movements, by implementing
certification instruments with regard to various
products such as the Kimberly Process for diamonds.

The illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons - which was the subject of a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2007/24) adopted this past June -
is another of the many problems that must be
addressed. We trust that that statement will promote
decisive efforts to prevent, combat and eradicate illicit
trafficking and lead to the implementation of an
internationally binding instrument to end the prevailing
situation of impunity and evasion of responsibility.

As is clear, the necessary mandates and tools
exist to prevent conflicts and contribute to resolving
them. Nevertheless, there is also a need for concrete
and effective measures that address both the root
problems that lead to conflicts, as well as for efforts to
tackle the conflicts once they break out or prevent or
minimize the possibility that conflicts evolve into
widespread violence. Those are the challenges that
must be addressed in Africa in order to overcome
current conflicts and, above all, save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.

