Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, let me
welcome and congratulate Mr. Kanat Saudabayev,
Secretary of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan, on his assumption of the chairmanship-in-
office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE). I also thank him warmly for his
briefing today on Kazakhstan's priorities for the OSCE
in 2010.

The election of Kazakhstan to the chairmanship
of the OSCE is clearly a result of the progress made by
that country in building a stable, steadily developing
modern State, as well as of its contributions to regional
and global peace and security, such as the shutdown of
the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site and the voluntary
renunciation of the world's fourth largest nuclear
missile arsenal.

Kazakhstan's chairmanship of the OSCE, 35
years after the signing of the Helsinki Final Act, is also
a sign that the Eurasian-Atlantic area has been unified
under common principles and values. It also
demonstrates that, within that organization, the thin
line between East and West is completely fading away,
and that the OSCE is truly becoming a single security
space and a unique platform for dialogue among 56
countries sharing similar perspectives.

In this context, we believe that the OSCE still has
a key role to play, and that its comprehensive concept
of security will continue to make significant
contributions to defusing conflicts and differences in
Eurasia. Indeed, as the largest regional security
organization in the Eurasian-Atlantic area, and based
on the concept of cooperative security, which
emphasizes the need for increased cooperation among
participating States for common security, the OSCE is
relevant under today's prevailing conditions and
requirements.

Close cooperation with the United Nations is
undoubtedly crucial to meeting those requirements.
Turkey believes that the Kazakhstan chairmanship's
theme of four Ts - trust, tradition, transparency and
tolerance - is a valuable guideline for progress for the
OSCE. In the same vein, in order to foster debate and
achieve tangible results, we share the chairmanship's
concern that there has not been an OSCE summit since
the last one Turkey hosted in Istanbul in 1999. We thus
support Kazakhstan in its aim of holding a new summit
later this year, including by helping to meet any
logistical or organizational needs. The summit will
surely provide an opportunity for reflecting on the
future of peace and security in Eurasia and mark
symbolically the anniversaries of such historic
milestones in this process as the end of the Second
World War, the Helsinki Final Act and the Paris
Charter. In this regard, we endorse the intention of the
Kazakh chairmanship to strengthen the role of the
OSCE in Europe's security structure. We will closely
follow and contribute to the development of the
renewed dialogue format known as the Corfu process.

We also share the chairmanship's priorities of
deepening cooperation on combating terrorism, cross-
border trafficking in weapons, drugs and people;
increasing the OSCE'S contribution to achieving the
goals of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004); and
its efforts to contribute to the resolution of protracted
conflicts. In particular, we welcome the initiative to
host, in October in Astana, a conference on the
prevention of terrorism.

Turkey also attaches great importance to regional
initiatives to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan, and
in this regard welcomes Kazakhstan's intention of
increasing OSCE involvement in order to ensure that
country's transition to a peaceful future and to focus on
better protection of Afghanistan's borders with Central
Asian countries.

Let me conclude by once again saluting
Kazakhstan on its assumption of the chairmanship of
the OSCE and wishing it every success in this new
responsibility. Turkey will assist Kazakhstan in this
endeavour, both bilaterally and within the framework
of our presidency of the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, which we will
be assuming from Kazakhstan in June, building
together a bridge between the two organizations and
contributing to a truly comprehensive approach to
security in Eurasia.

