Mr. Qin Huasun (China)(sp0ke in Chinese): The oil-
for-food programme, established by Security Council
resolution 986 (1995), has undergone five phases, which to
some extent have eased the humanitarian difficulties of
Iraqi civilians. We would like to express our positive
assessment of the work done by the oil-for-food
implementation programme, the 661 Security Council
Committee members and the Secretariat.
It should be pointed out that from its inception the oil-
for-food programme had its limitations. Phase V of the
programme, in fact, has not resulted in significant
improvements in the humanitarian situation in Iraq. As the
Secretary-General stated, the programme cannot meet all
the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people, nor can it
restore Iraq's economic and social infrastructure to pre-199O
levels. The evaluation panel on the humanitarian situation
on Iraq also came up with similar conclusions in its report.
China would like to reiterate that only with the necessary
political will on the part of the parties concerned and only
with the lifting of economic sanctions against Iraq can there
be any fundamental easing of the humanitarian situation and
difficulties in Iraq.

Regrettably, however, the United States and the United
Kingdom are still bombing civilian targets in the so-called
no-fly zone. This act has aggravated the humanitarian crisis
in Iraq. We are strongly opposed to that act committed by
the United States and the United Kingdom. We demand that
the United States and the United Kingdom immediately halt
their bombing missions in the so-called no-fly zone.

In extending the oil-for-food programme, we believe
the programme must be expanded and revised. Regrettably,
however, it is difficult for the Council to reach consensus
on this. Based on the considerations of maintaining basic
humanitarian supplies to meet the needs of the Iraqi people
and civilians, China accepts the present technical roll-over
of the programme and will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

We fully agree with the proposal of the Secretary-
General to depoliticize the humanitarian programme. We
hope that the parties concerned will reach consensus on
lifting the ceiling on Iraqi oil exports as soon as possible.
We also hope that the 661 Committee will resolve the
technical and procedural matters that are hampering
implementation of the humanitarian programme, such as
reimbursement, putting applications on hold, and so forth.

