Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to express our gratitude to Ambassadors Mayr-Harting,
Lacroix and Urbina for today's briefing on behalf of
the Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004).

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Czech presidency of the European
Union.

Croatia supports the work of the three Security
Council Committees, which constitute essential
elements of the United Nations counter-terrorism and
non-proliferation structure. Croatia also supports the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
are committed to working with the counter-terrorism
bodies of the United Nations system in a coordinated
way. Furthermore, we will continue to reiterate that all
measures undertaken to prevent and combat terrorism
must comply with our obligations under international
law, in particular human rights law, refugee law and
international humanitarian law.

Regarding the 1267 Committee, we would like to
emphasize the need for further improvements to the
consolidated list in order to increase its legitimacy and
ensure that it accurately reflects the continuous threat
that Al-Qaida and the Taliban pose to international
peace and security. The list needs to be regularly
updated if we want to retain the effectiveness of the
1267 sanctions regime.

The adoption of resolution 1822 (2008)
represented a significant step in the evolution of this
targeted sanctions regime and contains important due
process innovations. We welcome the adoption this
past December of the revised guidelines, which
allowed the Committee to move forward. The review
of all names on the list is currently a priority in the
work of the Committee. We believe that it is necessary
for all Member States involved to assume their share of
responsibility to do a proper review and to ensure that
this process is concluded before the deadline set by the
Council. In this context, we fully support the intention
of the Chairman to regularly update Member States on
the progress in the review process.

The implementation of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime, particularly the listing and de-listing
procedures, is increasingly subject to challenges in
national and regional courts. In this respect, we believe
that the Committee must continue to ensure that fair
and clear procedures are strengthened in order to
enhance the efficiency and transparency of the regime.
We agree with the Chairmen that further steps in this
regard may be included in the new resolution to be
adopted by the end of 2009.

Croatia attaches great importance to the work of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and highly values
the assistance provided to it by the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED). We support the ongoing
activities in the Committee, with particular emphasis
on the stock-taking exercise. This review of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by all
Member States should enable the Committee and
CTED to understand in greater detail the progress and
the remaining shortfalls in counter-terrorism measures
employed by countries around the world. Continued
cooperation by Member States is vital if we want the
Committee to conclude the stock-taking exercise
expeditiously.

In the same vein, we expect the Committee to
adopt the remaining two Preliminary Implementation
Assessments as soon as possible. We are pleased to see
the positive effects of the revised organizational plan
of CTED, which introduced a more flexible approach
to controversies, particularly by engaging in shorter,
focused visits, in regional visits and in visits to
developed countries. We commend the proactive
approach by CTED in facilitating technical assistance,
especially by nurturing closer contacts with potential
donors.

We look forward to receiving the revised version
of the survey of implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), with priority recommendations for the
Committee's future actions. The revised survey should
be based on more fine-tuned assessments of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) as a result of
the stock-taking exercise and the work of the five
technical groups in CTED.

We also recognize the importance of the technical
guide that is currently under consideration in the
Committee. As we speak, the Committee has conducted
an interim review of CTED and should soon submit a
report to the Council. We see this as a good

opportunity for the Council to consider past
achievements and to provide guidance to CTED on
how to more effectively deliver on its mandate.

We welcome the adoption by the 1540 Committee
of its annual programme of work, as well as its
continuous efforts to actively engage all States in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through
continuing dialogue and participation in numerous
outreach events. At the same time, we deem of
particular importance the continuation of productive
cooperation between the Committee and other
international bodies and relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations.

Keeping in mind the important assistance
function entrusted to the Committee under resolution
1810 (2008), we salute the Committee's intensification
of its efforts to develop its clearing-house function for
channelling assistance in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) through matching, as
appropriate, assistance requests with available offers
for assistance. We welcome the establishment of the
four working groups, assigned with the principal task
of ensuring the effective implementation of the
programme of work, and we express our readiness to
contribute actively to their activities.

We look forward to the comprehensive review of
the status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
and we hope that early next year, following the
completion of the review, we will have a clear picture
of the risks and threats that await us on the path
towards the fullest possible implementation of the
resolution, as well as the ways and means to address
them. We are ready to take part in this important
process, which should eventually result in new and
inventive approaches to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Finally, as we expressed in the joint statement,
we welcome closer interaction between the Committees
and their expert groups, and we appreciate the support
and assistance provided by the experts to the
Committees in our joint action against terrorism.

