Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for China's initiative to
organize this open debate. I would also like to thank
His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon
for his important briefing and for his participation
in this meeting. I also express our appreciation
to Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Ivan Simonovie,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights; and
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law at
the International Committee for the Red Cross.

It gives me great pleasure today to address the
Council on the eve of the announcement of the first
real presidential elections in Egypt. On this occasion, I
would like to remind the Council of what the Egyptian
President-elect said in his speech to Egyptians and the
world yesterday, namely, that Egypt will respect its
international treaties and legal obligations and that it
intends to strengthen and support respect for human
rights at the national, regional and international levels.

This debate comes at an important time, since
civilians are still subject to violence, murder and
destruction during armed conflicts throughout
the world, especially in the region where Egypt is
situated - in Africa and the Arab world, and more
especially in the Syrian Arab Republic and the occupied
Palestinian territories. Egypt affirms what the most
recent Secretary-General's report (S/2012/376) has
stated in terms of the need on the part of States and
armed groups in conflicts to respect international
law and international humanitarian law. All parties,
especially States, must respect the principles of
proportionality and differentiation in all armed
conflicts. The States Members of the United Nations
have a greater responsibility in that regard, in that
they are essentially the ones who have the authority
to use force by virtue of their laws and sovereignty. A
violation of those principles does not justify the use of
force by other parties.

The international community, and specifically the
Security Council, must guarantee the accountability,
in an entirely effective manner, of anyone responsible
for violations against civilians. We also welcome the
establishment of national and international commissions
to investigate such violations. However, simply setting
up commissions is not enough to guarantee protection
or to deter violations. Such commissions must arrive
at genuine, timely and effective results that serve to
identify and hold responsible those responsible for
targeting civilians, including compensating those who
were harmed and their families, especially by States
that commit such violations.

Egypt reaffirms the importance of United Nations
peacekeeping missions that participate in the protection
of civilians. We support enabling those missions with
the necessary mandates, personnel and equipment. At
the same time, we reiterate the need to bear in mind and
respect the principles of the sovereignty and the culture
of the countries where those peacekeeping missions are
present. In that regard, we support the idea of establishing
a framework to support peacekeeping missions'
efforts in a manner that guarantees the protection of
civilians, as well as holding them accountable for any
violations that happen during the implementation of
their mandates. We also support the effective follow-up
by United Nations bodies on the protection of civilians,
including by the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council, each according to its own specific
mandate.

On this occasion, I would like to draw attention to
the importance of protecting civilians from the effects
of sanctions that might be imposed by the Security
Council or unilaterally by countries in order to deal
with specific disputes. The concept of protection must
also apply to protecting the economic and social status
of civilians that are not involved in hostilities.

In conclusion, on the occasion ongypt's presidency
of the Group of Arab States for this month, I would like
to call for the participation of all United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council, in implementing what
was called for by the resolution of the League of Arab
States adopted on 2 June on the need to protect civilians
in Syria and provide the United Nations Supervision
Mission with the necessary tools to do that, as well as to
take the necessary measures and decisions according to
the relevant articles of the Charter of the United Nations
in order to put an end to the attacks that are targeting
civilians in the Syrian Arab Republic.

Moreover, we call on the Security Council and the
relevant United Nations bodies, especially the Human
Rights Council, to take firm measures to put a stop
to random attacks against civilians in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as to lift the unjust siege
imposed by the Israeli authorities for many years on
Gaza, which is a form of collective punishment imposed
on the residents of the occupied Palestinian territories
in a manner that takes no account of proportionality
or differentiation and clearly violates the principles of
international humanitarian law.

