Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Arab Group submitted a draft resolution
which it believes to be simple and capable of meeting
the aspirations of the international community. It
would avoid complications and address the situation on
the ground and the tragic events in the region brought
about by Israel's killing and destruction of the
Palestinian people, despite all the flexibility shown by
the Arab side. Unfortunately, this flexibility was not
matched by those who submitted the draft resolution
before us, which fails to take Arab concerns into
consideration. This draft resolution is very weak and
does not address the root of the question: the Israeli
occupation. That is the issue to which the Secretary-
General referred in his statement today.

This draft resolution treats killer and victim
equally, which is particularly egregious in view of the
practices of the occupation authorities against the
Palestinian people. The destruction, the killings and the
detention of more than 2,000 Palestinians in massive
concentration camps by the Israeli occupation forces
must be condemned by the Council.

Any discussion of security arrangements in this
crisis situation merely underlines the failure of such
arrangements, as has been testified to by many
countries. They have been superseded by time,
particularly in view of the massacres committed daily
by Israel in the occupied territories, especially in the
densely populated Palestinian refugee camps.

The Security Council must call for the
resumption of the peace process and for a
comprehensive and just peace, pursuant to the outcome
of the Madrid Conference and based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. It must also call on Israel to
implement those resolutions and the principle of land
for peace. Otherwise, those resolutions will remain
unimplemented. I do not believe that the Council wants
to see that happen.

In conclusion, we regret that the draft resolution
does not even minimally take our concerns into
consideration in a way that would prompt us to support
it - that is, by including a reference to the Madrid
Conference, the peace process and a just and
comprehensive peace in the region. We have sought
this in all sincerity. Moreover, the draft resolution does
not demand that Israel, the occupying Power, respect
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949. That is the basic message we have
called on the Council to send to the Israeli occupying
Power.

S/PV.448')

 

In view of these points, which were not included
in the draft resolution before us, I wish to record that
the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic will abstain
in the voting on the draft resolution before us.
