Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today's
open debate. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing and for his ongoing efforts to achieve peace in
the region.

Two weeks ago, we were warned that, in recent
months, the situation on the Gaza strip had deteriorated
and was now on the brink of conflict. Yesterday, the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People heard from the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid
Ra'ad Zeid Al Hussein, who referred to the dramatic
escalation of tension and the potential for an escalation
that would destabilize the region, and warned of the
fragility of the situation, despite the agreed ceasefire.
He described the violence, poverty and unemployment
that are exacerbating the already tragic humanitarian
crisis. The media compel us to watch, almost in real
time, the exchanges of fire, which are the heaviest since
2014; air strikes with missiles; and deaths, including the
deaths of children. We must ensure that the immediacy
of this tragedy does not desensitize us to the violence.

On Sunday, we learned from the United
Nations Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian
Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
Mr. James McGoldrick, how the lack of fuel in
Gaza, the provision of which has been restored
today, endangered the medical care and potentially
the lives of 2,000 patients, including newborns.
Everything I have just mentioned shapes our
understanding of the situation in Palestine, which we
find on the monthly and quarterly agendas of the Security
Council, as well as on the agendas of the Economic and
Social Council and the Human Rights Council. The
prevalence of this issue is a reflection of the seriousness
of the situation, which is only getting worse, given the
violations of human rights, international humanitarian
law, the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War and the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Against that backdrop, 120
States members of the General Assembly, including
Ecuador, voted on 13 June in favour of resolution ES-
10/20, on the protection of the Palestinian civilian
population, motivated by concern about those acts of
violence against civilians and the need to implement
accountability measures.

Ecuador is concerned not only about the ongoing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the lack
of funding for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. It is
also concerned about Israel's adoption of new laws with
exclusionary and discriminatory provisions and the
demolitions announced in the West Bank that contravene
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and resolution 1322
(2000), on the Conventions' applicability, and that
violate resolution 2334 (2016). The expansion of Israeli
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory threatens
not only international peace and security, but also the
two-State solution, to which the Security Council and
the international community are committed.

Ecuador once again reiterates its full commitment
to Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
on the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. At
the same time, it reaffirms that the political solution to
the Palestinian situation requires a two-State solution,
negotiated by the parties, within the pre-1967 borders,
with Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine. We urge
the Security Council to not remain indifferent to the
worsening humanitarian and political situation, but to
work to implement measures to enable it to implement
its own resolutions.

In conclusion, Ecuador stresses that combating
impunity independently, impartially and effectively is
essential. It is equally necessary to address the causes
of conflicts, as that is the basis for lasting peace.

