Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this important meeting of the
Security Council to discuss the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. We believe
that this meeting requested by the Arab League is
appropriate and very timely for the following reasons.

First, the peace process between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, which was halted several months
ago as it moved into the final rounds towards a
negotiated settlement, remains stalled, with no visible
prospect for early resumption.

Secondly, the violence between Palestinians and
Israelis, which started in September last year and
which has already taken a heavy toll of lives on both
sides, particularly among the Palestinians, continues,
albeit at a lesser level but with no end in sight, and
clouds the prospects for negotiations to start again.

Thirdly, the blockade of the Palestinian territories
by Israel is inflicting untold suffering on the
Palestinian people, who not only are deprived of their
freedom of movement but are also unable to earn their
normal livelihood. It also imposes great economic and
financial hardship on the Palestinian Authority by
denying essential revenues to which it is entitled.

Fourthly, in Israel a new Government under the
leadership of Mr. Ariel Sharon was sworn into office
last week following the recent elections, and Israel
should be in a position again to resume negotiations
with the Palestinian Authority.

In the atmosphere of the continuing stalemate,
more than enough violence has occurred, with the loss
of many precious lives. The stalemate must end, and
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority must resume without further delay. We
believe that the international community should do all
it can to encourage the two sides to get back to the task
of negotiating a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian
question. The Security Council in particular must
assume its responsibility in this regard.

The Security Council had the opportunity to hear
Mr. Shimon Peres, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of Israel, yesterday afternoon, and we were
reassured by his statement that peace is at the centre of
the policies of the new Israeli Government. The
Council also heard yesterday the Ambassador of the
Observer Mission of Palestine, Mr. Nasser Al-Kidwa,
who also reaffirmed the commitment of the Palestinian
Authority to peace in the Middle East. According to
Mr. Peres, it is high emotions rather than politics that
are preventing the peace process from moving forward.

The other reason given in this regard by Mr. Peres
is the continuation of violence. Ambassador Al-Kidwa,
on the other hand, gave the Council a vivid picture of
the frustration of the Palestinian people and their
suffering under Israel's occupation and blockade.

We would like to say to both the Israelis and the
Palestinians that the two peoples have only one destiny,
and that is peaceful coexistence in mutual trust. There
is no other option, and to search for one is supremely
futile. It has been so in the past; it is so now; and it will
be so in the future. The right of the Palestinian people
to an independent State is unquestionable, and so is the
right of the Israelis to exist as a nation with secure
borders. The rest are matters of detail that the two sides
must work out at the negotiating table in a spirit of
mutual accommodation, on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

Israel has been insisting that all violence must
end before negotiations can resume. In our view, the
best and surest way to end the ongoing cycle of
violence is to deploy a United Nations observer force
in the occupied territories. This was suggested
yesterday to Mr. Shimon Peres by several delegations,
including Mauritius, in the Security Council. We hope
the Israeli Government will respond favourably to this
important proposal. The Security Council will shortly
consider a draft resolution on the Middle East that must
include such a proposal, and my delegation will fully
support the adoption of the draft resolution by the
Council.

Last but not least, I wish to emphasize that the
starting point for the resumption of negotiations
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority should be
where the negotiations stood when the two sides last
met. It took a long time and enormous patience and
skill on both sides for the negotiations to reach that
critical point from the early beginnings of the Oslo
process. The important gains already achieved must be
preserved and should constitute the foundation for
future negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority.

