Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I should like
to join others in expressing my gratitude to the
representative of South Africa, Mr. Aziz Pahad, for his
presence at the Council today and for his briefing on
the mediation efforts of President Thabo Mbeki on
behalf of the African Union. Let me also thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to get the
report directly from the South African mediators -
something my delegation has been looking forward to.

Also, I should like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his presence today and for the
useful written report (S/2005/ 186) to the Council, as
well as to the Principal Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Alan Doss, for his lucid
and enlightening briefing on the most recent events in
Cote d'Ivoire.

Cote d'Ivoire is still balancing on the brink: that
is the unpleasant reality that all actors involved in
trying to manage the crisis are faced with. There is a
clear need to act prudently and swiftly. It must be made
very clear to the main parties in Cote d'Ivoire that
there can be only a peaceful, negotiated solution to the
crisis. The military option would have no winners, only
losers. In Pretoria next week, the responsible Ivorian
parties should muster the courage to make the
necessary concessions and re-establish the mutual trust
needed to make the elections possible and to reconcile
the country.

I share many of the remarks and the observations
made by others. I will limit myself to only three brief
points.

First, Denmark strongly supports and appreciates
the tireless efforts of the President of South Africa, Mr.
Thabo Mbeki, to mediate between the parties. We
welcome the strong demonstration of African
ownership in the crisis management in Cote d'Ivoire
and sincerely hope for a constructive and forward-
looking outcome from the Pretoria meeting this coming
week.

Looking ahead, there is a need for the strong
re-engagement of all key external actors and a clear
division of labour among the African Union, the
United Nations, the Economic Community of West
African States and other key national and regional
actors in supporting the implementation of the crucial
next steps in the peace process: the broader electoral
framework and electoral process, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process and
the fight against impunity.

Secondly, the lack of progress in the
implementation of the peace agreement and the current
reign of militias should lead us to reflect carefully on
the goals of and the conditions for the international
peacekeepers. A stronger presence of regional actors
should be encouraged, and United Nations inter-
mission cooperation in West Africa should be further
developed. The harmful presence of ex-combatants
from Liberia and Sierra Leone is just one reason why
stronger inter-mission cooperation is crucial. At the
same time, I would like to make it quite clear that my
delegation shares the view of the Secretary-General
with respect to the need to strengthen the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and to
extend its presence for the coming year. I should like to
take this opportunity to commend Mr. Doss, Principal
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and the United Nations and French
peacekeepers for their unwavering efforts in spite of
the very difficult current situation on the ground.

Thirdly, I believe that one message should be
made very clear to the Ivorian parties, both before the
Pretoria meeting and after: action speaks louder than
words. In resolutions 1572 (2004) and 1584 (2005) the
Council has provided measures employing both carrots
and sticks. Denmark continues to believe that pressure
on the parties should be stepped up. As we have stated
before, it was concerted, credible pressure that led to
some progress towards the end of last year. When that
pressure faded, so did the political progress. We should
carefully study the findings of the International
Commission of Inquiry into allegations of serious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in C6te d'Ivoire and make the report,
without the annex, publicly available. The increased
lawlessness in Cote d'Ivoire is precisely the result of
the culture of impunity, which the report so vividly
depicts.
It is clear that in situations of heightened tension
and simmering conflict, irresponsible politicians often
look to stereotyped messages on such issues as religion
and ethnicity to rally support among their constituents.
Such messages should not be allowed to eclipse the
basic political questions of the polity of cote d'Ivoire,
to which the existing peace agreements have already
provided satisfactory answers. The overwhelming
majority of the people in Cote d'Ivoire want peace and
want to continue their lives without constant fear of
what tomorrow may bring. The responsible actors in
C6te d'Ivoire should deliver that peace to the people
now.

