President Deby Itno (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on taking
the initiative to bring us together on the margins of the
general debate of the General Assembly for this high-
level meeting. We also commend the comprehensiveness
of resolution 2178 (2014), just adopted, of which my
country was a sponsor. It represents a new step, one that
will enable us to more effectively combat a phenomenon
that the entire world is confronting today.
Terrorism and violent extremism are unquestionably
one of the worst scourges of our time. The phenomenon
of foreign fighters, the international jihadists of
the twenty-first century, is spreading and growing
alarmingly; hence the Council's adoption of resolution
2178 (2014), proposed by the United States of America.
In relating the resolution to the four points that the
concept note of 3 September (8/2014/648) asks us to
consider, I would like to make three observations
concerning the threat presented by foreign fighters,
the situation as it concerns Chad and, finally, violent
extremism and the solutions designed to eradicate it.

This threat is a global one and is constantly evolving,
since foreign fighters, particularly in terrorist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the Al-Nusra Front, come from all over the globe, and
their numbers are growing exponentially. In Africa we
are now dealing with such groups south of the Sahara.
Mali was their first Victim; Al-Shabaab is in the Horn
of Africa, while today Boko Haram is operating in
Nigeria and Cameroon. It is currently estimated that
there are several thousand foreign fighters from more
than 80 countries, most of them from the Middle East,
but also from non-Muslim countries, including Western
nations. The majority of them are young people,
recruited through the Internet, among other means,
and especially through social networks. Africa is also
dealing with the problem of foreign fighters. Terrorist
groups such as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb and Al-Shabaab, which have proved highly
dangerous in recent years, include them in their ranks.
Twenty-two African countries have been the target of
terrorist violence to date.

For that reason, on 2 September in Nairobi, I
chaired a summit of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union that resulted in some important
decisions about how to deal with the dual phenomenon
of terrorism and violent extremism across the continent.
In that regard, the Peace and Security Council asked
the Commission of the African Union to consider such
measures as, first, strengthening the legal framework
for the fight against terrorism by developing inter-police
cooperation in Africa, introducing an African arrest
warrant for perpetrators and accomplices of terrorist
acts, and establishing a mechanism for blocking sources
of terrorism financing; secondly, creating a special
counter-terrorism fund; and thirdly, establishing
special units at the subregional and regional level. In
that regard, it is essential that Africa's partners provide
it with thorough technical and logistical support so that
those units can carry out their mission effectively.
Despite its huge territory, Chad is working to ensure
security within its borders. Together with neighbouring
countries, we have established joint forces operating
joint patrols in order to deter criminals and bandits of
every kind. Despite the absence of violent extremism
in Chad, the Government, working with the religious
authorities, is deeply involved in preventing terrorism
by conducting awareness campaigns. Beyond our
borders, we are focusing specifically on regional
security, with the Chadian army involved on a number
of fronts, particularly in Mali, where during the past
two weeks we lost 10 of our peacekeepers, who were
killed in a cowardly way, not in combat, in the north
of the country, where we are paying a heavy price with
more than 70 casualties.

If we are to eradicate the phenomenon of foreign
fighters, we must address its underlying causes.
In Africa, the emergence of terrorism and violent
extremism is fuelled by people's poverty and misery
in general and by youth unemployment in particular.
Indeed, young people are easy prey for the terrorist
groups, which derive significant resources from drug
trafficking and other illicit trade. In order to stem such
practices, which are a dangerous threat to the security of
the continent, it is vital that the international community
support development projects and programmes for
African youth.

The Security Council, whose very purpose is
maintaining international peace and security, is
called on to find ways and means that can enable us
to resolve the armed conflicts that are rocking the
world, especially in Syria and Iraq. Besides the internal
causes ofthese countries' conflicts, we have regretfully
seen that outside interference has not only led to
conflict, with incalculable consequences, but also, and
more especially, has prepared fertile ground for the
emergence and development of extremism and violent
terrorism.

The phenomenon of foreign combatants, whether
yesterday in Afghanistan or today in Syria and Iraq,
is sometimes exacerbated by outside interference.
We might wonder why countries such as Syria, Iraq,
Yemen and Libya, to name but a few, were suddenly
transformed into fertile terrain for terrorist groups and
foreign combatants. How did we move from a situation
of relative political stability to the current situation
of war and violence? A process of deep reflection on
those matters at the global level, taking into account
the diversity and complexity of today's societies,
would help to better identify the root causes of the
threat and to prevent violent extremism. Therefore,
even as we reaffirm the need to wage an unwavering
war against terrorism in all its forms, we would also
recall the importance of preserving the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and the need to ensure that
any recourse to force is solidly rooted in the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.

We hope that resolution 2178 (2014) just adopted
and the measures it contains will allow us to respond
to such concerns and to the challenges posed by
terrorism in general and by the phenomenon of foreign
combatants in particular.

