Mr. Nunez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for the information they have
provided.

Cuba condemns all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all their forms and manifestations
wherever, by whomever and against whoever they are
committed and whatever their motivations may be. The
Cuban territory has never been used, nor will it be
used, to organize, finance or carry out terrorist acts
against any country.

Our country supports the position of the 118
member States of the Non-Aligned Movement against
the unilateral drafting of lists accusing States of
allegedly supporting terrorism, which are incompatible
with international law and United Nations resolutions.

Since 1982, the United States Government has
included Cuba on the Department of State's annual list of
State sponsors of international terrorism. With the
purpose of keeping Cuba on that list, various pretexts -
all of them untenable - have been used throughout the
years without putting forward a shred of evidence of our
country's participation in any terrorist act.

The inclusion of Cuba on that list has entailed the
application of economic sanctions by the United States
Government, including a freeze on financial
transactions, a prohibition on technology transfers and
restrictive and isolating measures against our country
and its citizens. Those sanctions are in addition to the
already draconian measures imposed by the economic,
commercial and financial blockade decreed by the
United States Government against Cuba more than
50 years ago.

Cuba demands its immediate exclusion from that
spurious list, as it constitutes an unjust, arbitrary and
politically motivated designation that contradicts the
exemplary conduct of our country in facing terrorism
and puts into question the seriousness of the United
States in the fight against this scourge.

By keeping Cuba on that list, the new United
States Government is denying the political rationality it
publicly proclaims and following the erroneous path of
its predecessors, as it resorts to political manipulation
and flagrant lies against Cuba in order to justify its
discredited, isolated and untenable policy against our
country. It is not in Cuba, but in the United States,
where a terrorist mafia that acts with impunity has
organized, financed and carried out hundreds of
terrorist acts against the Cuban nation.

During the past 51 years, the Government of the
United States of America has been involved in
numerous terrorist acts that have caused the Cuban
people 3,478 deaths, produced 2,099 disabled persons
and generated material losses that exceed $54 billion.
While the Government of the United States of America
claims for itself the right to label the behaviour of
other nations with regard to terrorism, it employs a
double standard by not prosecuting, and allowing the
continued freedom of, those who have confessed to
horrendous acts of terrorism against Cuba.

Despite having all the evidence to charge as a
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles - who has been justly
designated as the most notorious terrorist in the
Western hemisphere - the United States Government
has only carried out legal proceedings against him for
petty offences. The sham of the proceedings is also
evidenced in the continuous delays and postponements,
which prove the lack of interest in prosecuting and
sentencing that individual. Cuba reiterates that the way
that the United States Government has handled this
case is a clear and flagrant violation of resolution 1373
(2001) and other relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and General Assembly, as well as of several
international legal instruments in the fight against
terrorism. Cuba demands once again that the
authorities of the United States prosecute Posada
Carriles as a terrorist or return him to the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, a country that requested his
extradition on 15 June 2005, nearly five years ago.

If the new American Administration really wants
to illustrate its commitment to the fight against
terrorism, it now has the opportunity to act firmly and
without double standards against the terrorist
organizations that have attacked Cuba from United
States territory throughout the years. It has the
opportunity to achieve justice and to release, without
further delay, the five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters
whom it has kept as political prisoners in high-security
prisons for more than 11 years in spite of the fact that
they were just trying, with great altruism and courage,
to gather information about Miami-based terrorist
groups in order to prevent their violent acts and save
the lives of Cuban and American citizens. It is up to the
United States Government to stop using the issue of
terrorism to political ends and to bring an end to the
unfair and groundless inclusion of Cuba on the list of
countries that supposedly sponsor terrorism.

For years now, our country has submitted detailed
information on terrorist acts committed against Cuba to
the Security Council. Our denunciations have still not
received an appropriate response. We reiterate our
willingness to make a more detailed presentation on
this matter before the Counter-Terrorism Committee or
to submit to it any additional information or
clarification it deems necessary.

As in the past, Cuba will continue to strictly
comply with the provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), and to cooperate with
the subsidiary bodies established pursuant to them.

