Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: Mr. President, I thank you
for this opportunity to brief the Council on the judicial
activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on Darfur.

Since my last briefing in June 2009 (see S/PV.6135), there have been positive developments.
First, judicial proceedings in relation to the Darfur
situation are progressing; secondly, cooperation with
the African Union, the League of Arab States and other
international bodies has been fruitful; and, thirdly,
States and international organizations have maintained
consistent support for the execution of the Court's
arrests warrants. I shall begin by referring to these
three aspects.

First, I shall address the International Criminal
Court's judicial proceedings. On 19 November, rebel
leader Bahr Abu Garda, President of the United
Resistance Front, was the first person to appear in
Court in relation to Darfur crimes. My Office alleges
that he is responsible for killing and injuring
peacekeepers from Botswana, Senegal, Mali, Nigeria
and the Gambia during the attack against the Haskanita
bases. Abu Garda appeared voluntarily before the
2

Court and presented his defence, arguing that he was
not part of the attack. However, we presented 552
incriminatory items of evidence and called three
witnesses to testify during the confirmation of charges.
Two of them were peacekeepers from Nigeria and the
Gambia who survived the attacks, and the other was a
senior Kenyan military expert.

For my Office, attacking peacekeepers is a
serious crime. It affects millions of civilians in need of
aid and security. Both this Council and the African
Union have emphasized the seriousness of the
Haskanita attack and the need to bring the perpetrators
to justice. We are grateful to a number of States -
including Senegal, Mali, Botswana, Nigeria, the
Gambia, Chad and the Netherlands - that contributed
to the investigation and surrender of the rebel leader.

On 20 November in The Hague, the
representative of Nigeria, which is an incoming
member of this Council, stated:

"The Court's function of ensuring accountability
for grave crimes is vital for the maintenance of
lasting international peace Cooperation is
critical in enhancing the effectiveness of the
ICC Nigeria is presently assisting the Court in
the prosecution of those involved in [...] the
Haskanita killings of peacekeepers in Darfur."

We are grateful for that support.

The decision of the judges on the confirmation of
charges is expected within two months. In this and the
other cases, my Office is continuously taking measures
to protect our witnesses. As the Council is aware,
individuals falsely suspected of providing evidence to
the International Criminal Court have been arrested
and tortured in Khartoum. There have been public
threats from the Sudanese authorities against anybody
who cooperates with the Court's investigation of the
crimes in Darfur. We are pleased, however, that no
witness has been harmed.

There have also been positive developments in
our cooperation with institutions that can complement
the intervention of the International Criminal Court and
promote additional proceedings for other perpetrators
as well as truth and reconciliation mechanisms. This is
the comprehensive approach defined by the Council in
resolution 1593 (2005), which encourages the Court to
support international cooperation with domestic efforts
to promote the rule of law, protect human rights and
09-6333]
combat impunity in Darfur, and which emphasizes the
need to promote healing and reconciliation in order to
complement judicial processes. This is the approach
adopted by the Security Council and which the
prosecution is following.

The League of Arab States, which reported on the
commission of massive crimes in Darfur as early as
2004, is active in efforts to promote justice in Darfur.
At the initiative of Secretary-General Amr Moussa,
international crimes have been included in the
Sudanese penal code.

President Mbeki, as head of the African Union
High-level Panel, contacted me upon taking office and
requested information on our activities and on crimes
committed in Darfur. My Office submitted written
observations to the Mbeki panel. We noted that the
Government of the Sudan had created multiple judicial
instruments and courts, but never allowed these courts
to fulfil their mandates. The Mbeki panel shared this
analysis in its own report (S/2009/599, annex I), stating
that:

"As a result of the failings of the State in dealing
with the grave situation in Darfur, faith in the
criminal justice system has been severely eroded.
To restore confidence and prevent impunity, a
root and branch change will be required."

On 7 July, I was received by the full panel at
African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa. We held a
half-day dialogue. It was then clarified that the cases
against President Al-Bashir, Ahmed Haroun and Ali
Kushayb, as well as Abu Garda and two other rebel
commanders, will be decided by the judges of the
International Criminal Court. Additionally, we had
exchanges on the complementary role that other courts
can play to investigate other perpetrators.

The Panel's report respects the independent
judicial work of the International Criminal Court and
recognizes the need to do more, not less, justice efforts
for Darfur and to try more, not less, cases. As the Panel
rightly notes:

"The emphasis on the International Criminal
Court should not distract from the reality that,
even at full capacity, the Court can only deal with
a handful of individuals, thus leaving the burden
of justice to the national system."

The Panel thus adopted a comprehensive solution,
combining the current International Criminal Court
09-63331
cases with the possibility of having other courts try
other perpetrators, if and when the conditions for such
courts to operate effectively are created.

This last point is key and I wish to highlight it.
As the Panel notes:

"To date the perpetrators of the serious crimes
in Darfur have overwhelmingly remained
unpunished and the need for healing and
reconciliation has remained largely unmet. This
situation must be rectified urgently."

The Panel proceeds to list a series of prerequisites
to be met before this situation can be rectified,
stressing that no genuine proceedings can take place
before the Sudan, first, removes official immunities;
secondly, adopts special measures for dealing with rape
and sexual crimes; and thirdly, ensures the protection of
witnesses. Thus, it is not just a matter of setting up new
courts. It is a matter of creating a framework allowing
these courts to operate effectively and independently.

As Council members know, on 29 October a
high-level meeting in Abuja of the African Union
Peace and Security Council endorsed the report and
recommendations. It established an implementation
panel comprising former Presidents Thabo Mbeki,
Pierre Buyoya and Abdulsalami Abubakar. The Office
of the Prosecutor is ready to assist the new panel in its
endeavours.

In past meetings, Council members have also
stressed the need to pursue an integrated approach in
Darfur integrating justice, security, political negotiations
and humanitarian aid. I am glad to report to this Council
that all the actors working on those different aspects are
respecting the judicial independence of the Court - in
particular, as I mentioned, the Mbeki panel but also the
Prime Minister of Qatar as chair of the Arab-African
ministerial committee, Joint African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur Djibrill Bassole,
and the Arab League Secretary-General. It is
remarkable, because they demonstrate that engagement
with the Government of the Sudan in political
negotiations is possible while recognizing President
Al-Bashir's individual criminal responsibility for the
crimes committed and respecting the Court's decisions.
Engagement while respecting legal limits is the
solution that they are pushing.

There are also positive developments to report
regarding the cooperation of States, including in the
3
execution of arrest warrants. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) is receiving decisive public
support. Efforts to get the arrests executed are going
forward. The warrants for arrest have been transmitted
to Sudan. In its resolution 1593 (2005) and its
presidential statement of 16 June 2008
(S/PRST/2008/21), the Security Council insisted on the
duty of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the Court.
Ending crimes and arresting individuals on Sudanese
territory is a primary responsibility of the Sudanese
Government. It has both the legal duty and the ability
to do so. All efforts during this month have converged
to encourage the Sudan to respect its responsibilities as
a United Nations Member State, to put an end to crimes
and to arrest the persons sought by the Court.

During the General Assembly debate in October,
56 States emphasized the importance of cooperation
with the Court, including in relation to the arrests. On
29 October, Kenya, on behalf of the African States
parties, reaffirmed their commitment to their legal
obligations with no reservations. African States parties
to the Rome Statute have affirmed both their position
as African Union members that the Security Council
should consider deferring the Darfur investigation and,
at the same time, their legal duty under the Statute to
execute arrest warrants should indictees be present on
their territory.

Over the past six months, Deputy Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda and I met with many African
Presidents, including President Zuma of South Africa,
President Museveni of Uganda, President Jammeh of
the Gambia, President Kibaki of Kenya and President
Deby Itno of Chad. All of them expressed their
commitment to justice and to ending impunity. I would
also like to note that, during the General Assembly
debate in October, Mexico referred to the refusal of the
Sudan to cooperate with the Court as "clear
non-compliance with a legally binding obligation";
Peru and Bolivia indicated that, upon receipt of the
warrant, they had activated national procedures to
ensure the arrest of President Al-Bashir, should he set
foot in their countries. On 15 September, the European
Union's External Relations Council adopted
conclusions calling upon the Sudan to cooperate fully
with the Court in accordance with its obligations under
international law.

As a consequence, President Al-Bashir, at risk of
being arrested, has not travelled to the territory of
States parties for high-level events that he had planned
to attend in South Africa, Uganda, Nigeria and
Venezuela. He cannot attend the Climate Conference in
Copenhagen. He has not attended the United Nations
General Assembly, nor a recent meeting of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference's Committee
for Economic and Commercial Cooperation. This is the
way to ensure the arrest of President Al-Bashir. This
process of marginalization of indicted criminals, if
maintained steadfastly, is a way to ensure the ultimate
implementation of the arrest warrants issued by the
Court. Respect for the Court's decision to issue a
warrant for President Al-Bashir's arrest sends a clear
message: President Al-Bashir will face justice. Any
leader committing this type of crime will face justice.
Power does not provide immunity. There was no
immunity for President Milosevic; there was no
immunity for Prime Minister Kambanda; there was no
immunity for President Taylor. There will be no
immunity for President Al-Bashir.

There are also negative developments in two
areas: the lack of cooperation of the Sudan, and the
continuation of crimes. Sudan has refused to cooperate
with the Court. In resolution 1593 (2005), the Council
decided that the "Government of Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully
with and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor" (para. 2).

AS I said, the warrants were transmitted to the
Sudanese Government. However, President Al-Bashir
has refused to appear in court. He has refused to
appoint a lawyer to represent his position. He has
refused to arrest Ali Kushayb and Ahmad Harun.
Ahmad Harun is now the Governor of South Kordofan.
This all represents non-compliance with the Security
Council's decisions. Instead, over the past six months,
President Al-Bashir has continued to use the Sudanese
State apparatus to conduct a diplomatic, political and
communications campaign against the Court; he has
endeavoured to shift the attention of the international
community to other pressing issues, such as the
conflict with the South. President Al-Bashir is willing
to exacerbate such conflict, if it can divert your
attention from the crimes committed in Darfur and his
responsibility for them.

As the Prosecutor, I will deal with any judicial
challenge brought by President Al-Bashir and other
suspects in court. But I will need the full support of the
Council to ensure that the focus remains on the need to
arrest President Al-Bashir and the other individuals

09-6333]
sought by the Court, and on the need to end the crimes
in Darfur. The crimes are continuing. During the past
six months there have been indiscriminate bombings of
civilians resulting in casualties and forced
displacement; ongoing tactics aimed at exterminating
displaced persons in the camps, including hindering
humanitarian aid and expelling assistance providers
with the obvious consequence of reducing access in
camps to food, water and other services; ongoing rapes
and sexual violence resulting in mental and bodily
harm; and continuing use of child soldiers, though by
various parties. As recently as last week, on
25 November, there were reports of Janjaweed militia
attacks against Al-Harra and Jabel Issa, two villages in
North Darfur, in which civilians were captured,
villagers beaten and property looted.

I would like to inform the Council that, with a
View to increasing predictability, my Office is
reviewing information in four main areas. The first is
acts affecting displaced persons, committed in
particular by the Humanitarian Aid Commission
(HAC). On 10 November 2009, HAC Commissioner
Hassabo announced that the Sudanese Government
would close the camps for displaced persons by early
next year, without guarantees of access to food and water,
and without guarantees of security. Sheikhs in camps who
oppose returns to unsafe areas are targeted. They are
imprisoned and tortured. Let me clarify that any forced
return of displaced persons in these conditions can
constitute a new crime within our jurisdiction.

The second area is acts against civilians in the
camps, including rape, by the forces of President
Al-Bashir.

Thirdly, we are monitoring the use of child
soldiers. The recent report by Ms. Coomaraswamy
indicates that both the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
rebel groups recruit children. That is a crime under our
jurisdiction.

Fourthly, as our investigation into the case of
President Al-Bashir demonstrated that he used the State
apparatus not only to commit massive crimes but also
to conceal them, and thus to facilitate their
continuation, my Office is considering the criminal
responsibility of Sudanese officials who actively deny
and conceal crimes. They do not benefit from any
immunity under the Rome Statute. Since Nuremberg,
due obedience is no longer a legal excuse for the
commission of crimes.
09-63331

A few months ago, on 4 March 2009, the judges
of the International Criminal Court ruled that the
policy adopted by President Al-Bashir against
2.5 million Sudanese citizens in the camps constituted
extermination, as a crime against humanity. The
Appeals Chamber is considering whether the charge of
genocide should be added.

President Al-Bashir, instead of stopping the
crimes, is stopping information about the crimes. The
decision to expel humanitarian workers and silence
others by threats of expulsion, or the attempts at
restricting the freedom of movement of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) are part of this policy to reduce the
monitoring capacity of the international community.

In his 16 November report (S/2009/592), the
Secretary-General accused the Government of the
Sudan of breaching UNAMID's Status of Forces
Agreement by placing impediments on the movement
of peacekeepers. UNAMID, which is the last
international presence able to keep a protective eye on
camps and rural areas and to report on rapes and sexual
violence, is now blocked.

As I have mentioned, my mandate as Prosecutor
is to investigate and prosecute those responsible for
such crimes, in order to contribute to the prevention of
future crimes. I am ready to answer any challenge -
about the evidence or about legal aspects - in court,
but I will need the full support of the Council to
contribute to ending the current crimes against victims
in Darfur.

