Mr. Ri Tong 11 (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): At the outset, I would like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his remarks
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004).

It is almost 70 years since the first nuclear-weapon
State in the world emerged, in 1945. International
efforts to build a nuclear-weapon-free world, thereby
creating a peaceful world, have continued unabated.
However, the number of nuclear-weapon States has
increased, standing at nine countries today.

The dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki by the largest nuclear-weapon State,
demonstrating the most brutal and destructive power of

such weapons, immediately sparked the proliferation of
such weapons. The overall process of overheated East-
West confrontations during the Cold War also gave rise
to the emergence of new nuclear-weapon States under
the protection and patronage of the largest nuclear-
weapon State. One such country was Israel, which
emerged as another nuclear-weapon State. On the other
hand, under increasing pressure - torrents of so-called
Security Council sanctions and increasing nuclear
blackmail - countries such as the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea cannot have nuclear weapons even
for the purpose of self-defence.
Recently there has been an increasing tendency
towards nuclear-weapon modernization programmes
and nuclear umbrellas are continuing to open up for
so-called allied countries, with massive build-ups
of nuclear weapons - a trio, by air, sea and ground,
with aircraft carriers, nuclear-powered submarines
and strategic bombers carrying nuclear weapons. That
gives further rise to the fear of the vertical proliferation
of nuclear weapons and increased concern about a
nuclear arms race among nuclear-weapon States. All
of these facts clearly indicate that the mastermind of
nuclear-weapon proliferation is none other than the
largest nuclear-weapon State, the United States. The
propaganda being produced by that country is nothing
but hypocrisy seeking to deceive the world.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea is
consistent in its opposition to all types of weapons
of mass destruction. We strongly insist that the total
elimination of all existing nuclear weapons in the
world is the only single measure that can guarantee the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
delegation would like to take this opportunity to briefly
draw the Council's attention to the recent developments
in the situation on the Korean peninsula and to clarify
its position on the nuclear issue on the peninsula.

First, let me turn to the efforts of my Government
with regard to national security and peace. In his 2014
address, Marshall Kim Jung Un, the respected leader
of the entire Korean people, made a warm appeal to
the entire Korean nation to move, at a historic turning
point, towards the reunification of the country and
safeguarding national security and peace. Upholding
the warm appeal of the supreme leadership, the
National Defence Commission of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, the supreme governing
body of the country, last January advanced crucial
proposals addressed to the South Korean authorities.
Those proposals concerned very important issues.

First, there was the question of suspending all acts
of mutually slandering each other, thereby creating a
better planet and improving North-South relations.
They also concerned the question of suspending all
hostile military acts against each other. In particular,
they referred to suspending the joint military exercises
that were going to be held as planned.

After advancing those crucial proposals, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea took unilateral
initial steps by suspending any slander against the other
side. Furthermore, it went ahead with its suspension
of all its military movements along the full length of
the military demarcation line, so that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea would not be misinterpreted
as an instigator of provocations or threats, as one
country is continuing to serve as an adversary to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and to mislead
the world.

In February, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea made another proposal on holding high-level talks
between the two sides, which were held successfully.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea boldly
accepted the request from the South Korean authorities
to hold reunions for families separated throughout parts
of North and South Korea. Most of those were held
successfully. Those very positive initiatives, although
they were in the initial stages, gave rise to great
expectations and hope among the entire Korean nation
for a broader and greater path towards reconciliation
and the casing of tension in the Korean peninsula. It
was highly welcomed by the international community.

Secondly, there is the question of the United
States response with its increased hostile activities
and policies against the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and its increased nuclear programmes. As
I mentioned earlier, there had been positive moves
towards easing tensions. It was only the United States
that instead of encouraging them, totally ignored those
moves and intentionally proceeded to escalate tension
on the Korean peninsula. As soon as we advanced the
crucial proposals, the United States totally rejected the
proposals, declared that there would be no change in
its policy towards the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and stated that the joint nuclear military exercises
would be held as planned.

Upon our initiative, the North-South dialogue
was being held. At that time, the United States did
not hesitate to fly strategic bombers carrying nuclear
weapons into South Korea. As the two sides were
holding the separated-family reunions, in an atmosphere
of blood relations and warm feelings after a long time
of separation, the United States went ahead with its
opening ofjoint military exercises - which was very
dangerous and provocative - pouring cold water on
the positive move towards the easing of tension and
fostering reconciliation on the Korean peninsula. For
two months, from the end of February to the end of
April, the United States held joint military exercises in
South Korea. They brought in a massive arms build-
up of all kinds of the most powerful nuclear weapons
against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
They held the largest ever joint landing exercises. And
they beganjoint air-strike exercises, declaring that they
were targeted at so-called Pyongyang occupation.

In addition to that, the United States made gangster-
like advertisements, referring to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea as a provocation and a threat.
On the other hand, they were advertising their own
aggressive joint exercises as annual and routine. The
were held on our doorstep in South Korea, far across
the ocean from the United States mainland, threatening
the very security of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. They went so far as to raise the issue of our
legitimate self-defence rocket launches at the Security
Council and to condemn them, which were held on our
land and territorial waters.

The United States still remains quite silent. This
is a very serious issue: the question of South Korea's
ballistic missile launches with a 500-kilometre range.
Instead of raising the topic of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's legitimate self-defence launches at
the Security Council, The United States has remained
silent until today.

Thirdly, there is the question of the position of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea in the face of
increasing nuclear blackmail by the United States. I
mentioned earlier the hostile acts of the United States
against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. All
those facts clearly indicate that there has been no change
at all. The ambition of the United States Government
has been to eliminate the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea politically, isolating it economically and
annihilating it militarily. On 14 March, the National
Defence Commission of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea issued a statement in the face of the
grave, destructive situation being created intentionally
by the United States.

