Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
would like to thank the Algerian presidency for
convening this important discussion on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to
express our thanks for the briefing by the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan
Egeland. In particular, Sir, I should like to welcome
your presence as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Algeria, which gives this meeting special importance.

This second open debate on the item under
consideration in this year that is coming to an end
reflects the importance that the Security Council
attaches to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
A primary consideration in the context of this
item is the need to reaffirm the principles of
international law and of human rights in order to
ensure the safety of millions of innocent civilians,
among them women, the elderly and children, who are
exposed to numerous and varied forms of violence in
armed conflict.

We must also stress the fact that it is the parties to
the conflict - whether State or non-State - that have
the primary obligation to protect civilians, in
accordance with the norms and principles of
international humanitarian law.

Against that backdrop, we wish to emphasize the
need for all States to be parties to, and comply with,
instruments related to the protection of civilians, such
as the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols, the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, the Convention against Torture and
other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, and other conventions.

Since Secretary-General Kofi Annan initiated the
programme on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, we have become more familiar with the topic
as well as with related norms and recommendations.
For example, there has been an expansion of the
mandates of Security Council peacekeeping operations
and an increase in the resources allocated to them, in
order better to enable them to protect civilians.

A particularly positive aspect has been the
inclusion in peacekeeping missions of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes for combatants, as well as of mechanisms
to protect refugees and returnees. In that framework,
we are gratified by the Council's willingness to
welcome the valuable contributions made by regional
and subregional organizations.

We have also made progress in the fight against
impunity, through the establishment of the special
tribunals for Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia and Sierra
Leone, for example, and, most importantly, through the
establishment of the International Criminal Court.
International tribunals, however, can operate only in a
subsidiary capacity in the context of the internal
jurisdiction of the State in which crimes against
civilians are committed, since it is the State that has the
primary responsibility to arrest, try and sentence the
guilty.

Despite the progress made, much remains to be
done. Indeed, the Secretary-General's report notes that,
in more than 20 armed conflicts around the world,
humanitarian assistance is either denied or obstructed
for over 10 million people. In that context, we believe
that interaction of the competent agencies of the United
Nations and of other humanitarian bodies with non-
State agents, whether they are officially recognized or
not, is of fundamental importance in order to prevent
or mitigate threats to civilians.

Displaced civilian populations require particular
attention on our part. The forced recruitment of child
soldiers and the rape and sexual abuse of women and
children warrants our firm condemnation. Nor can we
overlook the so-called forgotten emergencies. For that
reason, we believe that the implementation of the
10-point platform that the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs submitted to the Security Council
last December is crucial, as it contains elements that
are key to moving forward.

Likewise, the various national and international
authorities, such as the High Commissioner for
Refugees and the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, must act in close coordination in order to set up
an early-warning network that would make it possible
to prevent conflict. The effective prevention of
conflicts also requires the establishment of a long-term
strategy that would pinpoint the causes of the conflict.
That means that we have to find ways to ensure
sustainable development, eradicate poverty, and
promote national reconciliation, democracy and good
governance.

Furthermore, the direct attacks that have taken
place against United Nations personnel make clear the
great vulnerability of our Organization's humanitarian
personnel, as well as that of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent societies. In that respect, we agree with the
Secretary-General that legal measures must be taken to
expand the scope of the 1994 Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel.

More than five years have elapsed since the
Secretary-General initiated the programme on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Progress has
been made, but millions of civilians are still being
subjected to extreme violence. That is why we believe
that the Security Council has to continue to discuss the
possibility of adopting additional measures that would
promote a culture of protection.

In that respect, we could consider adopting a new
resolution on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict that would include all the elements involved in
that area. We could consider also other initiatives, such
as the establishment of an ad hoc group on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict that would
make recommendations and provide follow-up to the
decisions taken by the Council. The report of the Panel
set up by the Secretary-General contains other ideas
that merit in-depth analysis.

To conclude, we would like to reaffirm our belief
that the protection of civilians in armed conflict is one
of the major challenges facing the United Nations. The
credibility of the Organization will also depend on our
ability to offer civilians a life in conditions of dignity
and free from fear. After all, the United Nations was
created to protect human beings from the threats of
both war and violence.

