Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like to
thank you, Madam, for convening this meeting on the
situation in Kosovo. I should also like to thank
Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen for presenting the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). My delegation also thanks
Mr. Covic' for his clarifying statement.

We would like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for requesting Ambassador Kai Eide
to make a comprehensive review of the policies and
practices of all actors in Kosovo. That was a wise and
timely measure.

My delegation welcomes the progress that has
been achieved so far on some of the eight Kosovo
standards on the Implementation Plan and commends
the sustained efforts of UNMIK towards the
establishment of a democratic, multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo where the rights of all communities are fully
protected and respected. Obviously, the standards are
aimed at promoting such values as respect for
minorities, tolerance, democracy and the rule of law.
The fulfilment of the priority tasks outlined by the
Special Representative represents an important step
forward in the implementation of the standards.

In that regard, we express our support for the
implementation of the comprehensive and integrated
strategy to advance the challenges set out: the
strengthening of current efforts to deal with the causes
and consequences of the March violence, improved
dialogue at all levels, readjusting the standards policy,
transferring further competencies to the Provisional
Institutions and enhancing their capacity-building,
reinitiating a more comprehensive dialogue with
Belgrade - which is a very important task indeed -
and implementing a stronger economic development
policy with short- and long-term measures.

We note with appreciation that the task of
identifying and prosecuting the perpetrators of the
March riots is not being neglected and that many of
them are in fact subject to prosecution. That is also a
very important decision and task.

The transfer of additional competencies to the
Kosovo Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), can enhance
their capacity, since they are the most important factor
in the implementation of the standards.

The lack of involvement of Kosovo Serbs in the
political process is still a cause of concern for my
delegation. Unfortunately, the participation of the
minorities in the last parliamentary Assembly election
was insignificant. They must accept the responsibility
to engage constructively in the building of peace and
they should be strongly encouraged to do so.

My delegation believes that the resumption of
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina is essential.
We encourage UNMIK's efforts to that end,
particularly the resumption of the working groups. To
develop a network of activities aimed at easing
communications and at facilitating freedom of
movement for members of minority communities in
Kosovo - in particular Kosovo Serbs - is very
important. Nevertheless, the security environment is
fundamental to that end to ensuring that the sustainable
return of internally displaced persons can take place in
safe conditions.

We welcome the economic development and
reform efforts in Kosovo. As indicated in the report of
the Secretary-General, some progress has been made in
completing economic legislation, moving privatization
forward and the overall implementation of the budget
process. However, much remains to be done. In that
regard, we are grateful for the commitment of the
international community, particularly the European
Union and the Contact Group, and call on them to
spare no effort in working towards Kosovo's peace and
development.

Finally, we fully support the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the political position
declared by UNMIK calling for the fulfilment of the
standards of democracy and applying the rule of law
towards the establishment of the final status of Kosovo.

