Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): The question before us is
not only whether or not Iraq is cooperating with the United
Nations Special Commission and its weapons inspectors.
What we have seen is a clear refusal to abide by the
decisions of the Security Council, and thereby also a
challenge to the entire United Nations.

When the Council in October again demanded that
Iraq comply with its obligations, Iraq shortly thereafter set
out unacceptable conditions for the work of the Special
Commission in the country. The Security Council swiftly
demanded that Iraq rescind its decision. My Government
commends the Secretary-General for his initiative, which
then followed, to send a high-level mission to Baghdad to
try to avert a potentially serious threat to international
peace and security.

Regrettably, Iraq did not grasp that opportunity to
find a solution to the crisis. Instead, it has continued to
violate its obligations to cooperate fully and
unconditionally with the Special Commission. In addition,
it has implicitly threatened the safety of the
reconnaissance aircraft operating on behalf of the
Commission.

This is in flagrant violation of Iraq's obligations
under relevant resolutions. It warrants a firm and clear
response from the Security Council.

My delegation feels that the draft resolution before
us is an appropriate response consistent with earlier
Council resolutions. The measures will affect only those
individuals who are responsible for, or are participating
in, instances of non-compliance. Innocent Iraqi civilians
will not be affected. Through diplomatic means, the Iraqi
Government should now be made to understand that
cooperation with the international community is in its
own interest and in the interest of the Iraqi people.

It is the continuing and unanimous determination of
the Security Council that Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction must be eliminated. The draft resolution
reflects that determination. It also underscores that full
cooperation with the Special Commission and
implementation of the relevant resolutions is the only way
forward towards having the sanctions lifted. If Iraq wants
to find an audience for its grievances, it should not
challenge the international community and provoke the
United Nations, but should cooperate and establish itself
as a credible partner for dialogue.

The unity demonstrated in the Council today will
send a clear message: that Iraq must rescind its decision
and cooperate with the United Nations Special
Commission fully, immediately and without conditions or
restrictions. For these reasons, Sweden supports the draft
resolution before us.

