The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Croatia.

I welcome and thank the High Representative and
the European Union (EU) Special Representative
Miroslav Lajcak for his report and today's briefing, as
well as for all the work he has done in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which Croatia fully supports.

I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and thank him for his statement.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of France on behalf of the
European Union. I wish to make a few additional
remarks.

My delegation welcomes the important progress
made on the reforms that enabled Bosnia and
Herzegovina to sign a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union on 16 June. The
Agreement is that country's first contractual
relationship with the European Union and the first
significant step towards seeing Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a peaceful, viable State irreversibly on
course towards European integration, which is the
long-standing objective of the Peace Implementation
Council.

However, due to many other troubled spots
around the world that have caught the attention of the
international community and media, the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has fallen below our radar. In
that sense, we are of the view that the international
community should refocus its attention on the current
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We are deeply concerned by the High
Representative's assessment of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which is far from stable. In that
regard, we echo the conclusions reached at the most
recent meeting of the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board, which expressed serious and deep
concerns over "challenges to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and constitutional
order" (5/2008/ 705, para. 93).

Thus, while we welcome with enthusiasm the
EU-inspired reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
progress on its path towards integration into the EU,
we also draw attention to a number of fundamental
problems that still need to be addressed. We stress the
importance of meeting the challenges confronting
Bosnia and Herzegovina through a comprehensive and
inclusive dialogue, in particular on future
constitutional reforms, which needs to be intensified
under the reinvigorated and more focused guidance of
the international community and with additional
support given to the High Representative.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing some difficult
problems, and the only way out is to reach an
agreement and a vision for the future that is acceptable
to all three of its constituent peoples. In this sense,
challenging the very foundations of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which reached peace with the Dayton
Accords, is hurtful and damaging. However, any
intention to improve the current situation and remedy
the problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be
welcomed and encouraged.

On that point I wish to stress that the stability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina depends on respect for the
equal rights of all three constituent peoples: Bosniacs,
Bosniac Serbs and Bosniac Croats. That is vital not
only for the future and the survival of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but for the future survival of the Croats
as well in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those two futures
are closely interlinked.

We have said several times that there cannot be a
Bosnia and Herzegovina without Croats in the country.
It is therefore imperative to protect their equality.
Having in mind their particular situation, I will
underscore again that their voice must be heard and
must be taken into account on a basis of equality -
both ethnic and civic - and on the basis of
constitutional equality. This stems from the
constitution and the history of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. All three groups, all three peoples must
feel that it is their country, and they should feel safe
and protected throughout its entire territory. Their
fundamental rights and freedoms, as well as their civic
and ethnic rights, should be protected throughout the
country, as should their right to return to their homes.

An important part of this is the fight against
impunity with regard to all crimes committed. We echo
the High Representative's calls regarding the need to
arrest the fugitives from the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. They should be
transferred to The Hague as soon as possible.

Finally, we are offering the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina a clear and unambiguous European
perspective. We are investing efforts in explaining that
such a European future will benefit each and every
citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina and all of its
constituent peoples. Croatia is doing that jointly with
the rest of the international community, and we need to
persevere on that path together. That will benefit all of
Europe, together with Bosnia and Herzegovina and all
of South-East Europe.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Miroslav Lajcak to
respond to the comments and questions raised.
