Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Argentine initiative to hold this debate
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. We welcome the
presence of Ms. Cristina Fernandez, President of
Argentina, to preside over today's meeting.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing. I have listened carefully to the statements
made by the representatives of the African Union,
the League of Arab States, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations.

The United Nations is the essential mechanism of
international collective security. The Security Council
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, at a time when security
threats and challenges are proliferating and the national
security interests of countries are closely interlinked.
Strengthened cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations helps to
promote multilateralism and enhances the international
collective security mechanism and our joint efforts to
maintain international peace and security.

China attaches great importance to the role
played by regional and subregional organizations in
conflict prevention and resolution, the deployment of
peacekeeping operations, post-conflict reconstruction
and other areas. We support the efforts of the United
Nations to deepen its cooperation with regional and
subregional organization so as to better fulfil its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Here I wish to highlight four points.

First, in strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and subregional and regional
organizations, we must be guided by the Charter of
the United Nations. The Council should encourage
and support such organizations in the quest to achieve
the peaceful resolution of a conflict through dialogue,
consultation, good offices and mediation, so as to
contribute to regional peace and security. At the same
time, the actions taken by regional organizations
should be in line with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and any actions taken
should be in accordance with the provisions of Security
Council resolutions and as mandated by the Council.

Secondly, the United Nations and regional
organizations can bring into play their respective
advantages and complement each other's work in
working jointly to meet security threats and challenges.
China supports the unique role played by regional
organizations in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations in promoting the
peaceful resolution of conflict, as they are better
positioned geographically, historically and culturally.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations should help them to maximize their
respective advantages, better complement and facilitate
one another's work and avoid overlaps and conflict.

Thirdly, cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations should focus on
effectiveness and be tailored to the local situation.
The United Nations may engage in various forms of
pragmatic cooperation with regional organizations,
in accordance with their respective characters, in the
field of confidence-building measures, good offices
and crisis mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
In addition to existing dialogue and consultation
mechanisms, flexible and practical collaboration
mechanisms should be actively explored with regional
organizations according to their institutional structure
and functions, with a view to meeting the real needs
inherent in a particular situation.

Fourthly, the United Nations should strengthen
its assistance and support to regional and subregional
organizations. Enhancing the capacity of regional
organizations to deal with security threats and challenges
is an important means of effective conflict prevention.
Many regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union (AU), have made major efforts,
through good offices, to settle local hotspots, push
forward peace processes and promote post-conflict
reconstruction, with positive results. However, they
also face various constraints in terms of resources and
capacities. The United Nations should provide greater
assistance to such regional organizations as the AU
in personnel training, institution-building, logistical
assistance and financial support, so as to strengthen
their capacity-building and thereby help them to play
an important role in the maintenance of regional peace
and stability.

China attaches great importance to the unique role
of regional and subregional organizations. We will
continue to support such organizations in their proactive
efforts to maintain regional peace and security and
promote common development. China is ready to join
the rest of the international community in pushing
for strengthened cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
creating a more secure and prosperous future.
Lastly, China supports the statement to be made
by the representative of Kyrgyzstan, who will speak on
behalf of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.

