Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
unanimous vote this morning in favour of the
resolution, in the presence of the Secretary-General, is
excellent news for the people of Iraq, for the Security
Council and for the United Nations.

Throughout the constructive negotiations that
characterized the preparation of this resolution, the
United Kingdom saw three main objectives for the
resolution: first, to confirm and accelerate the transfer
of power to the people of Iraq; secondly, to send a clear
signal that the international community is committed to
the rapid political and economic reconstruction of a
free Iraq which is secure and stable; and thirdly, to
ensure, as conditions permit, a strengthened, vital role
for the United Nations, in partnership with the
Coalition Provisional Authority and, most importantly,
with the Iraqi people.

On the transfer of power, the resolution we have
adopted is quite clearly about giving control of Iraq to
its people as quickly as possible. Quite rightly,
however, the resolution does not prescribe to the Iraqis
artificial schedules for that transfer. Instead, it puts the
people of Iraq in the driving seat through the Iraqi
interim administration. It reaffirms Iraq's sovereignty
and territorial integrity and the temporary nature of the
Coalition's powers. It adds increased impetus, structure
and clarity to the political process. It sets a deadline of
two months from today by which the Governing
Council should provide a timeline and the programme
leading to an Iraqi constitution and democratic
elections, and it engages the Security Council in this
process. As I argued during the negotiations, it does
not rule out moving to a provisional Government if that
is likely to lead more rapidly and in more stable
conditions to a democratic Iraq.
On the commitment of the international
community, the resolution encourages United Nations
Member States and international bodies to support the
reconstruction of Iraq, including in particular through
substantial pledges at the Madrid International Donors
Conference. It builds on the international efforts which
already involve over 30 countries in Iraq today by
establishing a multinational force that will help protect
the United Nations mission and ensure the conditions
of security and stability needed for political and
economic reconstruction to succeed.

On the part played by the United Nations, the
resolution we have adopted gives the Secretary-General
discretion to strengthen that role. Indeed, it asks him to
do so across a wide range of areas he had previously
identified, including in national dialogue, consensus-
building and the electoral and constitutional processes.
While the underlying assumption in this resolution is
that the Council wants the United Nations to play an
enhanced role, it also reflects realities on the ground. It
will be for the Secretary-General rightly to determine
the exact role as circumstances permit, but the United
Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-General's statement
this morning and looks forward to working with him
and the Secretariat on the implementation of this
resolution.

This resolution focuses on the practicable, not the
theoretical; on what will work for the Iraqi people as
the processes under way move forward, not on some
blueprint imposed from New York. The United
Kingdom hopes and believes that this unanimously
adopted resolution represents a further strengthening of
our joint efforts, supported by the unique expertise of
the United Nations, to build a better Iraq. As the
resolution makes clear, progress in Iraq will be all the
more swift if we put aside the divisions of the past, as
we have done this morning, and put foremost in our
minds the need to unite in order to meet the current
needs of the Iraqi people.

To that end, the success of this resolution will be
secured if all of us in the Council and in the
international community now mobilize to give effect to
the signal we have sent. We are united in wanting to
secure as rapidly as possible a democratic, secure and
stable Iraq governed by Iraqis for Iraqis.

