Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
We join other members of the Council in thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
comprehensive statement.

Despite the efforts made by the Indonesian
authorities in cooperation with the United Nations to
resolve all of the problems related to the return of the
refugees, this issue remains a source of concern and
continues to contribute to instability in the region.

The recent floods that struck the south-eastern
part of West Timor and claimed hundreds of victims
from among the East Timorese refugees in West Timor,
including women and children, have demonstrated the
need to speed up the return of refugees and above all
for their reintegration into East Timorese society in
good conditions.

We welcome the good cooperation between
UNTAET and the Indonesian Government, as well as
the specialized agencies in the field, which has enabled
the relocation of the affected East Timorese refugees to
other areas and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
We also welcome the calming of the security situation,
in itself an encouraging sign for the advancement of
economic activity and has a positive impact on public
order, which remains a delicate area that requires
follow-up on a daily basis.

There is also a need to emphasize UNTAET's
efforts and achievements in the area of creating jobs to
meet a growing need for employment. In this regard, it
is important to lay down a general policy in this sector
that will make it possible to ensure the participation of
the East Timorese in the establishment of an economic
environment that is conducive to peace.

We believe that the economic aspect is one of the
major priorities to which particular attention must be
paid by the international community, the donor
countries and the international financial institutions.
The post-conflict period and its humanitarian and
economic needs require intensive efforts so that peace
can be established for the long term. We welcome the
donors' conference that will take place next June in
Lisbon, which will make it possible, we hope, to free
up additional financial resources very much needed for
the improvement of living conditions and the
reconstruction of the country's infrastructure.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
delegation's congratulations to UNTAET for all the
efforts it is undertaking in all areas, despite the
difficulties in the field.

