Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I would
like to thank you again, Mr. Minister, for coming back
from Canada to chair this important meeting. I accept the
mandate of the Security Council to lead this mission and
am delighted that the membership of it is shaping up. I
think it would be useful to note that a prior mission to
Kosovo will be headed by Ambassador Chowdhury and
that these two missions further the evolving role of the
Security Council as an organization which, following on
the historic work of Ambassador Andjaba's mission to
East Timor last year, will take a more active role not only
in adopting resolutions but in making sure they are
implemented. So I welcome this assignment,
Mr. President, and I believe that it is a mission that can
be frankly said to give us the hope that we will avoid
another meeting such as this one in the future, so it is
very timely to announce it today.

Mr. Prime Minister, I want to thank you and your
colleagues for you efforts in producing this historic
report. Along with the Secretary-General's report on
Srebrenica, which Ambassador van Walsum has already
discussed, it is a remarkable document, a remarkable self-
criticism. We have much to learn from these documents.
That these reports were sponsored and generated by the
United Nations itself is a testament to our collective
commitment to work with the Secretary-General to reform
the United Nations, to overcome and avoid the failures of
the past and to do better in the future.

Fifty-five years ago the United Nations was created
in the ashes of the Second World War to help prevent
conflict and atrocities. It is the primary responsibility of
this body, the Security Council, to stand against such
horrible actions and take the lead in response. This is our
core task. This is the one, ultimately, upon which the
United Nations will be judged by the people of the world.

The report makes clear that in Rwanda, as in Bosnia
and Somalia, the international system failed and that these

 

collective failures nearly brought the United Nations system
down. It sparked an institutional and political crisis from
which the United Nations system is trying to recover and
which it will be severely tested in the "big four" of
peacekeeping: East Timor, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

For its part, our nation accepts its own shortcomings
in this terrible period. This has been expressed with
openness and candour by President Clinton himself during
his historic 1998 visit to Africa. In his visit to Kigali he
said,

"The international community, together with the
nations in Africa, must bear its share of responsibility
for this tragedy as well. We did not act quickly
enough after the killing began. We should not have
allowed the refugee camps to become safe havens for
the killers. We did not immediately call these crimes
by their rightful name: genocide. We cannot change
the past, but we can and must do everything in our
power to help Rwanda build a future without fear and
full of hope."

There is little I can add to President Clinton's
statement. Like the Carlsson report and the Secretary
General's report on Srebrenica, his words stand as an
indictment of both the perpetrators and the bystanders. They
are a call to action to prevent the recurrence of genocidal
violence.

In the trip that my colleagues and I made in our
national capacity to Africa and to Rwanda in December of
last year, I visited a memorial, on a hillside outside of
Kigali, to the victims of the genocide, accompanied by
many of the survivors, still in a state of shock, five years
later. Like the massacre sites of the Balkans or the factories
of death of Nazi Germany or the killing fields of
Cambodia, a visit to such a place of memory commands
justice for the dead and hope for the living. The people
stood in a field with wooden crosses and asked if the
United Nations could help make it a permanent memorial.
They told me that they estimated the cost would be
$300,000. I hope that some way can be found to
accommodate this request so that we can recognize in a
physical way on that hillside in Kigali the two fundamental
imperatives we must focus on here in this Chamber: never
forget, and never again.

What happened in Rwanda and Bosnia was not the
spontaneous result of some sort of genetic predisposition
for genocide or that dreadful phrase of journalists, "ancient
ethnic hatreds". Such judgements are an excuse for
inaction. I repeat, such judgements are an excuse for
inaction. I have written in my own book on Bosnia how
appalled I was to hear these phrases coming from
American officials in regard to Bosnia, and I commend
you, Mr. Prime Minister, for being so direct and open
about them in regard to this tragedy.

The atrocities in Rwanda were carried out by a small
group of murderers intent on promoting hate to preserve
power - just as was true in Bosnia. These were political
acts, plain and simple. Those perpetrating them must be
held responsible. For not acting against such violence
when there were clear indications it would take place, so
must we, the international community.

Again, we are grateful to Prime Minister Carlsson
and his colleagues for their unsparing report. It is a
historical document and, we hope, a blueprint for the
future.

That future must now be our highest priority. The
prevention of another round of violence, genocidal or
otherwise, in Central Africa is a core element of the
United States policy in the Great Lakes. It is one of the
United Nations greatest current challenges.

The legacy of genocide and ethnic cleansing in
Rwanda, Burundi and the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a tragic reality that must be
addressed and which will, Mr. President, be the focus of
the mission you have announced today. We undertake
your mandate with humility and hope, and I am delighted
that so many members of the Security Council here
represented will join in that mission. I know that you
have decided that every country here should either go to
Kosovo or the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
divisions are still being finalized, but I congratulate you
on an excellent solution to that aspect of the problem,
because Kosovo equally demands our attention.

In regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we must end the cycle of impunity. Our discussion today
should galvanize support for United Nations sanctions
against the Rwandan armed forces and the Interahamwe.
We must also begin to plan and prepare for
demobilization and reintegration of other armed groups in
the Great Lakes region.

The United States supports the International war
crimes Tribunal in Rwanda. We continue to press for
reforms to make it more effective. We support Rwanda's

 

own domestic justice system, which is sometimes
misunderstood by other people. We have allocated
$25 million for the Great Lakes Justice Initiative to help re-
establish and strengthen the rule of law in that area.

It is undeniable that many of the Rwandan murderers
remain at large within the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and many of those wish to renew
the genocide. The Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is unable to prevent the use of its territory by
these armed groups. It is simply outside their physical,
logistical and political capability. It is therefore time for all
the States of the region to come together and find a
common solution for the insurgencies of the groups that are
not fully covered inside the Lusaka Cease Fire Agreement.
Angolan, Rwandan, Burundian and Sudanese groups operate
with impunity in the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The solution Iies both within the countries of
origin of these groups and within the country that is the
often unwilling host.

We all know that something must be done. The full
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and a
rededication to the institutions of justice offer the best hope
for an end to the present crisis. We cannot say that the
solution to Rwanda's problems lies exclusively in actions
within the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Neither can
we say that Rwanda's problems should be solved without
addressing the presence of the genocidal militia in a
neighbouring State. Lusaka's full implementation, local and
international justice, and democratization and institution-
building in Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are the keys to preventing further conflict and
genocide.

We share the previously expressed view of the
representative of the Netherlands that the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is inadequately
staffed and inadequately structured to deal with the massive
challenges that are posed by the African crises as well as
by East Timor, Somalia and their other missions. However,
we emphatically support the Secretary-General's
peacekeeping commission. We look forward to its results
and urge that it be ambitious in its goals.

Meanwhile, we must deal with ongoing crises. In the
mission to Kinshasa that will begin on 2 May, the Security
Council will assess the status of the progress being made,
and we will urge the parties to do more. In the days ahead,
how we act to help bring peace to the Congo will be the
best tribute to the important report we are discussing today.

I wish also to thank the President for coming back
to New York to chair this important and, I hope,
potentially historic meeting.

