Mr. Lowcock: Every month, I brief the Security Council on five priority issues in Yemen - first, the protection of civilians and respect for international humanitarian law; secondly, humanitarian access and delivery; thirdly, funding for the United Nations aid operation; fourthly, the Yemeni economy; and, fifthly, progress towards peace. As Mr. Griffiths just outlined, we are now going through an extremely worrisome period in Yemen. That is equally true for the humanitarian operation. Let us start with protection of civilians. Hostilities have escalated significantly along several fronts, most notably in the governorates of Ma'rib, Al-Jawf and Sana'a. As Mr. Griffiths just noted, those areas have been mostly quiet over the past two years. Fighting in those areas has displaced more than 35,000 people since January. That escalation, in addition to clashes in other places, has reversed thetrend seen in previous months of decreasing civilian casualties. In January, assessments suggest, more than 160 civilians were killed or wounded across Yemen. On Saturday, air strikes reportedly killed dozens of civilians in Al-Jawf. Humanitarian Coordinator Lise Grande issued a statement about that incident the same day, and I associate myself with what she said. Ten days ago, hostilities badly damaged two hospitals in Ma'rib and injured a health worker. Those hospitals had already closed because of fighting in the area, depriving 15,000 people of medical care. And in Taiz, Al-Hudaydah, Sa'dah and other places, we continue to hear daily reports of civilians killed, homes destroyed, farms damaged, children shot by snipers and other horrors. For months, I have called for a nationwide ceasefire. That call is even more urgent today when the violence, as Mr. Griffiths has said, is at very real risk of spiralling out of control. The second issue is humanitarian access. Let me remind everyone that international humanitarian law requires the parties to facilitate access to people in need. Access is essential if we are to continue saving millions of lives across Yemen. Yet the space in which we need to do that work has been narrowing from all directions. In the south, humanitarian agencies have to wait too long to get projects approved. We estimate that approximately 30 per cent of non-governmental organization (NGO) projects were not taken forward last year because the Government failed to agree them. Efforts to carry out a multisectoral needs assessment have recently stalled. We also remain concerned about proposed Government regulations that would hinder humanitarian agencies' ability to move around the country as necessary in order to meet urgent needs. This past week, the Government returned eight trucks with medical supplies, held by Government forces in Ma'rib since 30 January. However, after initial inspection, it appears that up to 70 per cent of the supplies are missing. We appreciate the ongoing dialogue with the Government on all those issues, but it is important to be clear that we have much more serious problems in the areas controlled by the Ansar Allah authorities. Last year, those authorities issued more than 200 regulations on humanitarian action. By the end of the year, the number of reported incidents disrupting assistance had risen by a factor of six. Approximately half of those incidents constrained movements of relief supplies or staff, while approximately a quarter of them involved attempts to influence decisions on who receives help or otherwise interfere with programmes. The Ansar Allah authorities asked NGOs to sign agreements that would not be consistent with humanitarian principles. Approximately 40 per cent of NGO projects last year went unapproved - 10 per cent more than in the south. It has also been suggested that NGOs pay a 2 per cent tax to fund the authorities' aid-coordination body. The situation is unacceptable. Stopping the world's largest aid operation would be fatal for millions of people. The Secretary-General issued a statement last week about that. He reiterated the importance of sustaining the humanitarian operation, and he supports continued dialogue with all the interested parties to ensure that help reaches all those who are in need of it, in accordance with humanitarian principles. There was also a valuable meeting in Brussels last week involving United Nations colleagues, leading international NGOs and some of the large donors to discuss how we can maintain life-saving assistance in a principled way, including the measures that may need to be taken as a result of the interference and blockages that we are seeing. The United Nations is seeking to intensify dialogue with the Ansar Allah authorities at all levels and through all the channels available to us. Last week, the Ansar Allah authorities returned food that had been taken from a World Food Programme (WFP) warehouse in Hajjah. They also announced that they were dropping the proposed 2 per cent levy and informed WFP that they would implement a long-pending agreement on biometric registration and other issues. We welcome all those announcements and look forward to seeing them implemented. There are several other issues, including, first, project approvals, especially agreements with NGOs; secondly, moving forward with urgently required assessments, including updating food security assessments; and, thirdly, approving more monitoring missions, all of which continue to require progress. Those are activities that the humanitarian principles require humanitarian agencies to conduct. Important discussions are ongoing with the relevant parties to cover all those and other points.Talso want to reiterate what Mr. Griffiths said about the FSO SAFER oil tanker. I have raised this issue in my briefings to the Council on 10 occasions over the past 12 months. It needs to be resolved. Nothing can happen without the United Nations assessment mission. Once again, therefore, like Mr. Griffiths, I urge rapid action on that. Amid all those challenges, the humanitarian operation has continued to deliver. The World Food Programme reports that it continues to provide food assistance to more than 13 million people every month; the World Health Organization is carrying out more than 1.5 million medical consultations a month; and UNICEF and others report that support to water networks benefited an average of nearly 4 million people a month from September to December in 2019. I want to commend once again the humanitarian workers, especially the Yemeni staff, who are delivering that response. They are unquestionably saving millions of lives. No one has suggested that the emergency in Yemen has improved over the past year, but key assessments remain blocked, complicating efforts to adjust programmes based on the latest evidence. That makes it difficult to know with certainty whether there are large pockets of unmet needs throughout the country. To date, we have not heard reports of famine-like conditions returning in high-risk areas. In late 2018, we heard such reports from many sources even before the formal assessments had been completed. I believe that high levels of aid delivery have helped, but it is clear that without the assessments we cannot be confident of the position. Let me, finally on this point, thank everyone who has contributed to the medical evacuation of the 28 patients whom Mr. Griffiths mentioned. Like him, I would like to see a more sustainable solution put in place soon. Humanitarian agencies have been able to continue saving millions of lives because our donors have provided the money to do so. That brings me to my third point: funding for the United Nations aid operation. I once again want to thank the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United States, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, Germany, the European Union, its States members and all our donors for their support. All humanitarian agencies take very seriously the accountability for those funds. We know that the choice over whether or not to provide assistance is a voluntary one. The donors have shown much generosity in financing the Yemen humanitarian operation. In my _ experience, that generosity is based on just two things: first, the belief that there are real needs and, secondly, the belief that if they provide resources, they will get to the people who need help. Therefore, anybody currently or potentially hindering humanitarian agencies' work with regard to those two points needs to understand what a big risk they are taking with donors' continuing generosity. I turn now to the Yemeni economy. As Yemenis depend almost entirely on commercial imports for food, fuel, medicine and other basic goods, it is essential to keep all ports open. Most food and fuel imports continue to come in through Al-Hudaydah or Saleef. Commercial supplies through those ports have remained stable in recent months Thanks to a mechanism for commercial fuel imports managed by the Special Envoy, fuel volumes have been higher than the previous average every month since October 2019. It is equally important to ensure that imports are affordable. The Yemeni rial is losing value, meaning fewer people can afford the goods, above all food, that they need to survive. A dispute between the parties over bank notes is still driving a disparity between the exchange rate in the south, which is approximately 650 rial to the dollar, and the north, where it is at approximately 595 rial to the dollar. In late 2018, the rapid depreciation of the Yemeni rial was a key factor in bringing the country to the brink of widespread famine. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has played a crucial role in stabilizing the rial. I thank that country once again for that, including the recent release of an additional $227 million for those purposes. I expect that such support will continue to be necessary. The last point is progress towards peace. Peace is the only way to end the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Mr. Griffiths just briefed the Council on the serious risks that we now see. We are now entering the sixth year of this war. Enough is enough.
