Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank the
United Kingdom for its efforts in reaching consensus
on resolution 2483 (2019) and also in producing a more
concise resolution, in line with the Security Council's
agreement to reduce text in resolutions.

The United States believes that this new mandate
sends an important message from the Security Council
to the sides and relevant parties that the leaders of the
communities must work with a sense of urgency to
resume fully fledged negotiations that will fulfil the
hopes of the Cypriot people to reunify Cyprus as a
bizonal, bicommunal federation, with political equality,
as set out in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We also believe that the mandate makes clear that
peacekeeping missions must support political solutions
and cannot substitute for an active political process.

The United States is disappointed by the lack of
progress in the two years since the Conference on
Cyprus, but we believe that a settlement remains
achievable. The leaders of the communities must
demonstrate the political courage and will to transform
their words of readiness into action and engage in
a United Nations-facilitated process. We know that
the ultimate settlement will require more than just
the agreement of the leaders of the two communities.
Direct contact between the sides does not implicate
issues of recognition, but should be encouraged as a
way to rebuild trust and improve the public atmosphere
to prepare the communities for a future settlement. To
that end, we also look forward to renewed progress
in supporting women's participation in the settlement
effort.

In the 2014joint declaration, the community leaders
described the status quo as unacceptable. We agree and
believe that this holds true today. The resolution is the
unanimous expression of the Council's support for the
leaders to take the political risks necessary to engage
meaningfully and with a sense of urgency. We that
hope it spurs political progress that will reunify Cyprus
and bring about a sustainable peace for all Cypriots.
We also look forward to the Secretary-General's next
report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP), including his recommendations
for how to further encourage the sides and all involved
parties to respect UNFICYP's mandated authority in
and delineation of the buffer zone in an effort to defuse
tensions.
