Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany, Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, on
his assumption of the chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
by thanking him for his very complete briefing on the
priorities of the OSCE for this year. I would also like
to thank him for his comments with regard to former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and for his
recognition of Mr. Boutros-Ghali's efforts to realize
peace in the wake of the Cold War.

We have often insisted on the importance of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, we place high value and importance
on the efforts of the OSCE to re-establish stability in
conflict zones in Europe and in Asia. I would cite, in
particular, the conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Ukraine
and elsewhere.

Progress has been made as a result of OSCE efforts
in the areas of preventive diplomacy, mediation and
good offices, and we would encourage the OSCE to
continue its efforts. We believe that the role ofthe OSCE
should be complementary to that of the United Nations,
and that the latter should contribute to strengthening
OSCE efforts undertaken within the framework of its
mandate. We also support the strengthening of dialogue
and cooperation with our Mediterranean partners in
the light of the close link between the countries of the
Mediterranean and the European continent. I would cite
in particular such issues as the Syrian crisis, the need to

re-establish stability in Libya, and the fight against the
terrorism and extremism that threaten the aspirations
of the peoples of the region.

Moreover, it is necessary to strengthen dialogue
among civilizations and religions, and to address issues
related to migration, the protection of refugees and
the trafficking of human beings in the Mediterranean
region. In that context, we particularly appreciate
the efforts of the OSCE to pool international efforts
with a view to reaching a sustainable solution in
Ukraine, in accordance with the Minsk agreements.
We believe that those agreements provide the best
framework within which to achieve a sustainable
peace. In that context, the implementation of the
ceasefire is particularly important, as are the necessary
constitutional reforms and the organization of elections
in the Donbas region. And let us not forget the need
to respond to the humanitarian consequences of the
conflict in cooperation with all stakeholders, without
exception. Egypt welcomes the decline in hostile acts,
which helps to provide conditions that are favourable to
peace and stability. It is essential that all parties honour
their commitments in accordance with the Minsk
agreements, and we urge them to engage in dialogue
and to seek a peaceful resolution to the conflict that
takes into consideration the aspiration of their peoples.

Finally, we would be extremely pleased to see
strengthened cooperation with the OSCE in order
to arrive at a common vision on a number of issues,
including Islamophobia in Europe, dialogue among
civilizations and religions, as well as the combat against
terrorism and extremism. The latter two constitute two
ofthe greatest security threats we face today. We call for
strengthened joint efforts that include the participation
of all parties and organizations concerned, including
the OSCE, in order to eradicate terrorism. Those efforts
should be carried out using a comprehensive approach
that is not limited to only security and military
solutions, but that includes cultural and economic
aspects as well. That will help to improve the lives of
all the populations in the region. In that vein, Egypt,
which is a Mediterranean partner, will spare no effort
to achieve our shared goals.

