Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sambo
Sidikou, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, for their
comprehensive briefings.

I would like to once more reiterate Uruguay's
commitment to stability and peace in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, not just as an elected member of
the Security Council but also as a country that has
contributed troops to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo (MONUSCO) in an uninterrupted fashion over
the past 16 years.

As referred to in presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/18, the Security Council undertook a field
visit a little less than a month ago and the messages that
were conveyed focused on the political and security
situation in the country. The Democratic Republic of
Congo finds itself at a decisive moment in its history
in political terms. Furthermore, both the Congolese
population and the international community have great
expectations vested in the holding of free, transparent,
inclusive and credible elections.

Political stakeholders, who should act in the
interests of the nation and its inhabitants, have the
enormous responsibility of achieving the necessary
consensus to hold credible elections without unjustified
delays, so as to avoid any escalation of tension or
violence. Uruguay wishes to reiterate its call to political
groups that have yet to join the dialogue process to do
so and play a constructive role that can contribute to the
proper holding of elections.

Of concern are the complaints of violations of
civil and political rights, including violations of the
freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, that
have been committed, inter alia, by forces or personnel
linked to the Government. It would be better for the
persons responsible for such violations be brought
to justice to account for their acts sooner rather than
later. Uruguay wishes to emphasize that it will be of
great importance during the preparation, development
and implementation of the election process that all
necessary guarantees be provided for the monitoring,
protection and promotion of human rights.

Unfortunately, many rulers in Africa and still more
in other parts of the world are calling for constitutional
reforms when they wish to extend their terms in office.
Every constitution involves laborious negotiations
in which almost all political actors and parties and
civil society organizations of a country participate.
A constitution also implies a delicate and balanced
social, political and legal pact in which all the citizens
of a country subscribe to or have what is referred to in
English as "ownership" of the country's magna caria.

Reforming constitutions with the sole objective
of extending elected terms of office or of allowing for
persons in power to be re-elected has proved to be a
misguided and damaging practice for the political and
democratic evolution of States over the past 40 years.
One day, all Governmental leaders without exception
will understand that the essence of democracy is the
regular holding of general elections in accordance with
constitutional guarantees and that what is important
about that is seeing political alternation among different
political parties as natural and healthy for society as a
whole. We hope that the unanimous political messages
delivered by the members of the Council during their
recent visit to the country are echoed throughout the
political class and the population of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Finally, Uruguay wishes to pay tribute to each and
every one of the officials deployed in MONUSCO who
have been making an enormous sacrifice on a daily
basis to contribute to the peace and stability of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are, without a
doubt, the true guarantee that this entire process comes
to fruition.

