Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the initiative of the United States to convene
this public meeting. We thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould
Sheik Ahmed; United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein; and
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Kyung-
wha Kang, for their briefings.

The information provided by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
stakeholders reveals the serious deterioration of the
situation in Yemen, in particular the humanitarian
situation. We note with alarm reports of actions that
may constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

We condemn the use by all parties of explosive
weapons in densely populated areas and their serious
consequences on the civilian population and Yemeni
infrastructure, including schools and hospitals. In
particular, we condemn indiscriminate aerial attacks
and the use of schools for military purposes, in violation
of resolution 2143 (2014), and the possible use of cluster
munitions. In the absence of a political solution and a
definitive ceasefire it is urgent that we reiterate the call
on the parties to the conflict to respect international
law. For its part, the international community should
promote justice and accountability. We support the
recommendation of the High Commissioner pertaining
to the establishment of an impartial and independent
mechanism to investigate all allegations of violations
and abuses of international human rights law and
violations of international humanitarian law.

We thank the agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations and its partners for their efforts to
address the humanitarian needs in Yemen. Nevertheless,
we must not forget that humanitarian assistance
relieves the symptoms of the conflict without curing
the underlying problem. We reiterate that a political
solution is the only remedy for the latter. We call on
the parties to constructively resume direct negotiations
in January without preconditions. Such negotiations
would be a step in the right direction. We also reiterate
our support for the work of the Special Envoy. Only
through a political solution can the crisis in Yemen
come to a sustainable end, thereby making it possible to
address the institutional, economic, humanitarian and
security challenges faced by the country. With regard
to the latter, we must not lose sight of the threat posed
by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula.

Given that this will probably be our last opportunity
to refer to the matter within the context of our two-year
tenure as a member of the Council, we wish to note how
deeply moved we are by the conflict in Yemen, having
seen first-hand the disappointment of the dreams of the
women and men who in 2011 aspired to build a better
country. We hope that we have contributed, through
our actions in the Council, to ensuring due respect for
the humanitarian needs and protection of the civilian
population affected by the conflict, including children,
and we call on the Council to continue to work towards
the implementation of resolution 1612 (2005) and
subsequent relevant resolutions, and well as towards
the eradication of the use and recruitment of children
in Yemen.

We hope that the international community will not
fail the Yemeni people and that it will support them in
creating the conditions that will help them establish a
stable, tolerant, inclusive and democratic system.

