Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for the opportunity to make a further
statement concerning the unfounded allegation made
against my country by the representative of Azerbaijan.

I would like to inform the Council that Azerbaijan
has turned Armenia-phobia into State propaganda at
a level that is beyond dangerous. That is not only our
assessment; the alarm has also been sounded by the
United Nations, other intergovernmental institutions
and Member States.

By denying and destroying all that is Armenia,
Azerbaijani representatives persistently continue to
disseminate propaganda and false accusations, even in
this very Council Chamber.

Let me draw the kind attention of the Council to just
one appalling example of how Azerbaijan understands
and implements the concept of the rule of law, the very
subject of today's discussion. On 19 February 2004,
exactly 10 years ago today, an Armenian participant
in a NATO-sponsored Partnership for Peace training
programme in Hungary, Lieutenant Gurgen Margaryan,
was axed to death by his fellow Azerbaijani participant,
Lieutenant Ramil Safarov. The 26-year-old Armenian
army lieutenant was hacked to death while asleep in
his dormitory room. Safarov stabbed Margaryan 16
times with an axe, almost decapitating him. Following
the murder, he walked over to another Armenian
officer's room, hoping to commit a second murder, but,
fortunately, found the door locked. Safarov expressed
not even a hint of remorse after being sentenced in
Hungary to life in prison.

Eight years later, in September 2012, the whole
civilized world was appalled to learn that Safarov
had been transferred to Azerbaijan and freed upon
his arrival in Baku, Azerbaijan's capital. Moreover, in
Baku he received a full pardon and eight years' salary
compensation. He was granted an apartment, promoted
to the rank of major, glorified and received a hero's
welcome from President Aliyev of Azerbaijan.

That treatment of a cold-blooded killer and his
pardoning contradicts not only international human
rights instruments but also the Azerbaijan criminal
code, which stipulates that a prisoner serving a life
sentence cannot be freed before serving at least 15 years.
This is a manifestation of how Azerbaijan treats a
convicted murder who carried out a brutal hate crime,
a crime committed against an unarmed Armenian.
It is an appalling demonstration of the Azerbaijani
Government's failure to uphold the rule of law.

We expect that the United Nations and its Member
States will continue to voice their concern and react
to this atrocious development in our part of the world,
which has already undermined respect for justice,
human rights and human dignity and endangers regional
peace and security.

In conclusion, we call upon Azerbaijani
representatives to simply try to establish a tone in this
Chamber that is based a little bit more on reciprocity and
mutual understanding. Armenia pursues an approach
of dialogue, negotiation and mutual compromise. We
strongly reject the language of force, threats and hatred.

