Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the convening of today's meeting and thanks Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his informative briefing.
We join the previous delegations in thanking him and
expressing our gratitude for the firm commitment and
passion he has shown as Special Envoy. We hope that
under Mr. De Mistura's leadership a representative
and much-desired constitutional committee will be
established before he retires as Special Envoy.

We welcome the participation of several member
countries of the contact group in today's debate. The
Government of my country believes that it is essential for
the Security Council and the international community
to listen carefully to the actors and countries involved
or directly or indirectly affected by these long years of
conflict.

On 18 September, Equatorial Guinea, along
with several other countries, applauded the signing
of the agreement between Russia and Turkey on the
establishment of a demilitarized zone in Idlib, which
has undoubtedly prevented a large-scale offensive
with catastrophic consequences for Syria and the
region, and has given a major boost to the ongoing
peace negotiations. We welcome the removal of heavy
weapons from the future demilitarized zone in time to
meet the deadline agreed in the agreement. However,
the most difficult task continues to be convincing the
jihadist groups to definitively abandon the area. We call
on all parties to the conflict not to weaken the agreement
and to accept the conditions agreed in Sochi. In order
to do that, they must refrain from armed provocations
and take the path towards a peaceful settlement of the
situation in the areas under their control.

Equatorial Guinea sees no alternative to the
political process in Syria. We will continue to insist on
the facilitation of the political process in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015). The demilitarization of
Idlib has changed the tone of efforts aimed at settling
the conflict, making it more political than military.
Indeed, since the signing of the agreement, there have
been fewer clashes between the Syrian army and armed
opposition groups, and that should enable the political
process to move forward.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
importance of making progress in the search for a
political settlement based on negotiations and of
establishing an intra-Syrian constitutional committee,
under the leadership of the Special Envoy, as soon as
possible. However, while we should always respect
the sovereignty and independence of the Syrian
people, priority should be given to the quality of the
composition of the constitutional committee so as to
make it impossible for external forces to impose plans
that have not been agreed to by the Syrian people or
their legitimate representatives, as has been stressed on
numerous occasions.

