I would like to thank you, Madam President, for the organization of this open debate, as well as the briefers with us today. In July last year, on the impulse of the Republic of Peru, the Security Council adopted resolution 2482 (2019) on the link between terrorism and organized crime by consensus, thereby acknowledging the importance of both phenomena, as well as their interconnection. Today, we must ensure that this resolution is fully and correctly put into practice. The concluding observations formulated by the Secretary-General in the report (S/2020/754) requested by this resolution constitute valuable guidance in our way forward. The links between terrorism and national and transnational organized crime are manifold and evolving and vary between regions. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic did not break those links, which instead adapted to this new framework, and can be, for example, increasingly witnessed online. Although many Member States have already adopted responses to address those linkages, both terrorism and organized crime continue to dangerously undermine the rule of law and human rights, and thereby exacerbate the threat posed by terrorism to international peace and security. Some measures adopted by Member States in their fight against terrorism and organized crime may have negatively impacted the respect of fundamental rights and the work of humanitarian actors on the ground. My country wants to recall the fundamental principles enshrined in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and to underline that respect for international humanitarian law, human rights and the rule of law must remain a top priority, everywhere and under all circumstances. It is even more the case in the framework of the COVID-19 pandemic. An efficient fight against terrorism and organized crime requires intense cooperation and coordination at the international, regional and national levels, as well as a global, whole-of-society approach. Strengthening the capacity of States is of key importance, and we wish to underline the central role played in this endeavour by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, as well as all other United Nations entities involved. Our efforts to fight terrorism and organized crime should increasingly benefit from the expertise of civil society organizations, the innovations of the private sector and the involvement of local communities, including the youth, women and girls. Belgium, like many other countries speaking today, has been harshly hit by terrorist attacks and violent extremism. Together with our European and United Nations partners, we will remain committed to efficiently addressing the linkages between terrorism and organized crime, as well as to cutting off the sources of terrorism financing in all its forms.
