Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. I also
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing. Brazil
appreciates the participation of Minister Riad Malki
and the contribution of the Permanent Representative
of Israel.

As this is the first open debate on this issue since the
historical adoption by the General Assembly of resolution
67/19, let me reiterate Brazil's great satisfaction at the
unequivocal support of the international community
for the Palestinian request for observer State status in
the United Nations. Brazil congratulates the people
and the Government of the State of Palestine on that
development, which we believe will reinforce the path
towards a negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
question.

As we begin another year, prospects for peace in the
Middle East seem to be growing increasingly remote.
The passing of time has only added new complexities
to the situation and intensified the need for diplomatic
efforts towards sustainable solutions for new and long-
standing challenges.

The international community is, unfortunately, still
failing to effectively assist with solutions to the most
important political problems affecting the region. The
Council would, in this regard, set a meaningful example
by displaying a stronger determination to seriously deal
with this issue through sustained, regular debate.

Throughout 2012, the window for a two-State
solution continued to narrow, and more people in Gaza,
Syria, Lebanon and southern Israel continued to suffer
the consequences of inaction.

The situation has been further aggravated by the
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. That illegal practice remains a serious
obstacle to peace in the region and to the realization
of the two-State solution. The construction of Israeli
settlements in the so-called E-l area and other recent
settlement construction in the Palestinian occupied
territory are of particular concern. Israel should
reconsider its decision. Such activity undermines the
prospects for a two-State solution, is illegal under
international law and constitutes a major obstacle to
peace. Not only must Israeli settlement construction be
completely frozen; settlements must be dismantled and
the occupation must end.

Progress is urgently needed in 2013. The
international community has long been in possession of
the blueprint for the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The essential missing element is the political
resolve to apply it through a reliable process.

Brazil reiterates its call on the Security Council to
fully carry out its responsibilities. The promotion of
peace in the Middle East is in the interest of all members
of the United Nations and cannot be delegated to third
parties. As stated previously by my Government, an
inoperative Quartet and a silent Security Council do
not serve the interests of peace in the Middle East.

The recent conflict in Gaza was yet another
reminder of the human, political and material costs
of the indefinite protraction of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and of the paralysis of the peace process.

The Brazilian Government protests in the strongest
terms the destruction by Israeli forces, during the most
recent conflict in Gaza, of the Al Sikka bridge serving
the inhabitants of Moghraqa, Wadi Gaza village,
Buriej and Nuseirat, which had recently been rebuilt
by the United Nations Development Programme with
Brazilian funds. It is simply unacceptable that the
civilian population should pay the price.

It is positive that the ceasefire agreed upon by
the parties was upheld. Human life must be equally
protected, be it in Gaza City or in Sderot. A sustainable
solution for this issue involves the repudiation of
violence and extremism by all actors, Palestinian
reconciliation, the end of the Gaza blockade and the
resumption of the peace process.

Concerning Syria, we are appalled by the current
level of violence against civilians. We have strongly
condemned the attack at Aleppo University. Brazil
reiterates the need for an independent investigation to
identify those responsible for that act and bring them
to justice. We are also concerned by the situation of
Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries. Brazil has
contributed to the activities of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Lebanon,
Jordan and Turkey in order to diminish their suffering.

Violence in Syria compromises the future of the
country, yet both the Government and the opposition
continue to disregard the imperative for a negotiated
solution and to wrongly believe that they can prevail
by military means. The primary responsibility for the
cessation of violence certainly lies with the Syrian
Government, but we are also aware of the responsibilities
of the armed opposition groups and of the presence of
radical elements among the rebels.

All parties must fulfil their obligations to halt
violence and respect international humanitarian law, as
well as actively engage in finding a peaceful solution to
the conflict. The international consensus is that there
is no military solution to the conflict. The only path
forward is through an inclusive Syrian-led political
process.

At the present juncture, support for the work of
the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, is even
more important. Brazil calls on all actors, including
the Security Council, to redouble their efforts to
find a multilaterally agreed solution to the crisis, as
provided for in the final communique of the Action
Group for Syria (S/2012/522, annex), which retains its
relevance today as a consensus document. Efforts must
concentrate on the need to end bloodshed immediately,
to promote stability and to help the parties to negotiate
in good faith.

