Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to join previous speakers in thanking the
delegation of Viet Nam for its initiative to convene this
debate, as well as for the preparation of the document
previously circulated as a contribution to the
discussion. I would also like to congratulate the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Viet
Nam, Mr. Pham Gia Khiem, for his work leading the
morning's portion of this meeting.

I also thank Ms. Coomaraswamy, Ms. Veneman,
Ms. Hunt and Mr. Mulet for their informative
presentations

The open debate format for the briefing on the
annual report of the Chairman of the Working Group of
the Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict
is very appropriate. It provides an opportunity to
express points of view concerning the Group's work
and its contributions to the Security Council and other
organs of the United Nations system.

The protection of children and the promotion of
their rights are priorities for my country. Colombia has
ratified the international instruments aimed at putting
an end to the recruitment of minors. Moreover, our
legislation establishes obligations for protection
against the illicit recruitment of children and
adolescents. We therefore support all efforts that
contribute to that end.

The Security Council Working Group has adopted
important guidelines for its work, including the terms
of reference and the tool kit. My delegation wishes to
stress the importance of the guides and modalities
continuing to be implemented in accordance with
resolution 1612 (2005).

The Security Council established essential
principles for the implementation of that resolution.
One is the priority that it assigns to situations on the
agenda of the Security Council and the differentiated
treatment given to situations included in annex II of the
report of the Secretary-General. A second aspect is its
recognition of the primary role of national
Governments in the protection of children affected by
conflicts, as well as the duty of United Nations entities
to cooperate with Governments. The Council also
established the principles that govern the management
of information in the implementation of the resolution.
In addition to being objective, accurate and reliable,
information should be thoroughly verified in close
consultation with the Governments concerned.

My delegation has taken note with interest of the
suggestions contained in the document circulated by
the presidency. Of particular interest is the suggested
approach on the protection of children, both from a
human rights perspective and with a focus on
development issues.

My country's commitment to fully guarantee the
rights of children - and of all our citizens - is part of
a three-pillar Government agenda: security based on
democracy; investment based on social responsibility;
and social cohesion based on prosperity and freedom.

Our democratic security policy, which has made
it possible to restore security on our territory while
guaranteeing the viability of democracy and the
strengthening of the legitimacy of the rule of law, is a
fundamental basis for strengthening the programmes to
prevent the forcible recruitment of children and
adolescents and to enhance the protection of children
affected by the actions of illegal armed groups. We
have arrived at this stage by restoring the State
monopoly on the legitimate use of force in order to
confront these groups. Our citizens have placed their
trust in these policies, which has made it possible to
continue this process in a sustained manner, by
building investment and social cohesion.

The elements of the Colombian State's strategy
on children and armed conflict include the prevention
of recruitment, along with protection, rehabilitation
and reintegration. Since 1999 the Colombian Institute
for Family Welfare has provided assistance to more
than 3,600 children and adolescents who have been
taken away from illegal armed groups. The national
budget resources for this programme for the period
2002-2007 were over $14 million.

The Colombian Institute for Family Welfare
promotes concrete action at the regional level to assist
and protect children and adolescents, for inclusion
within the development plans established by the offices
of mayors and governors.

The Office of the Counsellor for Women's
Equality has integrated the gender perspective in the
public policy implemented by the Office of the High
Counsellor for Social Reintegration, aiming at
providing solutions for the impact of recruitment on
children separated from illegal groups. Through this
focus on social integration, children and adolescents
are supported in regaining self-esteem, participation,
education, income generation, restored family ties and
health.
As programmes are implemented, they generate
the need to make further efforts at coordination and
allocation of resources, especially in the field of
training and education of human resources.
International cooperation can play a significant role to
complement those efforts.

In addition, since the establishment in December
of our Intersectoral Commission for the Prevention of
the Recruitment and Use of Children, Adolescents and
Young Persons, an important diagnostic and
awareness-raising effort has been under way at the
institutional level. Several factors that fuel the problem
have been effectively neutralized. This has entailed an
enormous challenge to the country.

From that perspective, I would like to reiterate
once again the resolute will of the Government of
Colombia to continue to advance in the protection of
children affected by the actions of illegal armed
groups, to strengthen the policies of prevention in this
area and to channel international cooperation efforts to
that end.

