Mr. Fedotov: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
growing threat of transnational organized crime at sea.

Two thirds of the world's surface is ocean, nearly
all of it beyond any State's territorial waters and largely
not subject to a single State's criminaljurisdiction. The
high seas are open for vessels of all countries, both
coastal and landlocked, to support international trade
and economic cooperation, contact among peoples
and the responsible use of natural resources. However,
in recent years the freedom of navigation has been
exploited by criminal groups. Transnational maritime
crime is increasingly sophisticated, and it is expanding
both in terms of size and types of criminal activities.

Even as I speak, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has staff in the field
working with Member States to counter the smuggling
of migrants and terrorist materials and attacks on
shipping in the Gulf of Aden; cocaine trafficking in
the Atlantic; heroin trafficking in the Indian Ocean;
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea;
kidnap for ransom in the Sulu and Celebes Seas;
illegal fishing in the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific
oceans; and migrant smuggling in the Mediterranean.
Those crimes pose an immediate danger to people's
lives and safety, undermine human rights, hinder
sustainable development and, as the Council has
recognized, threaten international peace and security.
I am therefore grateful to the presidency of Equatorial
Guinea for bringing this global issue to the Council to
strengthen international responses and protect our seas
from criminals.

We have a solid international legal framework
in place to tackle transnational maritime crime. The
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
settled nearly 40 years ago, addresses only piracy in
detail. But global action is reinforced by the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its protocols, as well as by the 1988
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, the
1988 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, the global
counter-terrorism instruments, and more. That is the
basis for the technical assistance and capacity-building
that UNODC provides through its country, regional and
global programmes.

By its very nature, maritime crime involves
vessels, cargoes, crews, victims and illicit money flows
from many regions. UNODC's Global Maritime Crime
Programme operates out of Colombo, which puts our
experts close to some of the world's busiest shipping
routes. I believe that its annual report, which we just
published, could be of interest to the Council, as it
contains detailed information on, and analysis of, our
activities in different parts of the world. Our methods,
based on long-term mentoring and hands-on training,
are innovative, efficient and effective and include work
at sea as well as in coast guard offices, courtrooms
and prisons. Our work on maritime crime grew out of
our successful counter-piracy programme off the coast
of Somalia.

UNODC continues to support trials in Kenya
and Seychelles, as well as the humane and secure
imprisonment of convicted pirates. In that regard, I am
pleased to report that we have completed the first phase
of the Mogadishu Prison and Court Complex, which
will be handed over shortly to the Somali Government
and will provide a secure environment for trying those
suspected of maritime crime and terrorism.

We implement those activities with European
Union naval forces and other international naval forces,
including INTERPOL, the International Maritime
Organization and partners in the commercial maritime
sector. We have further advanced that model of public-
private cooperation through the Indian Ocean Forum
on Maritime Crime, which coordinates the response to
heroin and charcoal smuggling that is funding terrorist
groups, and the Contact Group on Maritime Crime
in the Sulu and Celebes Seas. UNODC also supports
interregional cooperation against criminal activities
at sea through the so-called Yaounde maritime
security architecture.

Moreover, we are working to secure the container
trade supply chain through another global programme,
the joint UNODC-World Customs Organization
Container Control Programme, as well as through our
programmes to counter terrorism, human trafficking
and migrant smuggling, wildlife and fisheries crime,
firearms trafficking and emerging crimes. All our work
at sea - where jurisdiction is complex, crime is often
committed unseen and enforcement is difficult - builds
on UNODC's long experience and research expertise
in addressing all forms of organized crime, terrorism
and corruption.

Going forward, we would welcome the Council's
support in, first, urging all Member States to facilitate
mutual legal assistance and other forms of cooperation
to address the expansion of transnational organized
crime at sea, through the ratification and effective use
of the international legal framework; and, secondly,
encouraging Member States to enhance technical
assistance so we can continue operationalizing
cooperation through platforms such as the Indian
Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime and through the
exchange of liaison magistrates and regional networks
of prosecutors and central authorities. Such action can
help to ensure that those responsible - the criminal
kingpins - are brought to justice.
Finally, we would welcome the Council's continued
engagement with this topic, including by encouraging
discussion to identify options for enhancing
coordination, as well as recommendations to better
prevent and counter transnational maritime crime.
UNODC is here to support the Council.

