Mr. De Las Ovalles Colmenares (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
join in the expressions of distress and condolences on
the earthquake suffered by the fraternal People's
Republic of China.

We wish also to thank you, Sir, for the manner in
which you have presided over the work of the Security
Council and to congratulate you on having convened
this debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under your
presidency.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier today by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is
convinced of the need for a final, lasting, negotiated
solution that will put an end to violence in the region
without undermining the rights of peoples including
their free and legitimate right to protect their
sovereignty. This conflict poses a threat to international
peace, and we therefore support initiatives that
promote possible talks. To that end it is important to
build mutual trust, within the framework of the Road
Map, which has a most relevant role to play.

But the Government of Israel must put an end to
its settlement policies and accept East Jerusalem as the
Palestinian capital.

My Government firmly supports the Palestinian
Authority State-building programme. Here, we are
against the closures in Gaza and of other border
crossings, because they are a violation of international
humanitarian law. It is striking that, although on the
one hand the Government of Israel has advocated a
two-State solution, on the other it announces the
construction of homes on Palestinian territory for the
Israeli occupiers. In clear violation of international
humanitarian law, Israel has engaged in the
persecution, detention and deportation of any
Palestinian residing in the West Bank. Also, no less than
70,000 Palestinians in the Gaza Strip are now at risk of
being separated from their families, their land, their
livelihood and their social milieu.

On 24 March, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
addressing the Security Council (see S/PV.6292),
stressed that almost all recent disturbances between
Israelis and Palestinians have taken place in areas
where Israeli forces are present in Palestinian-
populated areas. I should make it clear too that the
Prime Minister of Israel has ignored the requests of the
United Nations and the international community to
freeze settlement activity. The closure of Gaza
continues to be an unacceptable and inhumane
situation that must be rectified immediately. We also
support President Mahmoud Abbas's demand that
Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem be reopened.
The impediments placed in the way of Palestinians in
using their land to build homes and engage in
agriculture constitute an attack on economic
development, which results in a deteriorating situation
that poses an ongoing threat to the establishment of a
Palestinian State.

The repeated violations, acts of aggression and
other Israeli activities against Lebanon also constitute
an obvious destabilization policy by Israel in the
region. The permanent violation of air space, territory
and the territorial waters of Lebanon, as described by
the Permanent Representative of Lebanon on 3 March,
confirm that these new and continued threats are
clearly non-compliant with resolution 1701 (2006).
Similarly, we support the Government of Syria in its
demand for compliance with resolution 497 (1981) on
the Syrian Golan Heights.

International law prevents Israel from invoking
conquest and colonization, and to a lesser extent,
natural growth to the detriment of neighbouring
peoples. The expulsion of the Palestinian people from
their own lands is completely inexcusable and
constitutes a violation, unparalleled by any episode of
modern history, of the most basic principle of
humanitarian law. Our Government has, in this context,
insisted on the need to consider Chapter II, in
particular Articles 5 and 6, of the United Nations
Charter.

The Israeli Government has for some time now
acted outside the principles of the United Nations and
international law and cannot expect to develop its new
concept of so-called natural growth with impunity.

Finally, the Palestinian people should, in all
fairness, be recognized for their courage in the face of
adversity and the double standards of the international
community.

