Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): As I
an taking the floor on behalf of the Human Security
Network, I will deliver my statement in English and
thank you, Sir, for your understanding.

(spoke in English)

It is my honour to speak on behalf of the Human
Security Network, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica,
Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia,
Switzerland and Thailand, and South Africa as an
observer.

We would like to thank the French presidency of
the Security Council for having organized this
important debate. We would also like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
and Head of the New York Office of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their presentations today.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
priority of the Human Security Network. We highly
value the continued attention that the Security Council
is giving to that important issue. The holding of
informal consultations of the Security Council on
protection issues last February was a welcome step to
address the three pillars of the protection
architecture - namely, the protection of civilians,
children and armed conflict, and women and peace and
security - in a comprehensive and coherent manner.

Significant progress has been made in recent
years in the normative and institutional framework
with the adoption of important resolutions, most
recently resolution 1960 (2010), which established a
monitoring, analysis and reporting mechanism on
conflict-related sexual violence. However, emphasis
must now be placed on progress in enhancing
protection on the ground. The worrying recent increase
in the number of conflict situations, in particular in
countries in North Africa and the Middle East, leaves
no doubt that we need to strengthen our efforts so as to
protect civilians from the impact of armed conflict and
from becoming targets of attacks. We are deeply
concerned by the use of force against civilians and by
ongoing violations of international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law.

The Security Council should strongly,
systematically, consistently and promptly respond to
serious violations of international law concerning
civilian populations in all situations and without
distinction, as it has done with the adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011) in response to events in the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, and of resolution 1975
(2011), reinforcing the protection mandate of the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire.

The Human Security Network would like to
reiterate the importance of appropriate and determined
action by the Security Council to stop and prevent
further violations of international law. The recently
updated aide-memoire on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (see S/PRST/2010/25, annex) serves as
a useful tool in that regard.

We also believe that such initiatives as the so-
called horizon-scanning briefings of the Secretariat, if
held at regular intervals, can be a useful means to
enhance the Council's capacity to prevent violations
and should be continued. The systematic monitoring of
situations of armed conflict, as well as the inclusion of
detailed information relating to the protection of
civilians in country-specific reports of the Secretary-
General, is also important. We welcome the fact that
the Secretariat is currently developing guidance in that
regard.

The Human Security Network advocates a
people-centred, holistic approach to security. That
includes a focus not only on the protection of civilians
once a conflict situation occurs, but also on prevention
in a broader sense. In our view, peace and security,
development and human rights are indivisible and
interdependent. Therefore, human security threats and
vulnerabilities, such as the lack of development,
poverty, inequality or human rights violations, have to
be addressed in a comprehensive and integrated way.
The active empowerment of the individual, especially
of those that are most vulnerable, is an effective
protection strategy.

All parties to an armed conflict must respect
obligations under international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law. Recent events have once again
highlighted how humanitarian assistance is crucial in
times of conflict. The Human Security Network
condemns all attacks on humanitarian workers. All
parties to conflict bear the responsibility of allowing
and facilitating access for the delivery of such
assistance.

In addition to enhancing compliance with
international law and strengthening national protection
capacities, we recognize the major role of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the majority of
which are mandated with protection-related tasks, in
the protection of civilians, including in the area of
prevention. Peacekeepers cannot stand by when
civilians are attacked. The international community, in
close coordination with troop-contributing countries,
must ensure that peacekeeping operations are provided
with the necessary resources and capabilities, as well
as with operational guidance, to implement their
protection tasks effectively. Force commanders have
the responsibility to develop comprehensive and
effective strategies for the protection of civilians, and
to ensure that they are implemented vigorously.

The Human Security Network welcomes the
progress made over the past months by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in the development of a set
of important tools enabling peacekeeping operations to
carry out protection mandates in a coordinated,
coherent and proactive manner. The strategic
framework for protection of civilians strategies will
provide guidance to missions in this area and will help
to further clarify the roles and responsibilities of all
relevant actors. The resource and capability matrix will
assist both in planning missions with protection
mandates and in drafting protection strategies. Finally,
the envisaged protection of civilians training modules
will ensure that peacekeepers are adequately prepared
for implementing protection activities on the ground.

We also encourage the members of the Security
Council to continue to make regular use of the informal
Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians, which
provides, inter alia, valuable input to the revision of the
mandates of peacekeeping missions involving
protection tasks.

Respect for and implementation of international
humanitarian and human rights law are inextricably
linked with ensuring accountability and the fight
against impunity. The importance of ending impunity
for criminal violations of applicable international
humanitarian and human rights law should be seen as
part of a comprehensive approach to seeking
sustainable peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation. We welcome in this respect resolution
1894 (2009), which draws attention to the full range of
justice and reconciliation mechanisms to be
considered, including national, international and mixed
criminal courts and tribunals, and truth and
reconciliation commissions, as well as national
reparation programmes for victims and institutional
reforms. In this regard, we support the important and
complementary role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and welcome the Security Council's recent
consensual decision to refer the situation in the Libyan
Arab J amahiriya to the Prosecutor of the ICC.

In situations where there are serious allegations
of violations of international law and significant
civilian casualties, Governments are obliged to conduct
effective investigations and prosecutions. Where this is
not done, independent international accountability
mechanisms should be established. We welcome in this
regard the proposals for enhancing accountability
contained in the Secretary-General's most recent report
on the protection of civilians (S/2010/579), such as the
possibility of mandating commissions of inquiry to
examine situations where concerns exist about serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law.

(spoke in French)

I would now like to share a few observations in
my national capacity.

Switzerland welcomes the assertive manner in
which the Council has worked to address situations of
concern in recent months. In particular, I would like to
underline the importance of timely and concerted
action by the Council, using the whole range of tools
that the international community can apply in the case
of widespread violence against civilians. This includes,
in particular, applying deterrent measures such as asset
freezes, travel bans and early ICC referrals.

The Council needs to ensure that its actions to
protect civilians are coherent and non-selective in
order to ensure its political sustainability in the long
term. Switzerland therefore urges the Council to devote
more attention to situations that are not formally on its
agenda, as recommended in paragraphs 102 and 103 of
the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians of November 2010.

The momentum created by recent decisions of the
Council may be lost if situations that are just as
important as those in Libya and Cote d'Ivoire are not
addressed. Failure to do so may lead to the perception
of the whole concept of the protection of civilians as
purely utilitarian, further endangering civilians and
those charged with protecting them on the ground.

Among the various situations that would merit
the Council's attention, Switzerland is very concerned
about threats to civilians in Syria and firmly condemns
the human rights violations that have been committed
there. We are concerned by the behaviour of the
security forces towards non-violent protesters and
civilians who are not participating in protests.

We must also ensure that the most visible
situations do not cause us to lose sight of other, long-
term protection tasks. Humanitarian access remains
difficult in many instances, including in regions that
are not usually at the centre of the Council's attention.

Switzerland welcomes the fact that the United
Nations in general and the Security Council in

particular are addressing another aspect of the
protection of civilians more systematically, namely, the
duty to investigate allegations of violations of
international humanitarian law or human rights and to
hold their alleged perpetrators accountable. The recent
referrals of situations to the ICC are striking examples
of this positive trend. In this regard, Switzerland would
also like to stress the importance of the report of the
Panel of Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka
mandated by the Secretary-General.

