Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela congratulates Sweden on
the convening of today's open debate, while welcoming
today's adoption of resolution 2427 (2018). We would
also like to thank Special Representative Virginia
Gamba and UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore
for their briefings, as well as Ms. Yenny Londoflo for
her testimony, and express our appreciation for their
efforts to promote and protect the rights of children
affected by armed conflict.

The concept note prepared for today's debate
(S/2018/625, annex) begins by citing Graca Machel's
1996 report (see A/51/306), in which she stated that
the most effective way to protect children is to prevent
armed conflict. Venezuela fully concurs with this
proposition. We believe that the best strategy to protect
children from participating in and the consequences
of war is to prevent and resolve conflict situations
through a comprehensive approach to their structural
causes. It is a fact that in many cases the socioeconomic
vulnerability, ethnic and religious intolerance,
discrimination and the exclusion of children as a
result of war facilitate their participation in hostilities
and accentuate the harmful impact of armed conflict
on them.

That is why it is essential to prevent the use and
recruitment of children in armed conflict and to ensure
their protection and rights in such situations, thereby
overcoming the vicious cycle of violence. In addition,
another fundamental factor in the prevention of
armed conflicts is the cessation of all foreign military
intervention and induced wars, as well as the end of
destabilizations of entire societies for geopolitical
and economic purposes, the transfer of arms, the
financing and training of extremist and terrorist groups
and the provision of shelter to them. Accordingly, we
urge all States to act in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the provisions of international
instruments and the resolutions of both the Security
Council and the General Assembly.

It is tragic and ethically unacceptable that year after
year we continue to read in the reports on the subject
before us that serious difficulties persist in protecting
children affected by armed conflict who "continue to
be disproportionately affected by war" (S/2018/465, para. 5), and that in many of these cases the situation
of violations of children's rights have worsened, as
reflected in the report before the Council today by its
statement that

"[i]n 2017, there was a large increase in the number
of violations compared with the number reported
for 2016" (ibia').

Venezuela reiterates its categorical opposition to,
and condemnation of, all violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
against children in armed conflict, and calls on all
parties to conflict to comply with their obligations
under international law. Likewise, it must be a moral
imperative for the United Nations to act consistently
when we talk about actions to protect children in armed
conflict. The practice of double standards in these areas
only undermines international efforts for the protection
of children.

In that regard, we call for the full application
of international justice to crimes and violations
committed against Palestinian children in the wake
of the multiple acts of aggression that the occupying
Power has imposed on their country. It is observed with
shame when some countries call for the perpetrators
of violations against children in armed conflict to be
brought to justice, yet when Palestinian children are
the subject they remain silent. It is also necessary to
continue to support disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, including the deployment
of capacities specifically dedicated to child protection,
which are being carried out in countries within the
framework of the peacebuilding architecture, as they
are a key factor in an effective and sustainable transition
from war to peace.

In conclusion, Venezuela wishes to reiterate that
the protection of children affected by situations of
armed conflict must be a fundamental premise for all
States Members ofthe United Nations, as well as for the
entire United Nations system, at all stages ofa conflict.
Accordingly, we will continue to be committed to
providing our strong support and assistance to efforts
that, in accordance with international law, help and
protect children as an urgent ethical commitment.

