Mr. Feltman: On 25 May, according to reports,
slightly more than 60 per cent of Ukraine's eligible
voters cast a ballot in the country's early presidential
elections. An unprecedented number of national and
international monitors observed the polls and concluded
in statements that the election, to quote one statement,

"was characterized by high voter turnout and the
clear resolve of the authorities to hold what was a
genuine election largely in line with international
commitments and with a respect for fundamental
freedoms in the vast majority of the country. This
was despite the hostile security environment in two
eastern regions".

At the same time, the numbers across Ukraine
varied considerably, even in areas under full
Government control, with lower participation in Odessa
and elsewhere in southern Ukraine. In parts of eastern
Ukraine, eligible voters were denied their right to vote
due to the seizure or blocking of polling stations, the
destruction of electoral equipment, intimidation and
violence. The United Nations is deeply concerned by
the actions of those who have attempted to derail the
elections and prevent citizens from having a say in their
country's leadership.

According to preliminary results, Mr. Petro
Poroshenko won in the first round, obtaining 55 per
cent of the vote. This morning, the Secretary-General
spoke over the phone to congratulate the President-elect
on having received a strong mandate from the people,
who expect him to move quickly to steer the country
away from political, economic and social instability
and towards security, greater prosperity and genuine
democratic governance. The Secretary-General
welcomed President-elect Poroshenko's stated intention
to engage immediately in dialogue and de-escalation.
He affirmed that exercising restraint and reaching out
to eastern Ukraine was critical.

Despite what we at the United Nations hope will be
the beginning of a new chapter for Ukraine, violence
rages on in parts of the east, causing loss of life and
injuries. Since the last Security Council consultations
on the issue, held on 21 May, both Luhansk and
Donetsk oblasts experienced a dramatic increase in
deadly fighting. As a result, the numbers of casualties
and wounded continue to increase on both sides, with
civilian causalities reported as well. While we are
unable to confirm the details, the Secretary-General
is concerned by reports of scores of casualties; by
suggestions regarding the circulation and use of heavier
weaponry in the east; and by allegations of arms,
fighters and trucks entering Ukraine.

On 22 May, dozens of Ukrainian servicemen were
killed and many others wounded in an ambush by
unknown armed persons at a military checkpoint in the
city of Volnovakha.

On 26 May, fierce fighting ensued between
Government forces and armed groups when armed
militia stormed and attempted to seize control of
the Donetsk international airport. Ukrainian forces,
after conducting an air and land operation, are now
reportedly back in control of the airport, but sporadic
fighting continues close to the airport.

We are aware of video footage purporting to show
a United Nations-marked helicopter allegedly being
used inside Ukraine. The United Nations is unable
to determine the veracity of the images. I would note
that the Ukrainian authorities have affirmed to the
United Nations that no helicopters with United Nations
markings are being used in operations being conducted
inside Ukraine. We recall that it is the responsibility of
all troop-contributing countries that provide contingent-
owned equipment to peacekeeping missions to remove
all logos and signage bearing the United Nations name
once such equipment has been repatriated to the home
country or is no longer used for official United Nations
purposes.

In a deeply disturbing and alarming development,
following the capture of four Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) monitors on
26 May, today the OSCE headquarters in Kyiv lost
contact over several hours with an additional 11 OSCE
monitors, who were assumed to have been captured or
held by an armed group in Donetsk oblast. Following
my phone conversation earlier today with him, the
head of the OSCE monitoring mission, Ambassador
Apakan, just informed me that the 11 monitors have
been released in Donetsk. There is still no news of the
four monitors who have been held for the past two days.
The Secretary-General is appalled that international
staff have again been put in such grave danger. He
calls for their immediate release and appeals to all with
influence to assist.

The Secretary-General remains committed to
helping find a peaceful resolution to the crisis in
Ukraine and to assisting the country in prevailing over
the many difficult challenges that lie ahead. In that
vein, he appeals to the international community to use
the outcome of the elections as an opportunity to unite
in support of a peaceful, stable, prosperous and united
Ukraine.

