Mr. Du Xiaocong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for convening
today's open debate on the situation in Somalia. We
welcome Mr. Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime Minister of
Somalia. I thank Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing. I also thank Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, for his
statement.

Since the last briefing by Mr. Ould Abdallah to
the Security Council, there has been no noticeable
improvement in the situation in Somalia. The security
situation there does not allow for optimism, the
humanitarian crisis is worsening, and the political
negotiation process has been difficult and slow. Pirate
activities remain rampant. The situation in Somalia has
thus become a serious threat to security and peace in
the Horn of Africa and to international peace and
security.

It is the view of the Chinese Government that the
ultimate solution to the question of Somalia lies in the
cessation of armed conflict among various factions, the
settlement of political differences, and the achievement
of national reconciliation and reconstruction. China
supports the Djibouti Agreement and welcomes the
agreement recently signed between the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the Ahlu Sunna Wal
Jama'a. It is our sincere hope that the political parties
in Somalia will act in the interest of the State and the
nation by laying down their arms, seeking common
ground and participating in the political negotiation
process. We call on all the concerned parties, including
countries of the region, to cooperate in earnest, respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia,
offer support to the TFG, and advance the domestic
political process of reconciliation so that substantive
progress can be achieved as soon as possible.

China condemns all attacks on the TFG, the
civilians of Somalia and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). We highly appreciate AMISOM's
work to improve the security situation in Somalia in
circumstances of extreme difficulty and danger. We
also recognize the contribution of such troop-
contributing countries as Uganda and Burundi. We
believe that the United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, should play an even greater role
in seeking a solution to the question of Somalia. We
support the idea that the United Nations should
maintain its assistance to AMISOM. We also support
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia as soon as conditions permit.

The peace process in Somalia requires the
unflagging attention and support of the international
community. We welcome the upcoming Istanbul
Conference on Somalia. We hope that greater common
understanding can be reached at the Conference on an
appropriate solution to the question of Somalia.

To conclude, I would like to thank Special
Representative Ould Abdallah for his tireless efforts
and hard work in promoting peace in Somalia in recent
years. Every time he comes to the Council for a
briefing, he reminds us of the urgency of finding a
solution to the question of Somalia, which, in the
current environment, has become particularly
egregious. I would therefore like to reiterate that the
Chinese Government is ready to make its own
contribution to finding a solution to the question of
Somalia. We shall continue to support Mr. Ould
Abdallah's work.

