The President (interpretation from Chinese): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone to the United Nations, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dabor (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1997/824, letter
dated 28 October 1997 from the Permanent Representative
of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council, transmitting the texts of the
communique and the six-month peace plan for Sierra Leone
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which were issued at the conclusion of the
meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the
ECOWAS Committee of Five with the delegation
representing Major Johnny Paul Koromah, held at Conakry
on 22 and 23 October 1997; and S/1997/886, letter dated 13
November 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Sierra Leone to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1132

(1997) of 8 October 1997 and the statements of its

President of 27 May 1997 (S/PRST/1997/29), 11 July
1997 (S/PRST/1997/36) and 6 August 1997
(S/PRST/1997/42) in response to the military coup
in Sierra Leone on 25 May 1997. It reiterates its
condemnation of the overthrow of the democratically
elected Government of President Ahmad Tejan
Kabbah, and its concern about the threat to peace,
security and stability in the region which the
situation in Sierra Leone continues to present.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
and appreciation for the continued efforts of the
Committee of Five on Sierra Leone of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
seek a peaceful settlement of the crisis and the
restoration of the democratically elected Government
and constitutional order. In this regard, it welcomes
the peace plan agreed in Conakry on 23 October
1997 between the ECOWAS Committee and
representatives of the junta as set out in the
documents issued after the meeting (S/1997/824, annexes I and II). It also notes with satisfaction
President Kabbah's acceptance of the peace plan in
his statement of 5 November 1997 (S/ 1997/886).

"The Security Council calls upon the junta to
fulfil its obligations under the peace plan, and in
particular the ongoing maintenance of the ceasefire.
It calls upon all parties concerned to work for the
early and effective implementation of the peace plan,
and encourages the ECOWAS Committee to
cooperate closely with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Sierra Leone.

"The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the briefing on the outcome of the
meeting in Conakry on 23 October 1997 provided to
its members in New York by representatives of the
ECOWAS Committee on 11 November 1997. It
expresses its readiness to consider how it can
support the implementation of the peace plan, and
looks forward to early recommendations from the
Secretary-General on the role the United Nations
could play to that end.

"The Security Council reiterates the need for
the provision and distribution of humanitarian
assistance in response to local needs, and calls upon
the junta to ensure its safe delivery to its intended
recipients. It urges all States and relevant
international organizations to continue to assist those
countries dealing with the influx of refugees caused
by the crisis in Sierra Leone.
 

"The Security Council reminds all States of their
obligation to comply strictly with the embargo on the
sale or supply of petroleum and petroleum products
and arms and related materiei of all types to Sierra
Leone, and with the other measures imposed by its
resolution 1132 (1997)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/52.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm,

