Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea): At the outset, my
delegation expresses its warm congratulations to you,
Sir, on your assumption of this month's presidency of
the Security Council, and we welcome the convening
of this open debate on counter-terrorism.

Today's meeting has special significance, as it
marks the completion of Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock's outstanding chairmanship of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). Undoubtedly, he has
played a central role in the fight against terrorism by
initiating, facilitating and enhancing our common
endeavours in a most effective and transparent manner.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of Korea,
I should like to express our deepest gratitude to him for
his dedication and service over the past years. I join
others in wishing him every success in the years to
come. My delegation's appreciation goes also to the
CTC team in the United Kingdom Mission as well as to
the independent experts and to the Secretariat staff for
their valuable efforts.

More than a year and a half has passed since the
Security Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001),
following the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks.
Since then, we have had to face painful reminders of
the dangers posed by terrorism, such as the attacks in
Bali, Moscow and Mombasa. However, with the
unabated will and commitment of the international
community under the guidance of the Security Council,
we are now less vulnerable and more capable than we
were in September 2001 with regard to coping with
terrorist challenges.

Recently, political momentum and practical ways
to combat terrorism were further strengthened in the 20
January ministerial meeting of the Security Council
and in the 6 March special meeting of the CTC with
regional, subregional and international organizations.
We believe that resolution 1456 (2003), adopted at the
ministerial meeting, was yet another milestone in the
strengthening of resolution 1373 (2001). We also value
the achievements of the special meeting of the CTC -
the first such occasion - in directing diverse activities
aimed at coordinated and unified actions.

In addition, given the close inter-linkages
between the work of the CTC and that of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999), my delegation welcomes the
Council's reaffirmation of the need for improved
coordination and increased exchange of information
between the two bodies, as set forth in resolution 1455
(2003).

Let me now turn to the CTC's new quarterly work
programme, covering the months of April through June
this year. While welcoming and fully supporting what
is envisaged in the programme, my delegation has a
few comments to make.

First, we believe that it was most timely and
appropriate for the CTC to have chosen the
improvement of information flow as a priority in the
coming months. With the fifth highest ratio of online
population in the world, the Republic of Korea fully
recognizes the importance of developing a global
information network in the field of counter-terrorism.
The current CTC web site is obviously the best source
of information available to us. However, given the
further need for sharing of best practices, codes and
standards between countries and among relevant
regional, subregional and international organizations,
we believe it is urgent that the CTC enhance its web
site as a first-resort, user-friendly and comprehensive
focal point for international counter-terrorism efforts.

Secondly, my delegation welcomes the
remarkable progress made in the CTC's review of
national reports submitted by Member States on their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
dedication of independent experts deserves much credit
in that regard. Having already submitted its first and
second reports in line with the CTC's time limits, the
Republic of Korea will shortly be submitting its third
report in response to the Committee's request.

Thirdly, as far as the CTC's cooperation with
regional, subregional and international organizations is
concerned, we believe that the outcome document, the
Chairman's remarks and the follow-up Action Plan of
the special meeting have clearly articulated the
measures and actions needed to enhance the counter-
terrorism capacity of relevant organizations.

For its part, the Republic of Korea has been
actively contributing to regional, subregional and
international efforts to fight terrorism. To mention a
few examples, we remain an energetic participant in
actions of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
Regional Forum (ARF) with regard to terrorism,
including in the most recent ARF-sponsored meeting
on counter-terrorism and transnational crime, held in
March 2003 in Malaysia. In addition, the Republic of
Korea, together with Australia, is playing a leading role
in the Asia-Pacific region's efforts to fight money-
laundering and terrorist financing. Furthermore, the
Korean Financial Intelligence Unit, as a member of the
Egmont Group, is taking a proactive part in the global
fight against money-laundering and other financial
crimes.

Fourthly, my delegation shares the sense of
urgency with regard to the need for the provision of
assistance and supports the CTC's facilitating role in
that field. We are considering various ways and means
to share our counter-terrorism experiences with other
countries in a more effective and beneficial manner.

Let me conclude my remarks by reaffirming the
Republic of Korea's firm commitment to fighting
terrorism and by expressing our full confidence in the
incoming Spanish chairmanship of the CTC, under
Ambassador Inocencio Arias, whose wisdom and
leadership are well known in our diplomatic
community.

