Mr. Haysom: I thank you for this opportunity to
share the perspectives of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on recent
developments in Afghanistan.

Since my most recent briefing to the Security
Council (see S/PV.7403), there has been progress in
meeting Afghanistan's challenges in three distinct but
interrelated areas: the economic, security and political
areas. Although such progress itself has been modest,
this should not be undervalued.

It needs to be stressed that Afghanistan continues
to be tested in meeting its benchmarks in all three areas.
There is no room for complacency. Failure in any one

of these areas would have consequences for the overall
success of the Afghan transition. It is absolutely clear
that Afghanistan continues to need the support of the
international community and the sustained attention of
the Council.

The economic contraction that followed the
withdrawal of international military forces presents a
continuing challenge to the Government to meet the
fiscal gap - that is, the gap between the resources it
can muster and the monies it must spend. Afghanistan
is meeting and exceeding admittedly modest revenue
targets. Nevertheless, Afghanistan is struggling
to harness the resources to meet its governance
commitments and its development priorities. At this
time of continued low economic growth, we must also
guard against the danger of an increasing shift into the
illicit economy, particularly so in the case ofburgeoning
narcotics production.

Afghanistan is meeting its security challenges, but
is nonetheless being increasingly tested. The Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) have been undeniably
stretched as they take on full security responsibilities.
We have seen an intensification of conflict across the
country, including in areas previously considered to
be safe. Only yesterday, there were fresh challenges
to Government security control in an area close to the
strategically important Kunduz City. Today, there was
a failed attack on Parliament as it was about to review
the nomination for Minister of Defence. While the
ANSF face operational challenges, their commitment is
beyond question, and they are demonstrating continued
resilience in the face of insurgent efforts to take and
hold ground.

Foreign fighters from Afghanistan's northern
neighbours and elsewhere present a particular
challenge. There also remains considerable concern
that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, referred
to in Afghanistan as "Daesh", is seeking to establish
a foothold. Addressing that shared threat demands
greater regional involvement and collaboration. It seems
inequitable that Afghanistan should be shouldering the
burden of taking on terrorists whose points of origin
and eventual destinations are its neighbours.

The determined outreach from Afghanistan to its
neighbours is encouraging. Stronger relations between
the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan are
particularly noteworthy, with growing recognition of
shared interests. Ultimately, deeper collaboration on
the full range of political, economic and social issues
will promote regional stability and prosperity.

The intensification of the conflict was predicted.
There has been higher attrition on both sides, but the
most tragic index of this intensification is the toll on
civilians - so far this year 4,216 civilians have been
killed or injured. Just two days ago, 16 civilians,
mostly women and children, were killed when a bus
hit an improvised explosive device. Sadly it was not an
isolated incident, but rather a typical event.

Such incidents take a terrible emotional, economic
and social toll on families, especially surviving
widows, often left in the most appalling economic
circumstances. Many other Afghans continue to be
affected by the conflict, including those who have been
displaced. Humanitarian assistance is often impeded by
the continued insecurity and, lamentably, humanitarian
actors have been targeted.

The United Nations will continue to provide
humanitarian support to those affected, and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
will work to increase levels of trauma care and meet
the short-term needs of the increasing number of those
internally displaced. UNAMA will also continue
to advocate with all parties, including the Taliban,
to strengthen measures to ensure the protection of
civilians.

On the political front, there has also been modest
progress. Since I last briefed the Council in March (see S/PV.7403), all the members of the Cabinet have been
appointed, even though one remains to be confirmed.
As of this morning, 21 provincial governors have been
appointed, and there has been agreement on other
significant appointments.

After long delays, the Government has committed
to appointing the electoral reform commission within a
week and to providing clarity on the electoral calendar
within a month. The term of office of the lower house
of the National Assembly, the Wolesi J irga, was due to
end today, without the election for the new members
having taken place. The lack of clarity on the future of
the current Wolesi Jirga had caused consternation, with
the potential for public discord. Fortunately, just three
days ago, President Ghani decreed an extension of the
Wolesi Jirga until elections can be held.

Despite political tensions, Afghan institutions were
able to work together to find solutions on sovereign
issues. The United Nations looks forward to a decision
on the date of the next elections, as well as action to
implement the commitment to electoral reform. Those
steps will go a long way towards reassuring Afghans
that the democratic institutions and processes are
able to fulfil their proper roles and to meet public
expectations.

The most difficult aspect of the national
unity Government partnership has been to effect
appointments. With those now largely now completed
and the Cabinet in place, we expect to see a more
effective functioning of the Government. Now is the
time for a surge in the delivery of public services, the
fulfilment of election promises and the implementation
of the reforms set out in London and promised in the
ministerial lOO-day action plans. The upcoming senior
officials meeting of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, coming in less than three months' time,
presents an opportunity to demonstrate real progress
on the mutual commitments of donors and Government
to supporting the Government's reforms.

In reference to the request by the Security Council
that the Secretary-General initiate an examination of the
role, structure and activities of all UnitedNations entities
in Afghanistan, I am pleased to say that we have now
agreed with the Government to establish a commission,
composed of representatives of the Government, the
international donor community, UNAMA and affiliated
agencies, funds and programmes, co-chaired by
UNAMA and the Government. The terms of reference
have been shared with the members of the commission,
which will commence its work shortly. We anticipate
having a report ready for the Council by the time of its
September meeting on Afghanistan.

Peace would have a major positive impact on the
capacity of the Government to address its economic,
security and political challenges. In the long term, peace
is not a luxury, it is a necessity. Unless Afghans can
find a way to live together in harmony, Afghanistan's
political and security institutions and its economy
simply may not be sustainable. Failure would have no
beneficiaries.

Despite the disturbing security trends, or perhaps
even as a consequence of them, there has been a renewed
interest in peace efforts to resolve the conflict. Last
March, I spoke ofa unique alignment of circumstances
that could be conducive to fostering peace talks.
Indeed, the essential ingredients for a peace process are
present: a protracted Violent conflict with little prospect
of a military Victory for either side combined with clear
signs of a growing interest in a peace process.

A conference hosted by the Government of Qatar
in early May reaffirmed the appetite for peace felt by
a wide range of Afghans, showing the potential for
progress to that end through dialogue. Since then, there
have been several similar meetings in various locations,
most recently in Oslo last week, which I attended.
Those events have confirmed that Afghans want an end
to the ever-present violence that does so much harm and
shows no signs of abating.

While the Government has repeatedly stated its
readiness to engage in direct talks with the Taliban,
what is still missing is a clear indication from the
Taliban that they are ready to engage directly with
the Government. Without that direct engagement, no
meaningful progress towards peace will be possible, a
point that I continue to stress in my conversations with
Taliban representatives. Conference pronouncements
have been useful in clarifying positions, but can never
provide a format for a systematic engagement between
empowered representatives on the conditions for, the
agenda of and the barriers to an enduring peace. In
short, a direct engagement is necessary for a negotiated
agreement.

With leadership, peace is within reach. However,
the intensification of the conflict is eroding the
atmosphere for constructive negotiations. Just as the
voices for peace are growing louder, so too are those
who believe that peace is neither possible nor desirable
or that the focus should be on war. It is thus critical
that the international community as a whole, and
the regional neighbours in particular, send the same
message to all involved, unambiguously and forcefully.
The time to begin direct peace and reconciliation talks
IS now.

UNAMA supports a direct engagement between
the armed groups and the Government, has attempted
to facilitate its realization and will continue to do so in
full consultation with the Government.

I would finally like to express my hope that, in the
holy month of Ramadan, Afghans will be able to come
together to worship in peace.

