Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation thanks you, Madam President,
for organizing this interactive debate on the item
entitled "Post-conflict national reconciliation: role of
the United Nations". With your permission, I shall take
this opportunity to convey the sincere congratulations
of Cote d'Ivoire to the new members of the Security
Council: Algeria, Benin, Brazil, the Philippines and
Romania. I also thank Mr. Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Ms. McAskie,
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Mr. Malloch Brown, Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme, for their
introductory statements, which shed a very instructive
light on the question on the agenda. Finally, Madam, in
response to the concern you expressed at the start of
the meeting, I shall limit myself to presenting a extract
from my statement, which will be distributed in its
entirety in the Chamber.

The Secretary-General noted in his report on the
causes of conflicts and the promotion of lasting peace
and development in Africa (S/1998/318) that the
current conflicts, in particular in Africa, are generally
internal. There are no less often a function of the
dynamic of a subregion and of the role that certain
African Governments play in supporting, sometimes
even instigating, conflicts in neighbouring countries. In
many cases, they even have important international
dimensions because external efforts to bolster or
undermine African Governments did not disappear at
the end of the cold war. The sources of conflict in
Africa reflect that diversity and complexity.

Hostilities come to an end when mediating
initiatives enable the parties to a conflict to agree on
provisional arrangements generally for sharing political
power, dividing up economic resources and dealing
with certain sociocultural concerns. We not that such
mediating initiatives meet with lasting success only
when the mediators demonstrate complete neutrality
throughout the negotiations on the peace agreement
and discredit any attacks on the established
constitutional order.

The role of the United Nations is important in this
critical phase in which the urgency of a ceasefire and
reaching a peace agreement leave the mediator open to
the always feared risk of being accused of partiality.
The United Nations, with patience and know-how, must
lead the preparations of the peace agreement without
making the parties concerned feel as though they were
being led by the nose or being placed under
supervision. At the same time, the Organization is
called upon to administer refugees and the displaced
and extend humanitarian assistance. Reconciliation,
begun by the negotiations, is pursued while adapting to
the circumstances. It becomes a long and laborious
process of peace-building and national reconciliation
which will see the prompt implementation of decisions
made at the end of the conflict in order to prevent a
renewal of hostilities, consolidate peace and undertake
economic recovery and lasting development.

Post-conflict national reconciliation is the great
challenge for the women and men of a country
emerging from conflict and remains an undertaking in
which the international community is both foreman and
labourer. Once a peace agreement has been reached,
such as the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement for the
conflict in cote d'Ivoire, it must be implemented by
the parties with complete sincerity, humility and a
relentless demonstration of their resolute will for
reconciliation and cooperation. Of course, the
continuity between conciliation and reconciliation and
the length and comprehensiveness of the process
require a similar effort by the United Nations.

To conclude, I would like to make a brief
comment on the decision of the President of the
Republic of Cote d'Ivoire to submit to a referendum
two essential changes included in the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, because wrongly interpreting that peace
agreement could negatively impact on the
reconciliation process under way. The report of the
recent mission to assess the situation in Cote d'Ivoire
states that "it should be noted that only the amendment
of article 35 [of the Constitution] is constitutionally
mandated to be submitted to a referendum" (S/2004/3, para. 28). That affirmation does not at all seem to
follow from an understanding of article 43 of our
Constitution, a constitution that is recognized by the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and by the Security
Council, and which stipulates that

"the President of the Republic, after consultations
with the Bureau of the National Assembly, can
submit to a referendum any text or question
which he considers to require direct consideration
by the people. When the referendum concludes
the adoption of the text, the President of the
Republic shall promulgate it within the time-span
foreseen in the preceding article."

The Linas-Marcoussis Agreement makes no
mention of either a referendum or any particular
method of adopting texts relative to agreed reforms.
That eloquent silence is justified only by the need to
apply the rules set out in the Constitution, which was
adopted by a majority of more than 86 per cent in a
referendum that was recognized by the international
community. Thus, as everyone agrees, the amendment
of article 35 of the Constitution, on the eligibility of
the President of the Republic, must first be adopted by
a two-thirds majority in the National Assembly and
then submitted to a referendum.

The law on rural land tenure and nationality are
very important, as noted by the Secretary-General in
his most recent report on cote d'Ivoire (S/2004/3).
These questions are mentioned as causes of conflict
now being resolved, while the current law on rural land
tenure, for example, was adopted by the National
Assembly only after delegations of its members
consulted each department of the country in order to
gather the opinions of the population they represent.
This realism on the part of the parliamentarians is an
irrefutable sign of the people's demand for direct
consultation on all questions touching upon those
issues. Only a referendum will contribute to the
strengthening of democracy, which the Security
Council ardently promotes.

With the finalization of the deployment of the
troops of Operation Unicorn in northern Cote d'Ivoire,
France and the rest of the international community
have completed the preparatory measures to undertake
genuine national reconciliation in Cote d'Ivoire. My
delegation here wishes to pay a solemn and resounding
tribute to France - and to the United Nations, which
has here demonstrated the irreplaceable role of the
United Nations in post-conflict national reconciliation.

Cote d'Ivoire - which is emerging with
difficulty from the most serious crisis of its history
thanks to the United Nations, the European Union, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States - can now testify to the outstanding
role of the United Nations in post-conflict national
reconciliation, to which our country bears living
witness.

