Ms.Osode (Liberia): My delegation associates itself
with the condolences expressed by the Organization of
African Unity on the tragic and untimely deaths that
occurred over the weekend.

In the midst of the interest and grave concern that is
being expressed about children affected by armed conflict
and that has occasioned this open meeting of the Security
Council, my delegation is pleased, Mr. President, that
these deliberations are being carried out under your
enlightened leadership. We trust that this timely meeting
will challenge participants, and the entire international
community, and will heighten their awareness of the
plight of children in armed conflicts. It is our hope that
the results of these deliberations will encourage, in
particular, the demand for the implementation and
monitoring of the demobilization and rehabilitation of
child soldiers and for measures for mine-clearance.

In this context, my delegation recognizes Mr. Olara
Otunnu, whose outstanding qualifications and experience
fit him well to serve as the first Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
My delegation wishes him the best of success in carrying
out his mandate. We welcome the measures that he has
proposed today, and will recommend them to our
Government for its support.

None of us here is likely to forget any of the more
significant global conflicts and the atrocities committed
against innocent civilians, in particular women, children
and the elderly. While it is true that there is a crisis in
values in each of our respective countries, we cannot
ignore the fact of outside influences. Some of those who
find the use of child soldiers in armed conflicts most
revolting are themselves instigators and perpetrators of
conflicts around the world. With the global increase in
conflicts, particularly in Africa, the use of child soldiers
has increased as well.

Mr. Otunnu has provided startling specific statistics
on the children in armed conflicts, supported by the
newsletter Children of War, October 1997, which reveals
the new figure of at least 35,000 child soldiers, some as
young as seven years of age, which my delegation finds
very distressing. These are children like ours, who also
want to be free from traumatic experiences of conflict
situations, to secure some degree of certainty about their
future or to engage in vocational training. Instead, they
continue to be marginalized, vulnerable, orphaned or
displaced, and have been forcibly conscripted to
participate in combat and given mood-altering drugs in
many instances.

My delegation recalls how the use of child soldiers
in the Liberian civil conflict, prior to the democratically
elected Government of President Charles Taylor, was

 

frequently attacked in this Chamber as an odious, inhumane
and criminal practice. United Nations estimates showed
that some 15,000 to 20,000 children had directly
participated in violent acts, were forced to kill or maim,
were exposed to fighting and were themselves brutally
victimized. Some fought with factions as a means of
survival.

Certainly the extent of this problem is without doubt
considerable in other countries. For example, according to
the aforementioned newsletter, one of Liberia's neighbours
has one of the worst records of recruiting child soldiers. It
states that between 1992 and 1996 an estimated 4,500
children were forced to fight on both sides, with the former
Government forces junta and with the rebels, which later
became an alliance of strange bedfellows to commit
atrocities against the Government and the people of this
sisterly country.
One of the many challenging problems facing both of
our Governments has been the demobilization of
combatants. Regrettably, mobilization programmes for
former fighters are most inadequate and have failed to
sufficiently address the use of child soldiers, which has
caused a number of them to go back into fighting. My
delegation recalls that at the special ministerial meeting on
Liberia in October 1997 particular attention was drawn to
the importance of ensuring that adequate programmes and
activities were provided for demobilized fighters - fighters
who at 12 years of age in 1990 are 21 today, and some are
more hardened in their criminal activities.

Liberia is gaining ground and is looking beyond its
dark days and previous differences, and we, the people, are
working in an all-inclusive Government to secure the peace
and rebuild our war-torn country. But demobilization, as
recognized by the ministerial conference, remains one of
the key challenges for both Liberia and the international
community and one that is central to the prospects for
successful peace-building in my country.

Liberia wishes to express its gratitude to the
international community and donors for their continued
support for Liberia's reconstruction, rehabilitation and
resettlement programmes, and, indeed, humanitarian
assistance. It wishes to appeal to donors concerned to be
mindful of their pledges to assist in the demobilization of
former combatants, including child soldiers.

My delegation also takes this opportunity to greatly
commend the Secretary-General's envoy, Mr. Luciano
Pavarotti, who is not present here, for his benevolence in
giving a charity concert in his hometown of Modena, the
proceeds of which are pledged to the construction of a
village for children who are victims of war. His human
touch will go a long way in Liberia's peace-building.

Finally, the international community must work in
concert with both the public and private sectors to save
the child soldiers from being a lost generation and to
improve their lot in life. By our commitment and political
will, our interests and concerns will not be seen as
expressions of mere emotion and sentimentality.

