Mr. Dilja (Albania): Allow me at the very
beginning to thank you, Sir, for your excellent
management of the Security Council's agenda for this
month and for convening this meeting. Let me also
congratulate the Secretary-General on his latest report
and Assistant Secretary-General Annabi on his briefing
here today.

I would like to express our delegation's
appreciation for the significant achievements of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and for the exemplary professional
work of the Special Representative, Mr. Steiner. It is
our deep conviction that, through cooperation, the
Provisional Institutions and all the people of Kosovo
are making a success story there, which is really crucial
for its future, for the whole region and for the United
Nations as well.

With the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999),
everything started from scratch in Kosovo. Today, we
have to recognize that it has come a long way since
then. Vision is crystal clear there now, the trend is
positive and achievements are significant - not that
fast, perhaps, but steady. Let us not forget that Rome
was not built in a day. But we must also recognize the
imperative need to move further ahead on the important
agenda of standards, on jobs and security, on economic
recovery, on the fight against crime and corruption, on
creating multi-ethnic society, on advancing the transfer
of power, on establishing direct dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, on Kosovo's integration, and so
on. The Government of Albania has strongly supported
these priorities set out by Mr. Steiner, making its
contribution, when needed, to enhance their
accomplishment. Let me also mention here that my
Government has strongly condemned the latest act of
violence in Kosovo.

In its intervention today, my delegation would
like to confine itself to a few points that we believe are
of crucial importance.

The first regards the multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo. We share the Security Council's vision and
View of an integrated multi-ethnic society in Kosovo as
of crucial importance for its future. We draw attention
to the fact that ethnically-defined interest politics,
parallel institutions, violent actions or extremist threats
from any group will only harm the fragile
accomplishments there and be a roadblock to
reconciliation. We reiterate our evaluation that progress
on that important priority should be accelerated,
strengthened and broadened in its accomplishments.
We urge all parties there to continue to work actively
on inter-ethnic dialogue, returns, reconciliation and the
consolidation of a climate of peaceful coexistence
among ethnic groups. We strongly urge minority
communities to display their willingness to participate
and the majority community to demonstrate respect so
that all together may foster a sustainable multi-ethnic
environment in Kosovo.

We also note with satisfaction, however, that the
achievements and deeper commitment in this area are
encouraging. The latest report of the Secretary-General
clearly reflects that. Progress in recruiting minority
representatives in civil service; progress on inter-ethnic
dialogue; the programme initiated by the Office of the
Prime Minister for the active recruitment of the
minority community and his public commitment to
returns; the increased pace of these returns; improved
structures; and the enhanced engagement of local
authorities in this process, as clearly articulated in that
report, are to be counted as real positive steps. They
add to our optimism about the step-by-step creation in
Kosovo of a functioning multi-ethnic society in which
every Kosovo citizen, regardless of ethnic origin, can
be empowered to run his or her own affairs.

Secondly, the transfer of power is a process of
paramount importance in Kosovo. We commend
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions for launching
this transfer, which in our opinion is a give-and-take
process with mutual responsibilities. The Provisional
Kosovar Institutions should grow stronger with every
passing day. Of course, they should be given authority
and responsibility, but simultaneously they should
become authoritative and responsible and should
exercise that authority and responsibility by producing
concrete results. They should hold to the principle that
with power comes responsibility. UNMIK should
continue to hand over responsibilities, to identify
further areas that can be transferred, and to assess and
help with effective empowerment. Mutual confidence
and cooperation between UNMIK and Kosovar
institutions in this sphere is very significant and has
immense potential impact.

UNMIK is there to govern and to transfer
governance without reluctance. The Government of
Kosovo does need the continued support of UNMIK.
We must say that, in this process, it will help more than
hurt if the methodological principle of learning by
doing is taken into consideration by UNMIK. However,
we express our appreciation that the Kosovar
institutions are making progress towards the
benchmarks and are demonstrating that, with every
passing day, they are more and more capable and
equipped to handle added responsibilities, to be
accountable to all the people of Kosovo and to register
accomplishments.

Thirdly, with respect to the process of integration,
Kosovo must prepare to join the process together with
its neighbours and the whole region. We highly
appreciate and praise UNMIK and Mr. Steiner for
setting this priority in their agenda. At the same time,
we appeal for further progress in this process.
Expanding regional cooperation and listing Kosovo in
the various regional and European initiatives,
programmes of assistance, strategies and plans in the
region will help a lot. Kosovo should be part and parcel
of the integration process and progress which the
region and the continent are undergoing. We have
appraised the establishment of a new monitoring
mechanism between the European Commission and
Kosovar authorities. We believe that further steps
should be undertaken in that direction in order to offer
the people of Kosovo a better European perspective
through their institutional participation in the process
of stabilization and association. We believe that this
will help them to understand that lack of status does
not mean isolation and will raise the confidence of all
the people there in a better future. At the same time,
however, we think that it will invigorate and generate
understanding and efforts to recognize these
responsibilities and to meet the requirements.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my
Government's confidence that those processes all aim
at meeting the standards and pave the way for the final
status of Kosovo, which, in harmony with the
international community's responsibility and authority,
should definitely reflect and respect the right and will
of all the people there to determine their future.

