Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome India's initiative in convening today's meeting
on the working methods of the Security Council.
Today's meeting - the fifth open debate convened by
the Council on this issue - fully reflects the importance
the Council has attached to the issue of improving its
working methods and shows the attention the Council
gives to the opinions of Member States.

I listened attentively to the statement by the
Permanent Representative of Portugal, and I wish to
acknowledge Portugal's efforts as Chair of the Security
Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions.

China also supports, and attaches importance to,
the continuous improvement of the Council's working
methods so as to enhance the authority, efficiency
and transparency of the Council and allow it to better
implement the mandate conferred upon it by the Charter
of the United Nations. Thanks to the considered efforts
of Council members, the Council has made much
progress in terms of improving its working methods.

The number of open meetings of the Council
has increased significantly. The monthly briefing
to non-Council members by the Council's rotating
presidency on the monthly programme of work has
become a well-established practice. The Security
Council has effectively utilized various formats, such
as informal interactive dialogues and Arria Formula
meetings, to strengthen its exchange and interaction
with relevant Member States, country configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission, civil society and
academic institutions. The annual joint meetings
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union have served to
strengthen cooperation with regional organizations in
Africa. With the assistance of the Secretariat, various
information and communication technologies have been
extensively applied to the Council's work, allowing
it to respond more quickly and promptly to emerging
developments and allowing non-Council members to
find out about Council activities on a more timely basis.
The revamped official website of the Security Council
now provides more information to its users.

The Charter of the United Nations provides that the
Security Council shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
There is still room for improvement with regard to the
working methods ofthe Council. China supports the full
implementation of presidential note 507 (S/2010/507)
on that issue and supports the continued discussion on
concrete proposals and measures. I would like to focus
on and highlight the following points.

First, over recent years, the workload of the Council
has increased continuously. The Council should focus
on using its existing resources effectively and on dealing
with major, urgent issues that threaten international
peace and security. The number of thematic subjects it
addresses has also been increasing continuously. Some
of them are beyond the scope of the mandate of the
Security Council, and the Council should pay attention
to the concern expressed by Member States in that
regard.

Secondly, the Security Council should pay more
attention to preventive diplomacy and use peaceful
means such as mediation and good offices to defuse
disputes and should avoid the frequent use or threat
of sanctions and other measures of force. An effective
mechanism to monitor the implementation of the
Council's mandates should be established so as to avoid
acts that abuse or overstep them.

Thirdly, before adopting resolutions or agreeing on
presidential statements, the Council should carry out, in
a full and patient manner, negotiations and consultations
so as to reach extensive and broad consensus. In that
process, it is important that all Council members be

given adequate time to consider and study texts. The
Council should avoid forcing through texts over which
there remain serious differences, so as to safeguard the
solidarity of the Council.

Fourthly, the Security Council should continue to
strengthen its interaction and dialogue with non-Council
members and pay more attention to the opinions of
relevant Member States that are connected to the
Council's agenda. We support the full utilization by the
Council of various mechanisms such as the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and meetings with
troop-contributing countries (TCCs). With regard
to deploying peacekeeping operations and adjusting
their mandates, more attention should be given to
communication between TCCs and the Secretariat.

Fifthly, the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Peacebuilding Commission should fully respect
the division of labour, on the one hand, and strengthen
the communication and coordination among them,
on the other. China supports the Council's efforts
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter to
strengthen its cooperation with regional organizations
such as the African Union and the League of Arab
States so as to achieve synergy.

