Mr. Thomson (Fiji): Fiji joins those who have
spoken before us in condemning the Abuja bombing
and in offering our condolences to the Victims and their
families.

The Fiji delegation would like to thank you, Sir,
for having chosen the subject of this thematic debate. It
displays a keen sense of relevance and foresight on the
part of the Indian presidency.

For a country like Fiji, which places United
Nations peacekeeping at the centre of its foreign
policy, better mutual understanding on this central
aspect of the United Nations work is critical. The
remarks that follow come from a Pacific small island
developing country whose servicemen and
servicewomen have for the past three decades worn the
blue helmet in United Nations peacekeeping missions
in more than 15 troubled countries.

In terms of taking stock, it is no secret that
peacekeeping is a loss-making undertaking for many
troop-contributing countries. For a country like Fiji,
the cost of the fair wages we pay our soldiers serving
on United Nations peacekeeping missions does not
equate to what the United Nations reimburses us; in
fact, the United Nations reimbursement falls far short.
This is a stock-taking item that requires further
introspection by the United Nations.

We recognize that the United Nations must cut
the cloth to fit the suit. Thus, the United Nations must
examine all its options for cost-effectiveness, including
decreasing the number of United Nations peacekeepers
deployed internationally, encouraging greater South-
South and triangular cooperation, allowing more
sharing of resources between nearby peacekeeping
missions, and instituting better coordination between
the United Nations and contributing countries.

Turning to preparations for the future, the clear
view of the Fiji delegation is that it is humanly
possible to resolve the various political conflicts that
have preoccupied the world's attention for so long.
What is required is the genuine political will of the
parties concerned to negotiate and settle.

There is a reason these conflicts have to move to
speedy settlement. The reason is that if this world body
is to fulfil its Charter obligations, it must begin steeling
itself for the great security threat of the twenty-first
century. We refer not to squabbling neighbours, to
long-festering ethnic, tribal or religious feuds, or the
geopolitical gamesmanship of the twentieth century;
we refer to the looming onslaught of climate change
and the geophysical alterations it will bring upon our
planet, upon our societies, and perhaps upon life itself.
All our human resources - intellectual, economic and
political - will be required if we are to handle this
ultimate challenge as best we can. And if we care about
the welfare of our grandchildren, only our best
response will be good enough. We say "our" because it
is here at the United Nations that the solutions must be
found.

This is not a struggle that individual countries can
win, for climate change will not respect national
boundaries. Rising sea levels may drive some low-
lying countries to extinction, while others will have to
deal with massive population displacement as the great
food-producing deltas go under water. Desertification,
ferocious storms and melting ice-caps will disdain
national boundaries and similar human constructs.

It is for this reason that Fiji and the other Pacific
small island developing States spoke up so strongly at
last month's thematic debate in the Council on the
impact of climate change on international peace and
security (S/PV.6587). Thus, our concluding
contribution to this thematic debate is that United
Nations peacekeeping must indeed prepare for the
future - a different future in which, we submit,
humanity will face hostile environmental forces to a
degree we have not faced since the last ice age drove
our kind to the edge.

In all the drawn-out climate change deliberations
being pursued through other organs and bodies of the
United Nations, we submit that the Security Council
should throughout maintain focus on the security and
peacekeeping implications of climate change that lie
ahead of us.

