Mr. Morris: The World Food Programme is
deeply honoured to be here with you, Mr. President,
and your colleagues today. The World Food
Programme is the agency of the United Nations that is
charged with responsibility for feeding the world's
hungriest, poorest people, wherever they might be. Last
year, we fed about 80 million people in 83 countries.
Ten years ago, 80 per cent of our work would have
been in development. Today, 80 per cent of our work is
responding to emergencies. Our challenge is to respond
to emergencies in such a way that some permanent
advantage accrues to the benefit of the individuals we
are helping, and to feed people in such a way that their
educational opportunities, that their health and
nutrition are enhanced and, ultimately, that their
livelihood, food security and creation of assets are
strengthened.

I have been on the job only eight months. We
have about 9,000 employees and we are headquartered
in Rome; 700 of our employees are in Rome. When I
visit with my senior colleagues, they tell me that never
in the history of the World Food Programme have we
had as many difficult challenges before us. We work all
over the world. Last year we were feeding 10 million
people in Afghanistan and 6.5 million people in North
Korea. We are currently feeding half a million people
in the Palestinian territories. We have concluded our
work in East Timor, Kosovo and Yugoslavia. But I am
here to report that about 60 per cent of our work today
takes place in Africa.

Five places in Africa are experiencing very
severe problems. The issues in Africa represent a
combination of very difficult weather situations,
exacerbated by the El Nifio phenomenon; very difficult
health issues, dramatically complicated by HIV/
AIDS - I will talk more about that in a few minutes;
civil strife; a huge number of refugees and internally
displaced people; landmines; the issue of genetically
modified organisms (GMOs); and very challenging
issues relating to governance and economic policy.

For us to do what is expected of us, our Board has
approved a work programme this year of between $2.5
billion and $3 billion. All of our support comes from
voluntary contributions from Governments. We
essentially receive 90 per cent of what we have to work
with from 10 entities, including the European
Community. We need more support from our current
donors, and we need new donors to come in and be our
partners. We are very grateful that countries such as
Russia, China, India, Oman, Peru and Algeria - it is
quite a long list - have decided to help us for the first
time this year. Much of that support is directed to the
work that is being done in southern Africa.

Secretary-General Kofi Annan has been our great,
great friend. In July, he asked me to be his special
envoy to look at humanitarian issues in the six southern
African countries of Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia,
Zimbabwe, Lesotho and Swaziland. The fact of the
matter is that there are 14.5 million people in those six
countries who are severely at risk of starvation - half
of them in Zimbabwe, approximately 3 million each in
Zambia and Malawi, and several hundred thousand in
the other three countries. Mozambique is affected only
in the south.

The effects of serious weather problems have
been dramatically complicated by HIV/AIDS. I would
say that the HIV/AIDS epidemic has radically changed
the economic landscape of those six countries. During
my recent visit there, I spent a great deal of time with
teachers and with young people. There are 11 million
AIDS orphans in sub-Saharan Africa and 4.6 million
orphans in the six countries I mentioned, 60 per cent of
whom were orphaned because both their mother and
father died of AIDS. This is a tragic fact of life. AIDS
leads to all sorts of other serious health problems -
cholera, tuberculosis, malaria, polio, diarrhoea, and so
on.

There is a very difficult weather situation, an
incredible health situation with HIV/AIDS, and also
tough issues related to governance and to macro-
economic policy. Clearly, for the long haul, for
situations like this to be substantially addressed and
alleviated, there needs to be a major opening up of
economies and a strengthening of the role of the free
market. A whole range of new economic influences
that have made countries around the world successful
need to come into play here.

Most importantly, there must be substantial
investment in agricultural infrastructure. I think that
the countries around the world that support
development have lost their focus on the importance of
fundamental basic investment in agricultural
infrastructure, and I think that it is beginning to turn
around. But for people to become food self-sufficient,
they need to have a basic, strong agricultural system,
and I am grateful that countries such as the United
Kingdom and the United States have now substantially
increased their investment in agricultural
infrastructure.

A second area in Africa that is of great concern is
what we would call the greater Horn of Africa. Some
would define that as only Ethiopia and Eritrea, but we
would include the Sudan. Ethiopia and Eritrea are
countries that depend heavily on rain-fed agriculture
for their crops and for their pastoral livestock. They
have had a very difficult weather situation this past
year - virtually no spring rains, and the fall rains
came late. The agricultural crop this year in Eritrea will
be 20 per cent of what it was last year, and the crop in
Ethiopia will be decreased by 20 per cent, with about a
sixth of the population severely at risk. The worst-case
scenario would be that as many as 15 million people -
a number comparable to that in southern Africa - will
be at risk in the Horn.

In addition, the World Food Programme is
feeding 2.9 million people in the Sudan every day. The
situation there is a result of the combination of weather
factors, the conflict and refugees. In the western
Sahel especially in Mauritania - but also in the
Gambia, Mali, Senegal and Cape Verde, there have
been serious drought problems. Thank God, there has
not been conflict there, but as many as 750,000 people
could be at risk because of the weather in the western
Sahel.

 

In West Africa - Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea
and Cote d'Ivoire - another million people are at risk,
and it could be substantially more than that because of
the strife and because of the huge population of
refugees and internally displaced persons who move
around in the area. If all of this is pulled together, one
quickly comes to the conclusion that between 38
million and 40 million are at risk of starvation in
Africa.

The World Food Programme is the largest
humanitarian agency in the world. We have 2,000 non-
governmental organization (NGO) partners all around
the world, and our budget for our work in these places
in Africa is about $1.4 billion. To date we have raised
slightly more than $700 million. This does not take into
account the work that we do in school feeding or with
nutritional enhancement, and so on.

The fact of the matter is that weather problems
are simply dramatically more serious today than they
were 10 years ago. In the early 1990s, we averaged 18
emergency food assessments for the first five years. In
the second five years of the 1990s, we average 33
emergency food assessments, nearly twice that number.

In order for progress to be made, half a dozen
things need to happen. We need to have, as I said
earlier, stronger and more consistent funding of
humanitarian aid. The amount of food aid in the world
in the last three years has decreased from 15 million
tons a year to 11 million tons, a decrease of 25 per
cent. A total of 62 per cent of the support for the World
Food Programme comes from the United States. We are
incredibly grateful to the United States for its
generosity, but it is not healthy and it is not sustainable
for one country or provide such a huge percentage of a
single organization's budget.

Clearly there needs to be more basic investment
in agriculture. There is no country in the world that has
had economic success that did not first put in place a
very substantial agricultural economy. As I mentioned,
I am especially grateful to the United Kingdom,
because it has increased its investment in basic
agriculture fivefold.

Thirdly, the private sector needs to be allowed to
function. In some of the places where we have the most
difficulty, there is no functioning private sector; there
is no market; prices are set; and grain dealers are not
allowed to do their work. Without private-sector
incentives, initiatives and rewards, adequate crops will
not be available. We need to make a much more
substantial investment in nutrition. A modest
investment in nutrition may have the greatest leverage
for strengthening people's energy and health.

Secondly, investment in our school feeding
programme may be the most important thing we do.
Last year, we fed 15 million children in 57 countries
around the world. The fact of the matter is that there
are 800 million hungry people and 300 million hungry
children, half of whom do not go to school. This
problem disproportionately affects young women. We
have a practice in which we offer a school meal as an
incentive for a child to come to school. A meal
encourages the parents to send the child to school.
Once the child is in school and not hungry, the child
can begin to learn.

We can work with the World Health Organization
for all sorts of significant health interventions. Half of
those children are infected with worms. For 30 cents a
year, a child can be cured of worms. If a child has
worms, 50 per cent of the nutritional value of what the
child eats goes to feed the worms. So the impact of
feeding a school child, which we can do for $38 a year
or 19 cents a day, can dramatically change a child's
life. From a perspective of peace and security, there is
no substitute for offering hope and opportunity to
young people so that they, too, can have positive
dreams for their lives and stay away from mischief.

I want to take one or two minutes to tell the
Council about my recent trip to North Korea. I think
that it is an issue that should be of great concern to the
Council. I was there for five days last week. The World
Food Programme has been feeding 6.4 million people a
year in North Korea, including 4 million children,
400,000 women who are either pregnant or nursing,
400,000 elderly and more than one million people in
our food-for-work programme. The budget has been in
the neighbourhood of $240 million a year. This month
and last month, we have cut our work in half in North
Korea, we have gone from 6.4 million people to 3.4
million people. I anticipate cutting that number in half
again in January.

We will need 550,000 metric tonnes of food in
North Korea next year. At this stage, we have
commitments for 33,000 metric tonnes, 23,000 from
the European Community and 10,000 from Italy. Our
major supporters have not made commitments for our
work in North Korea. This is for a variety of reasons,
as the Council knows better than I.

The key issue that I am focused on - and the
World Food Programme tries to stay focused on - is
its agenda of feeding hungry poor people and leaving
all the other political issues for others to debate. But
we have a general set of principles by which we govern
our operation. They speak to accessibility,
accountability, transparency and a zero-tolerance
policy for foolishness or the inability to work
throughout a country.

In North Korea, we are permitted to work in 163
of the 206 counties. We do not have the ability to do a
random access check to verify our monitoring,
although we do 440 monitoring visits per month. We
do not receive a list of the institutional recipients from
the Government of North Korea. Therefore, the
accountability issue is put into play once again.

I only bring this to your attention because the
World Food Programme has 110 employees in North
Korea. Sixty of them are North Korean employees and
50 are international employees. We are essentially the
presence of the United Nations in North Korea. We
work closely with UNICEF, the World Health
Organization and other agencies such as the United
Nations Development Programme, but they have a very
small presence. We have a huge presence. We are the
lead agency. Our senior staff do the humanitarian and
the residential coordinating work. We are the only
international presence that has offices outside the
capital. We have five regional offices around the
country of North Korea, as well as one in Pyongyang.

I am concerned that it is conceivable that by 1
April, we will not have resources to do our work and
that there will not be a World Food Programme and,
ultimately, a United Nations presence in that country.
For a variety of reasons, I think that is not a good thing
for the world. It is clearly not a good thing for the
United Nations. And it is certainly not a good thing for
the people of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. But I could not come and visit with you and not
tell you this story.

We have more demands than we have ever had in
our history. We are working very hard to address these
demands. We focus on the most vulnerable people in a
society. We target our work towards women and
children. We start with very young children, and we
work up to approximately the age of 12. Then we work
with the elderly. We do a lot of work in paediatric
hospitals and orphanages. We do a lot of supplemental
and therapeutic feeding that makes all the difference in
the quality of life of a very young child.

A child that is born to a healthy mother and has
good nutrition in his or her first two years has a very
good chance to have the brain and body develop. A
child that is born to a poorly nourished mother or does
not have adequate nutrition during his or her first two
years will have irreparable damage done to the brain
and the body. That is why our focus on children is so
incredibly important.

I have given the Council the text of my statement
and tried to review with you my principal concerns.
The issues in Africa are huge. There are 40 to 50
million children of school age in Africa that are not in
school and who need to participate in a school feeding
programme to get them to come to school. The school
experience is fundamental to getting at the HIV/AIDS
issue. Education is the only opportunity that they will
have to think about alternative lifestyles. The loss of
mom and dad on the farm changes the family structure
and changes the output of the farm. It is more dramatic
than I think I could ever describe. That is why the
school experience is so incredibly important. In
Zambia, half the children of school age have dropped
out of school; in Zimbabwe, 25 per cent. Those are
devastating numbers. But I would be happy to hear the
Council's questions or to have a discussion.

Michael Usnick is the representative of the World
Food Programme here in New York. He is available to
members of the Council at all times. Many of you are
our very good friends. I see my friend from Ireland.
Ireland has been one of our best supporters and has
increased their support by 23 per cent a year. We also
have great friends in Cameroon and China. So, I feel
like I am among friends and am grateful for this
opportunity.

