Judge Mose: It is a great honour to address the
members of the Security Council. I welcome this
opportunity to present the ninth annual report of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
(S/2004/601), which was presented to the General
Assembly last week at its 53rd plenary meeting, and to
provide an assessment of the implementation of our
completion strategy, in conformity with Security
Council resolution 1534 (2004).

Even though only five months have elapsed since
the ICTR President and Prosecutor last appeared before
the Council, at the 4999th meeting, held on 29 June,
much has been achieved. The ICTR submitted an
updated version of its completion strategy to the
Security Council last week. I understand that this
document is now available to the members of the
Council.

It may be seen from the annual report that, during
the period under review, the ICTR delivered five trial
judgements involving nine accused. Another
judgement was delivered on 15 July 2004. That brings
the total number of trial judgements rendered by the
ICTR since the first trial started in January 1997 to 17,
involving 23 persons. The next judgement is expected
in early 2005. Never before has the judicial output
been so high.

In 2003, the ICTR commenced four new trials
involving a total of 10 accused. This was due to the
arrival of five ad litem judges that year. Security
Council resolution 1512 (2003) increased their number
to nine. The remaining four ad litem judges arrived in
Arusha in September 2004 and made it possible to start
two new trials. In 2004, we started a total of four new
trials concerning seven detainees, six of them after the
period covered in the annual report. Consequently, 25
persons are currently on trial. I would like to reiterate
our appreciation to the Security Council for having
adopted resolution 1512 (2003).

This brings me to three points that are relevant to
the implementation of our completion strategy. The
first point is that the ICTR now has a total of
completed and ongoing cases involving 48 accused.
That means that we have reached the number that was
promised in our completion strategy of April this year.

Secondly, the members of the Security Council
will recall that, in that completion strategy, it was
projected that three trials would be completed in 2004.
That aim has also been achieved. In June and July, the
Trial Chambers delivered judgements in the
Gacumbitsi and the Ndindabahizi trials. The third trial,
Muhimana, has been completed and is now at the stage
of closing arguments. Judgement is expected in early
2005.

The third point is that, according to the
completion strategy of April 2004, three trials
involving six accused would commence from May to
September this year. That projection too was
accomplished. The Simba case started on 30 August;
the Seromba case and the Military Il trial commenced
on 20 September 2004.

On that basis, I am pleased to confirm that the
ICTR is on schedule. We intend to complete all trials
by 2008, as required by resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (2004).

Let me now provide a more detailed assessment.
The ongoing trials involving the 25 accused may be
divided into two groups: multi-accused and single-
accused cases. Five trials are multi-accused cases,
comprising a total of 22 persons. These trials are
voluminous, complex and time-consuming, because the
prosecution and the defence will call a large number of
witnesses. I am, therefore, pleased to report that there
has been considerable progress in the Butare trial,
involving six accused, and the Military 1 trial, with
four accused. In both trials, the prosecution recently
closed its case after having called 59 and 82 witnesses,
respectively. The defence teams will commence their
cases in January 2005. In the Government trial, with
four accused, there are only about 12 remaining
prosecution witnesses.

The achievements in these three multi-accused
trials are significant elements in the implementation of
our completion strategy. Our experience with other
multi-accused cases shows that the presentation of the
defence case usually requires less time than the
prosecution case because of less extensive cross-
examination. The two remaining multi-accused cases
are at a very early stage. The Military [I trial
commenced on 20 September 2004 and has been
slowed down by illness. The Karemera et al. trial,
which started in November 2003, will commence de
novo, following a recent Appeals Chamber ruling to
that effect. Those two trials will be given priority in
2005.

The single-accused cases are less complex than
multi-accused trials and require less time. The
Gacumbitsi trial started on 28 July 2003, and
judgement was delivered on 17 June 2004 after 31 trial
days. The Ndindabahizi case commenced on
lSeptember 2003, with judgement on 15 July 2004
after 27 trial days. In the Muhimana trial, which started
on 29 March 2004, the parties presented their evidence
in the course of 34 trial days. As already mentioned,
judgement is expected in early 2005. Those three
recent trials confirm the Tribunal's capacity to
complete single-accused cases in less than a year even
though the judges sitting in those cases are also
conducting multi-accused trials. Two weeks ago, the
prosecution also closed its case in the Simba trial,
which started on 30 August 2004. I should add that we
are now in the process of scheduling a new single-
accused case from early 2005.

In order to ensure maximum judicial output, it is
important to find the right balance between the multi-
accused and the single-accused trials. The eight trials
currently in progress are taking place in three
courtrooms only. That makes our task difficult and
requires careful long-term planning. Single-accused
trials are normally slotted in when there are breaks in
the voluminous trials - so-called twin-tracking * or
they are heard in morning or afternoon shifts
simultaneously with other trials. We are anxious to
ensure the steady progress of the five multi-accused
trials. Once they are completed, there will be only
single-accused cases left. From then on, our task will
be easier.

During our June meeting with the Security
Council I mentioned the possibility of constructing a
fourth courtroom. The shift system implies that each
morning and afternoon session is about two hours
shorter than a full day session. More courtroom
capacity would be an important element in our
completion strategy as it would make it easier to give
priority to certain multi-accused trials and thereby
reduce the total periods necessary to complete them. In
view of the present climate of budgetary constraint, the
construction of such a courtroom and its running costs
should be based on voluntary contributions. We have
therefore been exploring that possibility with two
interested Governments.

I should also reiterate that our experience with
the Trial Committee, composed of representatives of
Chambers, the Prosecution and the Registry, continues
to be very positive. The Committee is in contact with
the various defence teams and has facilitated the trial
readiness of several cases by identifying problems and
solving them in a proactive way.

Let me emphasize - as I did in the General
Assembly last week - that the ICTR can comply with
the time frames established in Security Council
resolution 1503 (2003) only if it is provided with
sufficient resources. Unfortunately, certain Member
States have failed to pay their contributions to the two
ad hoc Tribunals. As a consequence, the recruitment of
new staff to the Tribunals has been frozen. So far, that
has not had any significant effect on the ICTR
completion strategy. We have been able to keep the
trials going, but the situation is becoming critical.
More than 80 staff members have left the Tribunal
since the freeze was imposed. The number of vacancies
is increasing every month. Many vacant posts are
directly linked to the judicial production of the ICTR.

Let me provide some examples, mentioned in our
updated completion strategy. As of today, there are
nine vacant posts for legal officers in the three
Chambers. Their recruitment has been put on hold as a
consequence of the freeze. Those nine legal officers
would have worked under the direct supervision of the
judges. Several permanent and ad litem judges have no
associate legal officers. The judges are sharing legal
officers through ad hoc arrangements. This situation
cannot continue. The Prosecutor will inform the
Council of the serious problems that his office faces.
Also, the Registry's ability to provide support to the
judicial process is reduced. Furthermore, the lack of
resources affects the defence teams. It is a paradox that
indispensable financial contributions are not paid when
the Tribunal is doing its utmost to complete its task.

That being said, I want to state very clearly that
the Tribunal is fully committed to the completion
strategy. We will make all efforts to achieve the goals
laid down in the completion strategy, including
completing all trials at the first instance by 2008.

I have already mentioned our results in relation to
single-accused trials. We are regularly discussing how
to increase our efficiency even further. We will
continue to improve our working methods and will
keep the members of the Security Council and the
membership at large informed of any further measures
to be taken.

The Prosecutor will reiterate that he remains
committed to the deadline for conclusion of
investigations by the end of 2004. He will also deal
with indicted and suspected persons that remain at
large, as well as his plans for transfer to national
jurisdictions. On the basis of the Prosecution's requests
for transfer, it will be for the Trial Chambers to decide
whether a person shall be transferred. Let me only say
this: a comparison between the previous and the
present version of the completion strategy shows that
in spite of the commencement of several new trials, the
number of detainees awaiting trial in Arusha has
increased from 15 to 18. That is not surprising. Three
accused have been transferred to Arusha since April
2004. They were previously in the groups of indicted
or suspected persons at large. The situation is simply
that three fugitives accused of genocide have been
arrested.
The Tribunal appreciates the cooperation of the
Rwandan authorities. Last year I reported that there
had been a steady flow of witnesses from Kigali to
Arusha. I am pleased to state that the situation remains
the same. On request, we have also received
documentation from the judicial proceedings in
Rwanda in order to evaluate fully the credibility of our
witnesses. That is important to the integrity of the
proceedings in Arusha. It is also essential that both
parties, the prosecution and the defence, receive the
necessary assistance to carry out their investigations in
Rwanda.

Finally, let me add that cooperation within the
Tribunal is excellent. The President, the Prosecutor and
the Registrar meet regularly in the Coordination
Council and are in frequent contact. The ICTR staff
continue to be committed and hardworking.

Let me conclude by expressing our deep
appreciation to the Security Council for its support to
the ICTR. The Tribunal also thanks the Secretary-
General for his continued support.

