Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We welcome the
opportunity to participate and share our views in this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. South Africa aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

In recent weeks and months, there has been some
encouraging movement towards reigniting the search
for peace in the Middle East. The successful elections
in Lebanon and the ongoing regional initiatives of the
League of Arab States to promote and achieve intra-
Palestinian reconciliation and unity have been positive
developments; so was the address by the United States
President, Mr. Barack Obama, on 4 June 2009. Recent
meetings between senior United States officials and
leaders in the Middle East aimed at promoting peace
also raised hopes in the Middle East and, indeed,
beyond.

However, those encouraging developments have
yet to be translated into progress on the ground,
especially in the occupied Palestinian territory. The
reality is that Palestinians continue to live under an
occupation that they have endured for decades. They
face daily hardships, compounded by the existence of
many checkpoints that restrict their movement and
access. The violent incursions by the Israeli army into
Palestinian areas continue unabated, while Israeli
settlements and the separation wall expand in spite of
international condemnation.

South Africa condemns the continuing Israeli
blockade and the ongoing construction and expansion
of illegal settlements. We reiterate our call to Israel to
immediately cease the building and expansion of
settlements in the West Bank. The intensified home
demolition programme on the part of Israel that we are
currently witnessing in East Jerusalem constitutes a
serious violation of international law, as definitively
clarified in the 9 July 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.

My delegation continues to be concerned about
Israel's construction of the separation wall in the West
Bank. The Israeli Government has pursued the
construction of the separation wall, which cuts through
the West Bank, confiscating large chunks of Palestinian
farmland, residences and commercial property for this
purpose. Israel's building of the separation wall runs
counter to the will of the international community.

South Africa has consistently demonstrated our
support for the rights of the Palestinian people to a
State of their own. South Africa's clear and unwavering
support for the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State is based on its firm belief that only a two-State
solution can bring lasting peace to the Middle East.

We believe that a vision of peaceful coexistence
between Israelis and Palestinians, based on the creation
of a Palestinian State existing side by side in peace
with Israel within secure and internationally
recognized borders, is the only sustainable solution to
this conflict. We remain convinced that negotiation is
the only way to end the conflict and to bring about an
end to the occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab
territories.

The Security Council should not neglect its
Charter-mandated responsibility to assist in the
attainment of peace in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Its failure to find a lasting solution to this crisis is a
failure to give hope to the people of Palestine. We
therefore urge the Council, in line with its Charter
obligations, to act decisively and take action to resolve
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

For its part, South Africa continues to support a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in
line with international resolutions and initiatives, such
as Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), and the Arab
Peace Initiative, which calls for the establishment of a
Palestinian State existing side by side in peace with the
State of Israel within internationally recognized and
secure borders.

South Africa welcomes the holding of successful
parliamentary elections in Lebanon early last month.
We commend the Government of Lebanon for its
continuous efforts to stabilize the country in the
aftermath of Israel's aggression and violation of its
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We are also
concerned about the explosions that occurred on
14 July 2009. In that regard, we call on all parties to
fully implement resolution 1701 (2006).

In conclusion, South Africa will continue to
support and contribute to all efforts aimed at achieving
a lasting peace in the Middle East, based on all
relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of
reference of the Madrid Conference, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road
Map.

