Mr. Chergui: I wish to express my sincere thanks to
you, Madam President, for giving me this opportunity
to update the Security Council on behalf of African
Union Commission on the situation in Darfur and the
work of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) since the adoption of
the communique of the 856th meeting of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, on 13 June, and
resolution 2479 (2019), adopted by the Security Council
on 27 June. I am honoured to do so alongside my good
friend Jean-Pierre Lacroix.

For the past decade or so, UNAMID has stood
as a commendable illustration of synergy between
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations in
responding to the needs of humankind and addressing
the ill effects of conflict and political instability.

At the outset, I wish to congratulate the people of
the Sudan on the signing of the landmark constitutional
declaration two weeks ago. This is a remarkable
milestone, ushering the country into a new phase of
its political history and towards the consolidation of
democracy and peace.

Against the backdrop of fast-evolving political
developments in the Sudan that culminated in the
collapse of the former Government of the National
Congress Party, UNAMID continued to implement
its mandate as set out in resolutions 2429 (2018) and
2479 (2019). The African Union supports the delay in
the drawdown plan to reduce the military component
ceiling to 4,050 to allow the mission to protect its sites
and installations, in particular the logistics hub in El
Fasher, thereby maintaining a strength of 4,375.

The overall security situation in Darfur remains
volatile, with intermittent armed clashes between
Government forces and the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid faction (SLA/AW) around Golo in Jebel
Marra. During the reporting period, the SLA/AW
abducted local civilians and staff of non-governmental
organizations for ransom, robbed commercial
trucks and looted property of local medical and
humanitarian organizations.

Notwithstanding the relatively improved security
situation in Darfur, internally displaced persons (IDPs)
continue to express security concerns 4 mainly,
increased criminality, destruction of farms and
unlawful land-occupation issues. Since the beginning
of the farming season in June, tensions have been
growing between farmers and herders, with the latter
depriving the former of access to their land. That has
resulted in increased attacks by the pastoralists against
the local farmers and IDPs across Darfur. The removal
of various Government officials and the redeployment
of some Government security forces to Khartoum has
created administrative and security gaps, presenting
a challenge in effectively managing tensions and
providing basic services to the population.

The current farming season is likely to witness
more land-related violence, which might affect harvest
prospects. In that regard, UNAMID has put in place
measures to reduce tensions and threats, including by
intensifying inclusive engagement with communities
and national stakeholders, while simultaneously laying
the foundation for peacebuilding as part ofthe mission's
transition process.

UNAMID continues to engage the Government to
further strengthen mechanisms for addressing human
rights concerning Darfur. The mission also conducted
the monitoring, investigation and verification of
violations and abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed in the region.

The inadequate footprint and capacity of
rule-of-law institutions in Darfur - including with
regard to the judiciary, the police, prosecutions and
prisons - outside the main urban centres continued to
have an adverse impact on the security situation and
in terms of ensuring accountability for serious crimes
and human rights violations. A prevalence of crime,
including conflict-related sexual violence, has been
reported in the greater Jebel Marra area, including
Golo, Kass, Kabkabiya and other parts of Darfur.
Furthermore, the root causes of conflict and continuing
intercommunal conflicts arising from issues related to
land and other conflict drivers remain unaddressed.
Conflicts involving armed movements of the SLA/AW
continue to result in displacements in many areas of
Jebel Marra.
On the political front, following sustained efforts
and intense pressure from the joint African Union
and Ethiopian mediation, as well as the international
community, the Transitional Military Council and the
Forces for Freedom and Change agreed on a political
declaration and a constitutional document, which were
signed on 17 July and 17 August, respectively. Those two
documents, in particular the constitutional document,
provide for a power-sharing arrangement during a
transitional period of 39 months, while outlining the
key priorities of the Transitional Government during
this period.

In that regard, the first six months of the transition
will be devoted to peace negotiations and achieving
comprehensive peace in all conflict areas of the
Sudan, including Darfur and Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan states. The constitutional document devotes
a separate chapter to comprehensive peace issues,
detailing the peace process and special measures that
will be taken to achieve comprehensive peace and to
address the root causes of the conflicts in the Sudan.
However, the armed movements, represented by the
Sudan Revolutionary Front, which are also members of
the Forces for Freedom and Change, are of the view
that their concerns have not been sufficiently reflected
in those documents, as agreed between the Sudan
Revolutionary Front and the Forces for Freedom and
Change in Addis Ababa on 25 July. Meanwhile, in
my discussions with the President of the Sovereign
Council, Mr. Abdel-Fattah Al-Burhan, and Prime
Minister Hamdok the inclusion of armed movements in
the new process is a top priority.

With uncertainties about the directions the peace
negotiations would take, the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur remains stalled. The
constitutional document, which governs the transition
period in the Sudan, provides for the completion of
comprehensive peace no later than six months from its
signing. It also stipulates that past peace agreements
reached between the Government of the Sudan and the
armed movements shall be reviewed to address their
shortcomings and to ensure comprehensive peace is
achieved. In view of those fast-moving developments,
it is important that the armed movements be fully
engaged in the political process.

So far, stakeholders seem to hold divergent views
on the way forward, but it is our considered View
that the Sudanese stakeholders and the international
community have invested a lot in the Doha process,
which should continue to serve as a basis for our efforts
towards an early conclusion of the conflict. Bringing
the negotiations to Khartoum as an alternative,
however, might require an agreement on the cessation
of hostilities and strong security guarantees for the
armed movements.

Moreover, at this critical juncture, it is important
that the international community take a coordinated
approach and consider how best to support the peace
process in order to ensure inclusivity and a successful
outcome. Moreover, it is important to note that the
leader of the SLA/AW, Mr. Abdul Wahid al-Nour, and
the leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-
North, Mr. Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, remain outside of the
peace process and continue to refuse to engage. It is
imperative that they be persuaded to join the process,
otherwise - and I cannot stress this enough - they
will remain spoilers.

In conclusion, it is worth noting that the current
political environment and the changes taking place
in the Sudan provide a unique opportunity for ending
the armed conflict and achieving comprehensive and
lasting peace in Darfur and in the Sudan as a whole. The
international community should seize this opportunity
to demand constructive engagement by all the actors
concerned. As Mr. Lacroix announced to the Council,
our two organizations - the United Nations and the
African Union - will continue to join efforts and
hands in helping all stakeholders achieve that goal. I am
very happy to join him once again on a visit to Darfur
in early October.

The African Union will continue to be at the
forefront and provide full support for the Sudan's
efforts and for the fulfilment of the aspirations of the
people of Darfur and the rest of the Sudan for just and
lasting peace.

