Mr. Badenhorst (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to commend you, Sir, for initiating this important
and timely debate on demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment. Given the international community's
growing concern over the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and, in particular, its impact on the socio-
economic development of countries in post-conflict
situations, this topic rightfully deserves the focused
attention of the Council.

The report on small arms submitted by the
Secretary-General rightly identified incomplete
disarmament of former combatants and mandates of
peacekeeping or post-conflict peace-building operations
which did not cover small arms and light weapons
disarmament as major causes of the excessive and
destabilizing accumulations of these weapons. In this
regard, one of the recommendations stemming from the
report was that

"consideration should be given to the establishment
of a disarmament component in peacekeeping
operations undertaken by the United Nations".
[A/52/298, annex, para. 79 (d)]

After many years of armed conflict in southern
Africa, the escalating problem of the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons can be related to the
availability of vast quantities of these weapons, which
recirculated in the region due to incomplete disarmament
programmes after peace operations were set up. As a
consequence, this renewed proliferation is having a
devastating effect on the rebuilding of civil society in the
region. Regional peace and democratization initiatives are
curtailed by the excessive accumulation of these weapons,
especially by criminal groups fuelling crime and violence
for their own financial gain.

My Government believes that a political commitment
is required to address this issue as a priority. South Africa
further believes that addressing the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons must be approached in a way that
includes arms control and disarmament, post-conflict
peace-building, conflict prevention and socio-economic
development. Holistic approaches should be adopted to
stem this proliferation problem. Regionally, political
leaders should commit themselves to solving this problem

 

through effective regional cooperation and security action,
addressing the underlying demand factors such as criminal
activities and socio-economic underdevelopment. In
addition, strict control should be exercised in the transfer of
small arms and light weapons, and where appropriate,
surplus stockpiles of small arms and light weapons should
be destroyed. With regard to the establishment of a
disarmament component in peacekeeping operations
undertaken by the United Nations, South Africa believes
that the mandates of future peacekeeping operations, as
appropriate in specific post-conflict situations, should
include weapons collection, disposal and destruction.

To this end, South Africa welcomed the adoption of
resolution 1209 (1998), on illicit arms flows to and in
Africa. South Africa strongly supports the role of the
Security Council in addressing the issue of small arms and
light weapons disarmament in the context of peacekeeping
operations. It is imperative that the mandate of any future
peacekeeping operation should include the implementation
of a comprehensive disarmament and arms management
programme which will continue into the post-conflict
reconstruction phase. Of particular relevance would be the
consideration of practical ways to work with States in
implementing national, regional or subregional programmes
for voluntary weapons collection, disposal and destruction,
including the possibility of the establishment of a fund to
support such programs. In this regard, resolution 1209
(1998) gives recognition to the important contribution of
programmes for voluntary weapons collection, disposal and
destruction in specific post-conflict situations in Africa,
stating also that the Council should consider including, as
appropriate, means to facilitate the successful conduct of
such programmes in the mandates of future peacekeeping
operations it authorizes in Africa on the basis of
recommendations by the Secretary-General.

The South African Government has declared the
combating of small arms proliferation as a priority and has
implemented a coherent strategy to deal with this problem
in all its aspects. This strategy represents an integral and
holistic approach, to introduce stricter control measures and
eventually to remove the causal factors of small arms
proliferation. My Government has further decided to effect
disposal via destruction of all State-held, redundant,
obsolete, unserviceable and confiscated semi-automatic and
automatic weapons of a calibre smaller than 12.7
millimetres. In addition to the destruction of many tons of
confiscated and obsolete small arms and ammunition, South
Africa will have destroyed by the end of this year more
than 260,000 redundant, obsolete, unserviceable and
confiscated small arms of various calibres currently stored
by its National Defence Force.

In order to deal with the availability and
recirculation of vast quantities of small arms and light
weapons in the region, South Africa has entered into
agreements with several other southern African States
with a view to curbing the trafficking of illegal small
arms and ammunition. In this regard, bilateral agreements
have been signed between South Africa and Mozambique
and between South Africa and Swaziland to address
cross-border crime. These agreements led to the launching
of the first joint operation, known as Operation Rachel,
for the collection and destruction of uncontrolled arms
and explosives caches within Mozambique. Four Rachel
operations have been launched within Mozambique since
1995, to locate and destroy uncontrolled arms and
explosive caches in Mozambique. Huge successes have
been achieved in which several tons of arms and
explosives have been destroyed.

While international arms control and disarmament
initiatives have so far mainly focused on weapons of mass
destruction and major categories of conventional arms, the
devastation inflicted by the indiscriminate use of small
arms and light weapons, especially on the reconstruction
of post-conflict societies, can and should no longer be
ignored. To this end, the Security Council should play a
leading role.

