The Candidate Countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement. This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. Both of these milestones speak to the importance of women's leadership and participation in peace and security processes and the need to fully consider the gendered impact of armed conflict and violence. They also serve to underline the need to understand gender inequality, the exclusion of women and human rights violations as root causes and drivers of conflict and fragility. With the declaration (General Assembly resolution 75/1) on the commemoration of the Organization's seventy-fifth anniversary, adopted in September, all States Members of the United Nations pledged to accelerate action towards achieving gender equality, women's participation and the empowerment of women and girls in all domains. In the twenty-first century, disasters and human-made crises and conflicts are increasingly linked to global challenges, such as climate change, environmental degradation, displacement and pandemics. The consequences of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) have shown that the women and peace and security agenda is central to addressing the need for women's inclusion and leadership and the growing threat of violence against women and girls. In order to implement the women and peace and security agenda, we need all actors, including the Security Council, to take holistic, whole-of-Government and cross-pillar approaches to security. Moreover, as the pandemic has exacerbated both inequalities and wider security challenges, those tensions create conditions conducive to violence, particularly sexual and gender-based violence, including domestic violence, and limit access to assistance and essential services, including sexual and reproductive and other health-care services, social protection, education, nutrition, full access to clean water, including safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene. The European Union (EU) remains particularly concerned about the Secretary-General report's (S/2020/946) clear demonstration of a global rise in sexual and gender-based violence and the increased risk of sexual exploitation and abuse as a direct consequence of the COVID-19 crisis. Nevertheless, the fact that 146 Member States and observers in April answered the Secretary-General's call to make the prevention and response to gender-based violence a key part of their national responses to COVID-19 gives us grounds for optimism. While there have been notable achievements in the field of women and peace and security since the year 2000, much remains to be done. Women are still appallingly underrepresented when it comes to decisions and processes related to peace and security. In that regard, we welcome that the recent resolution 2538 (2020), on women in peacekeeping, was guided by the principles of resolution 1325 (2000). We are deeply concerned about the increasing level of violence and threats against women human rights defenders, aid workers, peacebuilders and political leaders, as well as the shrinking space for civil society. In some cases, COVID-19 has exacerbated human rights violations and contributed to further shrinking spaces. We must enhance our collective efforts to protect women's rights. The EU remains committed to the promotion, protection and fulfilment of all human rights and the full and effective implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action, the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development and the outcomes of their review conferences, and remains committed to sexual and reproductive health and rights. Building on the success of our joint EU-United Nations Spotlight Initiative in tackling all forms of violence against women and girls, we intend to move forward hand-in-hand with our partners. We will reach out to international financial institutions and the private sector to ensure that sustainable funding for gender equality is included in multilateral investment and financing and provide further support to global initiatives in the framework of the Generation Equality Forum. The EU also plays an active role as one of the co-leaders of the Action Coalition on gender-based violence. The EU will continue to call on all parties to conflict to abide by their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law and to stop all forms of sexual violence in conflict, as well as to end impunity for perpetrators of such crimes and to provide the survivors access to justice and comprehensive health services. For the European Union and its Member States, supporting and advancing gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls is at the core of our policies, whether at home or abroad. The EU has been at the forefront of promoting the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in peace processes. Important strategies have been adopted in that regard. We are working on the new Action Plan on Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment in External Action 2021-2025 to guide the EU's external action for that period. The EU Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security 2019-2024 is an integral part of that approach. The women and peace and security agenda is driven by the critical contribution of civil society, which also plays an essential role in its implementation. In this milestone year for women's rights and gender equality, we take this opportunity to express our gratitude to civil society actors around the world, as well as to the dedicated gender advisers and focal points, without whom we would never have gotten this far. The future of the women and peace and security agenda depends on how well we all work together to take this endeavour to the next level, as underlined by the Human Rights Council in its resolution (A/HRC/RES/45/28) on promoting and protecting the human rights of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). We, the international community, have not yet delivered sufficiently on the unanimous commitment we made in 2000: to implement the women and peace and security agenda in full. To achieve that, we do not necessarily need new resolutions, but to act upon our promises. The European Union is determined to lead by example. We are determined to bring to bear all our political, diplomatic, technical and financial instruments to ensure that this is implemented now so that, when we mark the next anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we can present results. The United Nations and women peacebuilders, activists, human rights defenders and leaders can count on our full support and engagement, and we invite all our partners and allies to spare no effort in striving towards this goal for the sake of future generations.
