Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Before
I begin my statement, on behalf of the delegation of
Chad, I would like to offer our sincere condolences
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
the United Nations as a whole, the Government of
Brazil and the bereaved family of General Jose Luiz
Jaborandy, Jr.

I would first like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your and your team's excellent leadership
of the Council for the month of August. I would also
like to thank you for organizing this meeting under
presidential note S/2010/507. The month of August has
been very busy and all the scheduled meetings, along
with many others dictated by circumstances dictated,
were appropriately held, a fact that we welcome.

We noted with satisfaction that under the Nigerian
presidency the Council adopted by consensus resolution
2235 (2015), creating the Joint Investigative Mechanism
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations designed to identify
persons and entities in the Syrian conflict who may be
using chemical weapons or products, including chlorine
and other toxic substances. In View of the fact that the
civilian population of Syria continues to be the target of
attacks involving such banned weapons and substances,
this resolution is of major importance.

On 17 August the Council also unanimously adopted
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/15) in support of
the initiative of Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, aimed at launching
political negotiations around the four areas covered
by the corresponding working groups. The efforts of
Mr. De Mistura should be unreservedly supported
with a View to helping the parties to the conflict to end
hostilities and engage in a peaceful political process.
There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. We
welcome the adoption of the presidential statement,
even though we regret the lack of transparency
surrounding the drafting of the document without the
involvement of the Council's non-permanent members.
In that connection, we share the concerns expressed by
some delegations with regard to such exclusions and
stress the need for cohesion in the Council beyond its
members' status, two thirds of whom are guided by the
mandate of the General Assembly.

This month, the Security Council also considered
the role of regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security (see S/PV.7505).
Regional organizations are uniquely suited to
addressing the multifaceted threats to international
peace and security. We look forward to the African
Union remaining a strategic partner. It must receive the
support it deserves. Moreover, we believe that relations
between the African Union and the United Nations have
not yet reached the desired strategic level, and we stress
the need to support the African Union in its efforts to
complement the work of the United Nations through
sustainable, predictable and more flexible funding.

On 13 August, the Council also considered the
Ebola virus pandemic (see S/PV.7502). We recall that
the epidemic that ravaged the three most affected
countries - Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone - was
a real threat to the entire planet, as it affected many
other countries, including countries outside Africa.
We welcome the international community's consistent
mobilization to address the pandemic, and we call on it
to provide all the necessary support to the countries most
affected in order to stem the disastrous socioeconomic
consequences of the pandemic on their development.

The Council also addressed security sector
reform in post-conflict countries (see S/PV.7508). We
emphasize that United Nations support for security
sector reform is essential; however, national ownership
and the priorities of the country concerned, depending
on its particular needs, must be taken into account.
The Council must also improve its interaction with
the African Union, which has already established a
strategic framework on security sector reform, so as to
better assist African States.

Furthermore, we note that the Council adopted a
presidential statement on South Sudan (S/ PRST/2015/ 16)
following the signing of the peace agreement by all of
the parties concerned. Chad welcomes the signing of
the agreement and calls upon all signatory parties to
implement it in good faith in order to end the suffering
of the people of South Sudan.

Libya, Guinea Bissau and the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, among
others, were also the subject of Council consultations.
The security and humanitarian situation in Libya
remains a source of great concern, and the lack of a
solution to the political and institutional crisis not only
affects the future of that country but also threatens
security and stability throughout the Sahel owing to the
terrorist and criminal activities developing there. We
call upon the United Nations to work closely with the
African Union and the League of Arab States to bring
all Libyan stakeholders to participate consistently in
the political process in order to silence the weapons and
ensure a Government of national unity in the country.

The institutional crisis in Guinea Bissau is also
alarming. The international community must make
every effort to support efforts along the difficult path
towards a democratic process, as well as the momentum
towards socioeconomic recovery and the reforms
needed to ensure the country's lasting stability. In that
regard, we call for respect for the Constitution of the
country, and we underscore the need for the army to
stay out of the crisis.

The Palestinian crisis is, as usual, at an impasse,
without a glimmer of hope for the Palestinian people
under occupation. We reiterate that the status quo is not
an option. The international community must assume
its responsibilities in finding a lasting solution to the
conflict, which has lasted too long.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
congratulations to you, Madam President, and to
the entire Nigerian team, for your outstanding work,
the relevant topics that you have addressed and your
excellent conduct of the Council's work this month. I
also take this opportunity to wish every success to the
entire team of the Russian Federation on its assumption
of the presidency for the month of September, and
we wish to assure it of the support of the Chadian
delegation.

