Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation welcomes you, Sir, and is
pleased to see you presiding over this important
meeting of interactive dialogue, so opportunely
convened by the Security Council, on the problem of
preventing and resolving the conflicts undermining the
African continent and jeopardizing the future well-
being ofits peoples.
We are indeed very happy and satisfied with this
new method of work of the Security Council, which not
only has given pride of place to Africa in its schedule,
but has also decided to listen to the Africans at regular
intervals. It is very true that a man cannot be made
happy against his will.

We also wish to thank and congratulate
Ambassador Koonjul, the Permanent Representative of
Mauritius and Chairman of the ad hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, for
the great work he has done to date. My delegation
urges him to continue on his course with the courage,
resolve and competence with which we are so familiar.

Allow me to illustrate my points by using medical
terms that, in my View, are well suited to the
circumstances. The issue at hand is indeed one of
disease and cure.

During the exchange of views that took place on
29 January between the Security Council and African
representatives, the latter emphasized the need for
prevention rather than for cure, because once a disease
has taken hold, recovery may be difficult, lengthy and
sometimes uncertain, leaving a trail of death and
suffering in its wake. The Africans therefore recognize
the importance of preventive diplomacy, although the
need to resolve pressing issues requires the
implementation of remedial diplomacy as well.

During the debate of 29 January, the main causes
of conflict in Africa were identified, inter alia, along
the following lines: the absence of democracy, good
governance and the rule of law indispensable to
democracy; poverty, illiteracy and disease, especially
HIV/AIDS; and the proliferation and illicit trafficking
of small arms. In order to treat a disease, one must first
and above all begin to diagnose it.

Some time ago, Secretary-General Kofi Annan
essentially said that if the resolutions,
recommendations and decisions of the United Nations
could solve problems in and of themselves, Africa
would have overcome its difficulties a long time ago.
In brief, as the Latins said: "Facta non verba". On the
basis of the Secretary-General's statement, on 29
January the Africans spoke with one voice to say that,
with respect to Africa's development, including
conflict prevention and resolution, it is high time for
concrete deeds based on the need for results.

Backing up his words with action, the Secretary-
General recently opened a regional United Nations
Office for West Africa and named Mr. Ibrahima Fall as
his Special Representative. My delegation is grateful to
him for that and takes this opportunity warmly to
congratulate Mr. Fall, whose hardest work, it must be
said, has only just begun. In any case, he may be
assured ofthe full cooperation of Cote d'Ivoire.

On another matter, my delegation welcomes the
very recent entry into force of the International
Criminal Court, which we view as the main instrument
not only for preventing, but also for resolving conflicts
throughout the world and, most particularly, in Africa.
The International Criminal Court completes the array
of legal instruments aimed at establishing the rule of
law worldwide.

In that context, my delegation believes that the
conclusions proposed by Ambassador Koonjul at the
first meeting of the Working Group on 22 March with
Mr. Fall effectively reflect the letter and spirit of the
meeting between the African Group and the Security
Council on 29 January. My delegation particularly
welcomes the third, sixth, seventh and tenth points of
the informal report, in which the Working Group
emphasizes the need for a pragmatic approach to guide
its actions and envisages the possibility of involving
the Bretton Woods institutions in its activities.

In this regard, my delegation believes that, unless
we are careful, instead of contributing to an effective
struggle against poverty, the activities of the donors -
including the European Union and the G-8 - could
actually exacerbate poverty. Indeed, the money loaned
would be used only by a small group of elites, whereas
the debt burden would be borne by taxpayers. It would
be desirable for any new approach to involve the
donors in the entire process of economic development,
including the creation of a socio-political environment
conducive to the measured repayment of loans, follow-
up to the use of funds and, ultimately, the settlement of
the debt.

To us, far from representing any kind of
interference in the domestic affairs of States, an
approach involving donors, even in electoral processes,
could be an impetus to good governance. In any case,
such an approach involves support for peoples' choices
and not imposition. Moreover, the Working Group
envisages working in synergy with regional and
subregional organizations and involving itself in the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development.

My delegation has no significant comments to
make on the basis of its analysis of the Working
Group's programme of work. Indeed, as we have said,
conflicts are rooted in poverty, illiteracy, intolerance
and fear of the other. Furthermore, one of the main
sources of misunderstanding in Africa is very often the
endless contestation of elections, rightly or wrongly, by
suspicious protagonists. In such circumstances, my
delegation would like to see special attention given to
electoral processes in Africa. In order to ensure the
stability of the continent, the Security Council should
help to systematize, universalize and strengthen
genuinely independent electoral commissions in Africa.

It is well known that the accumulation,
proliferation and illicit trafficking of small arms are
major destabilizing factors that, inter alia, exacerbate
conflicts and legitimize the rule of the strongest and
best armed. My delegation believes that, along with the
First Committee of the General Assembly and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the ad hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa should devote particular attention to the
problem of the proliferation and illicit trafficking of
weapons in Africa. An arms moratorium should be
respected not only on the ground but also at the source.

Finally, it has been generally said that, to a
significant extent, African conflicts are the result ofthe
nature of the relations between the world's great
Powers. Thus, after having witnessed with concern the
annulment of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty of 1972,
the C6te d'Ivoire welcomes the recent agreement on
the limitation of strategic nuclear weapons between the
United States of America and the Russian Federation.
We encourage the two parties to pursue a dialogue in
order to favour a future world free of the danger of
nuclear weapons.

These are, in a few words, the reflections that the
delegation of Cote d'Ivoire wished to share on the
subject of the prevention and resolution of conflicts in
Africa.

