Mr. Lacroix: I would again like to thank you, Sir,
the Italian presidency of the Security Council and all
members of the Council for holding today's debate,
as well as for adopting resolution 2382 (2017). It is a
clear signal of the Security Council's interest in United
Nations police activities in the area of peacekeeping. I
will be very brief so as to allow our colleagues from the
field to respond to the various questions posed to them.

I think that today's debate has highlighted the
increasingly vital role ofpolice in peacekeeping - both
in providing security and complementing the military
component, as well as in contributing to the protection
of civilians, in partnership with other components in
our operations - but also the vital contribution of our
police colleagues in strengthening local capacity in the
crucial area of rule-of-law institutions. Obviously, the
strengthening of the rule of law and institutions is a
precondition for restoring lasting peace and providing
our peacekeeping operation with the possibility to exit.

The question asked by the representative of Sweden
was related to how the police dimension might be
further integrated within mandates conferred on us
by the Security Council. I believe that the rationale
behind the representative's question also involves
how those police activities could be increasingly and
better supported by the Security Council. I would like
to highlight the importance of the continuous interest
of the Security Council in the United Nations police.
As I said, that interest has been demonstrated today by
this meeting and the adoption ofresolution 2382 (2017),
but we are keen on having further interaction with the
Council. Moreover, we look forward to the Council's
consideration and discussion of the reports that we
will provide, specifically the report to be submitted
pursuant to resolution 2382 (2017), on a different set of
very important issues.

I would also like to say that the challenges
associated with and the need to improve United
Nations police peacekeeping are in many ways similar
and, indeed, complementary to the challenges and the
demands of other components. We look forward to the
Security Council's feedback on how we perform not
only in responding to those challenges, but in further
integrating the activities of various components, While
ensuring adequate cooperation in the field. A number
of past reports of the Secretary-General have already
addressed the issue of police components. I believe
that we should look to the Council to provide us not
only with consistent monitoring of and support for our
efforts, but also with encouragement to Member States
to support those efforts in crucial areas, such as scaling
up performance, increasing and improving training
and capacities, particularly as our police component
is dealing with activities and issues that require very
technical and specific capacities.

Some of those were addressed and mentioned
earlier during this meeting, including working to
increase the integration of police component activities
with other components; partnering with other
institutions and organizations, such as regional and
subregional organizations, as well as the European
Union; and cooperating with police-contributing
countries not only to increase the percentage of women
in our police contingent, but also to better address
the role of women in peacekeeping processes in our
operations. The language issue was mentioned by some
representatives; it is a crucial issue, particularly with
regard to policing, because the United Nations police is
all about interacting with the population.

I would like to add that that it is equally important
that our expectations vis-a-vis the Security Council are
met in terms of mandates being adequately provided
with the required resources to ensure that we can fulfil
the missions conferred upon us by the Security Council,
including policing, as well as the other activities. I
believe that it is also important to encourage States
Members to support our work in policing, not only by
entering into partnerships with police-contributing
countries with a view to helping them improve their
capacities, but also by encouraging them to continue
and possibly increase their support to programmatic
funding for capacity-building. As members of the
Council are aware, our police activities also depend
on that type of programmatic funding, which is very
important with regard to our work in developing several
key policies, several of which were mentioned today.

In conclusion, I would like to say that today's
briefing is particularly timely for many reasons, one
of which is that it provides us with the opportunity to
welcome Police Commissioner Luis Carrilho. I would
like to say before the Council that we are delighted to
see him join the peacekeeping family, but I would also
like to pay tribute and very warmly thank Commissioner
Stefan Feller for the his outstanding work at the head of
the Police Division.

