Ms. Power (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking Nigeria for keeping the international
community focused on Ebola with this meeting and,
of course, for deploying more than 500 health workers
to the countries affected at the peak of the outbreak,
when they were so desperately needed. I wish also to
commend Nigeria's swift and methodical response
to two outbreaks within its own borders during the
epidemic, including one in Lagos, a city of more than
21 million people, which show how we can effectively
contain Ebola with the right response.

I would also like to thank all of today's briefers
for their contributions: World Health Organization
(WHO) Director-General Margaret Chan, United
Nations Special Envoy David Nabarro, the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission and his representative
here, and the African Union Permanent Observer,
Ambassador Tete Antonio. We express our immense
gratitude to the men and women of their various
organizations on the frontlines of this fight helping
communities rebuild and recover.

Lastly, I wish to thank Dr. Mosoka Fallah, who
took time away from his daily work with his fellow
Liberians to share his story and the story of community
solidarity and leadership. When other people were
fleeing the growing outbreak, he ran headfirst into it.
Where others saw an impenetrate climate of fear and
distrust, he saw what he described here again today,
communities yearning to be empowered to stand up
to this deadly virus, and those communities, with his
support and partnership, went about building their trust
and knowledge, household by household and block by
block. We are in awe of his bravery and determination
and, above, all the compassion he showed for his fellow
Liberians.

Let me begin with what we all know. We have
made tremendous progress towards stopping this
deadly outbreak. Acording to WHO, in the week that
ended on 9 August, only three new cases of Ebola were
reported in the affected countries, one in Sierra Leone
and two in Guinea. Three cases in a week across three
countries; how many members of the Council would
have believed that possible a year ago, when we were
seeing three, four or more cases pop up each day in
individual households across the region, when three
new cases arriving in a single field clinic would have
been considered a slow day?

But it would be a serious mistake to take our eye
off the current outbreak or to think that when we end
it our job will be done. So today I want to briefly set
out three steps that the region and the international
community must take to address this outbreak and help
prevent future ones from reaching such devastating
proportions.

First and most obvious, we must work relentlessly
to get to zero. Ebola is a cunning virus capable of
exploiting even the slightest slip-up, delay or other
weakness in our response. A single missed link in the
chain, a contact who is not traced, a burial that is not
carried out safely, a symptomatic patient who is not
properly tested or quarantined, any single mistake or
weakness can itself spawn a new, deadly branch of this
outbreak.

So while the procedures that have been put in place
may feel onerous at times, they are critically important,
as is our constant vigilance. Even when a country gets
to zero, as we have seen, new outbreaks can and will
occur. The true measure of the progress made and
systems put in place will be how early these systems can
detect and then contain any new outbreaks. Consider
Sierra Leone's Tonkolili district, where on 24 July the
first case of Ebola in more than 150 days was reported.
In response, national and international experts travelled
immediately to the area, where more than 50 people
were quarantined, including 29 high-risk contacts,
two of whom tested positive for Ebola. Contact teams
deployed to trace possible lines of transmission, and
local religious and community leaders were engaged to
inform nearby communities about symptoms and what
to do if they detected them.

This is the kind of effort that is needed to prevent
new outbreaks from becoming epidemics.

Secondly, as others have noted, we need to build
up the public-health systems and improve primary
case in the countries affected as well as countries
with similar vulnerabilities, of which there are many.
This means strengthening the institutions themselves
and supporting the people who make them work. As
this outbreak demonstrated, Ebola thrives in places
with fragile, overstretched health systems and limited
public-health capabilities. By allowing the virus to
spread faster and more widely, those vulnerabilities
pose a threat not only to people living in countries with
weak systems but to people everywhere. Last month's
International Ebola Recovery Conference was aimed
at exactly that - strengthening public health systems
in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. It is critically
important that all countries deliver on the pledges they
made at the Conference - and before it, for that matter.

Thirdly, we need to understand how our global
health and emergency response architecture allowed
the epidemic to spread so widely before we stepped
in and scaled up. Several critical efforts have been
undertaken to identify crucial flaws in the response,
including the report issued by the WHO Ebola Interim
Assessment Panel and the United Nations High-level
Panel on the Global Response to Health Crises, whose
final report is forthcoming. We urge those involved
to put forward concrete, actionable recommendations
on the systemic reforms needed to ensure timely,
effective and coordinated responses, and we welcome
the commitment that Dr. Chan and Dr. Nabarro have
made to undertaking swift reforms within the WHO.
Those reforms necessitate the support of all partners
and Member States. Here are just a few of the questions
those efforts should seek to answer.

Why did it take the United Nations, its agencies
and all of us so long to be seized by the urgency and
magnitude of this outbreak? What was lost between
staff on the ground - people like Dr. Fallah, people
who were seeing clinics overflow and bodies
abandoned in the streets - and people like us, with
the power to catalyse an effective response? Would
critical resources, time and energy have been saved by
relying on existing United Nations and international
structures to coordinate the emergency response, rather
than creating a new one in the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER), or did
UNMEER add value? If we had the response to do over
again, or if we should confront another outbreak, the
bottom line is, what would we do differently?

Of course, the value of those exercises rests not
on the diagnoses but on the swift implementation of
any remedies identified. Here, too, the international
community's continued engagement is crucial. In
September of last year, when the United States had
the privilege of presiding over an emergency meeting
of the Security Council to try to rally international
support for the Ebola response, I noted then that we
knew how to bend the outbreak's deadly curve - it was
just a question of marshalling the resources and the will
to do it. "The math is simple", I said at the time; "the
sooner we act, the more lives we will save" (S/PV. 7268, p. 9). The same is true today, only we are no longer
just talking about this Ebola outbreak, but about other
disease outbreaks that will inevitably follow. Get to
zero. Build more resilient public-health systems that
everyone can access. Learn from our mistakes. If we
do that, we will go a long way towards preventing the
next outbreak from taking so many lives and tearing
apart so many families and communities. The math is
still simple. The sooner we act, the more lives we save.

I would like to close, finally, by telling the Council
aboutjust one ofthose lives saved. On 24 July 2014, just
over a year ago, a 44-year-old emergency-room doctor
named Philip Ireland was headed to a staff meeting
at John F. Kennedy Memorial Hospital in Monrovia,
Liberia, when he was struck with a headache so severe,
he saw flashes of light. His heart rate shot up and he
felt feverish. He suspected he had Ebola, but the few
clinics in Monrovia taking suspected patients were
overflowing. So he quarantined himself at home. His
mother made her own personal protective equipment
suit out of rain gear and household gloves so that she
could care for him. But Dr. Ireland's condition continued
to deteriorate, until by the seventh day he could not feel
his own pulse and was rushed to an Ebola treatment
unit. His first night in the unit, he had diarrhoea 46
times and vomited 26 times. "I woke up barely alive, in
a sea of mess," he said. But in what he later described
as "the most touching act of kindness one could ever
imagine", a physician's assistant named Patrick came to
Dr. Ireland the next morning, bathed and dressed him
and put him in a clean bed. Then Patrick prayed with
him. Dr. Ireland said,

"That man has changed my wheel when it comes to
how to give empathy and care for a patient. I now
know, because I was a patient who was dying."

Day by day, Dr. Ireland got stronger, and 14 days
later he was released, Ebola-free. Today, Dr. Ireland is
back in JFK Memorial Hospital in Monrovia, where he
is not only treating patients again but is also helping to
train a new generation of Liberian doctors and nurses.
He sees that as part of his duty, a way of rebuilding a
health system decimated by the virus that almost took
his life. And at the end of each day, he goes home to
his wife and five children. That is one life - one life
saved in an outbreak that to date has taken the lives
of more than 500 health professionals and more than
11,000 overall. Just imagine for one moment how glad
we will be, the next time around, if we take the steps
today that will save thousands of lives later.

