Mr. Malpede (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like, along with other members of the Council,
to express our gratitude to the Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Mr. Fausto Pocar and
Mr. Erik Mose, respectively, and to Prosecutors Del
Ponte and Jallow for the presentation of their reports,
which make it possible for us to continue with our
biannual consideration of the completion strategies of
the Tribunals.

We also take note of and recognize the steps
taken by the ICTY to speed up the pace of work. The
figures provided by the Tribunal show that the
measures taken concerning productivity, which were
referred to in earlier reports, are yielding good results.
The Trial and Appeals Chambers are working at full
capacity, and the simultaneous trials of multiple
accused are being carried out efficiently. It is also very
important to note the more active role of judges in the
preparation of trials as well as the role of the ad litem
judges. We believe that the Tribunal has been able to
optimize its operation and working methods without
affecting the principles of due process.

We take a positive view of the steps taken to refer
the cases of lower- and intermediate-ranking accused
to the competent national jurisdictions. There is a need
to continue to strengthen, through the provision of
adequate resources and capacity-building, national
judicial systems as well as detention and witness
protection mechanisms.

It is deplorable and unacceptable that there
remain six fugitives who have not been brought before
the Tribunal, in particular those accused of genocide,
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic. We would
highlight the seriousness of the issues mentioned in
Prosecutor Del Ponte's report, including lack of
political commitment, lack of trust and cooperation
among those institutions involved in locating fugitives,
and failure to put together an efficient and focused
strategy. We appeal to the Governments of Serbia and
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to cooperate fully with the
Prosecution and with the Tribunal. The completion
strategy will not be brought to fruition as long as those
accused persons are not brought to trial, nor will the
conditions be created that are essential for promoting
the peace process, reconciliation and development in
the region.

As regards the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, we would highlight the progress made in the
context of the completion strategy. We are concerned
that the transfer of cases to national courts could mean
that the accused might not be tried properly. We
endorse the criteria to be used in deciding which
accused will be tried in the Tribunal and which will be
transferred, in particular the distinction between those
that had leadership positions and major responsibility,
along with the criteria for such a determination.

While these are reasonable, there are doubts
about the capacities of national judicial systems
effectively to bring trials to completion. Such
limitations relate not only to the judicial systems of
African countries, to which we need to provide support
and resources; there may also be problems with
transfers to developed countries, as in the case of
Norway, to which reference was made.

We gather from the report that it is extremely
urgent to provide resources to the Government of
Rwanda and help it to build capacity, so that it can
tackle successfully the legal challenge of trying those
responsible for genocide, both in transferred cases and
in local cases. We appeal to the Government of
Rwanda to effectively abolish the death penalty and do
its utmost to ensure that the 18 fugitives are arrested
and handed over to the Tribunal.

Lastly, as this is the last statement Argentina will
be making on the Tribunals before the end of our two-
year term, we would like to say that the work of these
Tribunals has been an essential step taken by the
Security Council to root out impunity and to affirm the
rule of law in those regions.

The problems encountered by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, to which
we have referred and which emerge from the report,
demonstrate, in our view, that the fragmentation and
proliferation of ad hoc tribunals is not the right path
through which to deal with cases of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.

We believe, therefore, that it is necessary for
States and civil society to lend support, political will
and the right resources in order to bolster the work of
the International Criminal Court, so that in the future a
single international tribunal, with robust human and
material resources and with universal authority and
legitimacy, can be the legal weapon of the international
community to try those committing crimes against
humanity and to uproot impunity.

