Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): The United Arab Emirates would like to thank
His Excellency Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, for presiding over this
important debate. I wish to acknowledge the central
and historical role that the Arab Republic of Egypt
plays in maintaining international peace and security.
My country commends the important role of Al-Azhar
University, which has served as an intellectual and
cultural beacon for centuries throughout the Islamic
and Arab worlds. We would also like to welcome the
adoption earlier today of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2016/6).

The international community recognizes that
violent extremism has transcended national borders and
become a global phenomenon. We therefore welcome
the effortsto develop a comprehensive international
strategy to eliminate this scourge. Our region has
endured far too many nightmares perpetrated by
terrorist organizations, which have absolutely no link to
true Islam and which have become a major contributing
factor to insecurity and instability.

We acknowledge the importance of a society's
full participation in State-building, especially for
the population of youths under 25 years old, who
constitute 50 per cent of the population of Arab
countries and who are targeted by extremist groups
that exploit their grievances. Our counter-terrorism
strategy also empowers women and integrates them
into decision-making, including efforts to combat
extremism, based on the concept of moderation,
coexistence and tolerance throughout society. His
Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan,
President of the country, has issued a decree to combat
discrimination and hatred. In addition, we support
efforts to foster a number of relevant initiatives aimed
at reforming the religious narrative and returning to the
noble vision of Islam.

Education also plays a significant role in countering
terrorism. We need to promote research and religious
scholarship in order to develop effective curricula for all
levels of education with a View to building the resilience
and capacity of Governments and communities. That is
why we host the Hedayah Centre for Countering Violent
Extremism, and the Muslim Council of Elders, chaired
by the Sheikh of Al-Azhar, which aims to address the
root causes of sectarianism.

We also need to develop ways to combat the
new online recruitment tactics used by terrorists and
extremists. To that end, we established, in collaboration
with the United States, the Sawab Centre, which
aims to combat extremist messages through social
media. Furthermore, in terms of policy development,
the entities we host are dedicated to building
multi-stakeholder efforts to map, identify and remove
the drivers of extremism. We are also eager to organize
workshops with Government officials and experts in the
technology sector to share information and encourage
the development of counter-narratives, including the
perspectives of female former foreign terrorist fighters.

The Arab region has historically exemplified
pluralism and coexistence. Today, we call for a return
to that model and vision. I would like to offer some
recommendations for actions that would help to achieve
this objective.

First, the Security Council must apply a single
standard to all actors, all States and all perpetrators
of occupation, State terrorism or foreign interference.
Secondly, the international community, including the
private sector, must expand its efforts to implement
relevant existing norms to combat terrorism, including
resolution 2178 (2014). Thirdly, we must discuss how
best to rehabilitate and reintegrate foreign terrorist
fighters who have defected from extremist groups and
returned to their countries. Fourthly, we must work to
improve the economic and social context for young
people, create job opportunities, protect their rights and
engage them in building the future of their countries.
Finally, we look forward to the recommendations that
will be proposed in June in the context of the review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

I would like to reiterate that the United Arab
Emirates believes in the importance of countering
extremism before it becomes violent, in an urgent and
comprehensive manner. I would also like to express
our appreciation for today's important debate and wish
Egypt continued success in its presidency this month.

