Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to welcome the presence here
today of the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, whose return to New York to take up her
important duties is both a great opportunity for the
United Nations and excellent news for us all. I should
also like warmly to congratulate the United Kingdom
on its accession to the presidency of the Security
Council, as well as to assure it of our full support.

It was an honour and an unrivalled experience to
lead this important Security Council visit to the Lake
Chad region, along with you, Sir, and our colleague
and friend from Senegal. Ijoin you, Mr. President, in
expressing thanks to all of the officials who welcomed
us so warmly, including the entire United Nations team.
In line with the distribution of issues we agreed, I will
focus on the humanitarian situation.

On behalf of my colleagues, I should like to begin
by paying tribute to the courage and commitment of
the humanitarians we met, who are doing outstanding
work in often very difficult situations. The daily
commitment of those men and women is exemplary,
and it is important that the Council visited them on the
ground in order to express our deep gratitude.

The United Nations has considerably increased
its presence on the ground, particularly in north-east
Nigeria, to face the humanitarian crisis that threatens
hundreds of thousands of people. We were able to visit
the hub at Maiduguri, in north-east Nigeria, which
brings together all humanitarian actors and is now
operational. Those efforts must be pursued, while the
United Nations must further strengthen its presence
in order to meet the immense and growing needs of
the most vulnerable populations. With regard to the
humanitarian situation, we have identified three main
issues: the humanitarian emergency, protection for
affected populations and the challenge of financing
humanitarian aid.

On the first challenge - the humanitarian

emergency and access to populations in need - the
humanitarian consequences ofthe crisis are catastrophic
for the region: 26 million people affected, of whom
10.7 million are in need of emergency aid. More than
two and a half million people have been forced to take
to the road to flee or go into exile. Land is no longer
cultivated, markets are at a standstill and the prices of
basic necessities have soared.

Food security was the first urgent need highlighted
by our interlocutors on the ground. The situation is
tragic and threatens hundreds of thousands of people
in the region. In total, more than 7 million people are
affected. The Secretary-General has spoken of famine
in the north-east of Nigeria. The Security Council was
able to meet with displaced persons and refugees in
Cameroon and Nigeria. All of them expressed the same
concerns: problems of safety and access to water and
quality food. The inhabitants are sometimes deprived
of their means of subsistence and depend entirely upon
humanitarian aid for their survival.

Insecurity and access difficulties sometimes
complicate food distribution. It is therefore crucial that
the countries of the region ensure unhindered access,
without bureaucratic impediments, as well as secure
access for the United Nations and humanitarian actors
wherever populations need emergency assistance. To
be truly effective, the efforts of the United Nations
must be only in support of those of the Governments
concerned. During its visit, the Council welcomed the
excellent cooperation between the United Nations and
the countries of the region. In north-east Nigeria, given
the scale of the needs, we encouraged the Nigerian
Government to continue its efforts to facilitate
humanitarian assistance for the most vulnerable people.

Health is the second emergency. With, for instance,
60 per cent of health-care facilities destroyed in north-
east Nigeria, people are threatened by large-scale
epidemics, such as polio or measles.

The third emergency is education. More than 1,200
schools have been destroyed since the beginning of the
crisis, and 3.2 million children are urgently in need
of education. Education for girls is paramount and
should be encouraged. There is no time to be wasted in
preventing this generation from being sacrificed.

In addition to the humanitarian emergency, the
second challenge is that of ensuring the protection
of civilians and respect for human rights. The goal is
to ensure that people are kept safe from Boko Haram
and to assist with the voluntary and sustainable
return of displaced persons or refugees, where the
security situation allows. The Council also recalled
the importance of respecting humanitarian law and,
to that end, welcomes the tripartite agreement signed
by Nigeria, Cameroon and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
on 2 March in Yaounde. The agreement allows for the
creation of a solid legal framework to encourage the
voluntary and sustainable return of Nigerian refugees
to safe areas, under the auspices of the UNHCR. The
Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria have committed
to implementing that agreement as soon as possible.

The Security Council has also paid special
attention to the plight of women and girls in the region.
In Maroua, Cameroon, the Council heard stories of
the pain inflicted on female refugees and internally
displaced persons by Boko Haram. I think that, for
all of us, it was a particularly powerful and touching
encounter. In Chad and Nigeria, we also met with a
number of civil society women's organizations for
those displaced in the Maiduguri camp and women
Senate representatives in Abuja. We lauded the courage
shown by women and girls who are often victims of
both Boko Haram violence and of stigmatization within
their own communities. It is therefore crucial for those
women not only to be protected from prostitution and
early marriage, but also to be included in security
management, political decision-making and economic
development matters. It is a key point that struck us all,
which I would like to underscore today.

The third challenge is that of providing financial
support to affected areas. The response to the immense
needs that I mentioned has remained inadequate. We
welcomed Nigeria's commitment to allot $1 million
to the north-east of the country in response to the
humanitarian emergency. It is important for that
financial commitment to lead to action as soon as
possible. We have also noted that the international
community's has rallied in support of the Government
of Nigeria by building on the outcome of the Oslo
Conference, which was held just prior to our mission
and was a step in the right direction. Fourteen countries
pledged $672 million in humanitarian aid over the next
three years and $457 million for 2017. We have also
underscored the need for the international community
and Governments in the region to continue their efforts.
By way of example, it is in that spirit that a donors'
conference for Chad will be held this spring in Paris,
under the auspices of the World Bank.

Given the magnitude of the needs, we underscored
that it was important to promote a global and regional
approach to creating synergies and enhancing
coordination with other donors and to mobilize
goodwill, including private donors and companies, as
well as other non-traditional donors such as emerging
countries. Beyond that, our interviews revealed how
important it is for humanitarian aid from partners to
be equitably distributed among the four countries
concerned and for it to be properly apportioned within
each country according to emergency needs.

As underscored during the Oslo Conference,
our interlocutors also recalled the importance of
the humanitarian continuum, stabilization and
development. Above and beyond financing for
emergency humanitarian aid, as our friend Ambassador
Seck pointed out, it is essential to secure long-term
financing to prevent the perpetuation of the crisis. To
put things in a broader perspective, I would say that,
based on information on the situation on the ground,
which is always the most important type, the mission
was crucial for validating, and if necessary, rectifying
some of the strategic guidelines that we implement here
in New York.

For my part, I would like to briefly highlight three
main lessons learned. The first is that the mission was
crucial in itself, not only to shed light on the Lake
Chad basin region, but also to make it a long-term
priority for the international community. Frankly, the
Lake Chad basin region has not always received the
attention it deserves from the international community.
This mission will help to correct that mistake and
injustice. Secondly, this mission proved that, given
the multifaceted humanitarian, security and economic
crisis that affects the region, the only response possible
is a global approach that encompasses all three key
priorities: stepping up a coordinated response to Boko
Haram, responding to the humanitarian emergency and
setting in motion the virtuous circle of development.
All of our representatives agree and feedback has
clearly shown that to be successful in overcoming
those three challenges, they must be tackled head-on
and simultaneously.

How can we vanquish terrorism without eradicating
abject poverty and malnutrition? How can we
achieve that without improving education and youth
employment? Conversely, how can we spur development
without putting an end to Boko Haram? We can see that
they are all interlinked and that compartmentalizing
the situation would mean resigning ourselves to
doing nothing. The only way to overcome those three
challenges is to address their root causes. Once again, it
is one thing to understand concepts while here in New
York, but quite another to internalize them as we hear
from our interlocutors on the ground.

The third lesson - and allow me to stress this - is
that our efforts in the Lake Chad region can and must
be an example of United Nations reform. This mission
confirmed that the silo mentality, which has long been
the key component of United Nations bureaucracy, does
not produce results and that an integrated approach that
smartly combines the entire range of tools available
can be successful. The Security Council's mission
strengthens a vision held by Antonio Guterres and
Amina Mohamed for United Nations reform that France
fully supports.

