Mr. Roed-Larsen: I am disappointed to report
that since the last briefing to the Security Council on
19 August, the Israeli-Palestinian peace process has
stalled. The recent cycle of terror attacks and
extrajudicial killings has broken the Palestinian
ceasefire and brought the process to a standstill. A
combination of violence and the too slow
implementation of the road map peace plan have
brought the region to a potential turning point. We are
today confronted, once again, with the question of
whether the parties will recommit themselves to peace
or whether the long, debilitating conflict will grind on.
I am concerned that, without a major change in the
situation on the ground, further deterioration, resulting
in major bloodshed, will be inevitable.

The month since the last briefing has been
dispiriting for all of us who hope that the road map will
provide a path to peace. On the day of that briefing, 19
August, shock and sadness enveloped the United
Nations on hearing of the savage bombing of the
United Nations headquarters in Baghdad. The tragic
deaths of our colleagues and friends there was
compounded by news of a another cruel suicide
bombing in Jerusalem in which 23 people - 20
Israelis and 3 foreigners - many of them women and
children, were killed. That bombing occurred after two
operations of the Israeli Defense Force (IDF) that
resulted in the death of 4 Palestinians.

In the aftermath of that terror attack, the
Government of Israel declared "an all-out war against
Hamas and other terrorist elements" in the occupied
Palestinian territory. That war has involved a stepped-
up campaign of attempted extrajudicial killings of
Hamas leaders. Since 19 August Violence has
increased, and the fragile process that began with the
presentation of the road map to the parties and the
Aqaba summit has been severely set back.

Late last week, after two suicide bombings on 9
September, the Government of Israel announced that its
Security Cabinet had decided in principle to remove
Palestinian Authority President Arafat "in a manner
and at a time of its choosing". Mr. Arafat is
democratically elected, and as such, the legitimate
leader of the Palestinians. He embodies Palestinian
identity and national aspirations. He is far from
irrelevant.

Since the last briefing to the Security Council, 81
people have lost their lives to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict - 38 Israelis and 43 Palestinians. This raises
the death toll since September 2000 to 2,808
Palestinians and 830 Israelis. This death toll is
particularly disappointing and sad in the light of the
dramatically reduced toll of the last reporting period
when a ceasefire was in effect.

During the current reporting period, Israel has
been hit with three suicide bomb attacks. These attacks
broke the ceasefire that was declared by Palestinian
groups and brokered by the leadership of the
Palestinian Authority and Egyptian negotiators. The 19
August and two 9 September attacks killed a total of 38
people. The Secretary-General has consistently
condemned such acts of terrorism, emphasizing that
they are heinous, immoral, indefensible and contrary to
international humanitarian law. The deliberate targeting
of civilians cannot be justified to advance any cause.

We call on the Palestinian Authority to bring to
justice those who plan and carry out such attacks and to
live up to its obligations regarding security under the
road map.

Both during and after the unilateral ceasefire
Israel continued to carry out extrajudicial killings
aimed at the leaders of Palestinian militant groups. The
United Nations has repeatedly and strongly called on
the Government of Israel to cease such attacks. Our
basic principled opposition to extrajudicial killings is
compounded by the frequency with which such
operations are carried out with disproportionate force
in densely populated civilian areas, killing and injuring
civilian bystanders in contravention of international
humanitarian law. Israel has an obligation as the
occupying Power to ensure the safety of Palestinian
civilians.

We recognize Israel's legitimate right to defend
its people against terrorist attacks, but that right must
be carried out using proportionate force and strictly in
keeping with Israel's international humanitarian law
obligations.

Unfortunately, implementation of the road map
never effectively began. I am afraid, viewing the
situation with hindsight, that we moved too slowly and
with only incremental steps at the initial stages of
implementation. What was necessary were bold steps
that could have produced support on both sides for the
process.

Neither side has seriously and actively addressed
the core concerns of the other side. For Israelis, that
concern is security and freedom from terrorist attacks.
Unfortunately, the Palestinian Authority failed again to
grasp control of the security situation. The unilateral
ceasefire declared by Palestinian militant groups was a
useful step, but other steps such as the consolidation of
security forces and security reforms could have been
taken. For Palestinians, the core concern is an
assurance that the peace process will lead to the end of
the occupation and the establishment of a viable,
independent Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967
borders. The ongoing settlement activity and continued
construction of the separation wall cause Palestinians
to wonder whether we are moving in a direction
opposite to that goal. In addition, Israel has never fully
endorsed the road map.

Thus, the two key issues in the peace process are
terrorism and occupation. Virtually all relevant actors
have agreed that both need to end in order to achieve a
just and lasting settlement. The road map addresses
both. But the very limited approach to implementing
the road map never effectively tackled either issue. Not
only must progress be made on each, but progress must
be seen to be occurring by Israelis and Palestinians
alike in order to develop and maintain public support
for the peace process. Real action must therefore be
taken to end terrorism and to end occupation. Without
popular support no Palestinian Prime Minister can, at
this stage, counter terrorism and terrorist organizations
in an effective manner. That essential public support
could best be achieved under the current circumstances
through the abandonment of settlements. The continued
expansion of settlement activities produces the
opposite effect. In such an environment, it would not
be possible for the Palestinian Authority to move
forward with political and security measures to counter
terrorism and terrorist groups.

The principle of parallelism, reciprocal steps
taken by both parties in all fields, is a core concept of
the road map. The weakness of the past four months of
half-hearted implementation by both sides is that
parallelism was not emphasized. As a result, a single
but essential issue - security of the Israelis from
terrorism - became the sole focus of road map
implementation. The ineffective way in which the issue
was addressed contributed significantly to stalling the
peace process. That single focus has allowed Violent
groups to set the pace and the agenda for the process.
We must reassert the principle of parallelism by
beginning to end both terrorism and occupation. In that
way, control will be taken out of the hands of those
who would use violence to prolong the conflict.

Before the establishment of the Quartet and the
release of the road map, the prerequisites for restarting
a peace process were clear. The first was the creation
of an international mechanism, a consensus-based
coalition of States and institutions that would put an
internationally supported peace plan on the table and
guide the parties through a process. The second
prerequisite was a plan that would set the end point of
the process: the establishment of a Viable, independent
Palestinian State, comprehensive regional peace and
security for Israel. Finally, the situation required the
appointment of an empowered and credible Palestinian
prime minister, to be a partner for peace and to whom
consolidated security services would report.

Despite the recent setbacks, we still have the
international mechanism, the Quartet - composed of
the European Union, the Russian Federation, the
United Nations and the United States - which needs
to redouble its efforts. The Quartet's envoys have met
frequently to address the current crisis, the latest
meeting being in Geneva two days ago. We still have
the plan: the road map. However, there is for the
moment no Palestinian prime minister for the Quartet
and the Israelis to work with.

An honourable and peace-minded prime minister
has resigned and the new nominee has not yet,
unfortunately, been able to take up the reins of power.
The rapid appointment and confirmation of a credible
and fully empowered Palestinian prime minister is an
essential step to address the current dangerous
situation. That prime minister should focus on
establishing law and order and ending terror and
Violence by disarming militant groups. He must express
full commitment to a policy of non-violence and to the
road map.

The Quartet and key regional partners - Jordan,
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and others - can do much to help
a new prime minister succeed and mobilize the
necessary popular support. In doing so, the
international community must address the central
issues animating this conflict: occupation and
terrorism. It is clear that without significant Israeli
concessions, related particularly to settlements and the
separation wall, neither the peace process nor any
peace-minded Palestinian leader will be credible in the
eyes of the Palestinian people. Without a credible
Palestinian leader, it will be difficult for the Palestinian
Authority to take the necessary steps of consolidating
security forces, disarming militant groups and
establishing law and order.

Determined international engagement is now
urgently required. The Quartet is the pre-eminent
diplomatic mechanism for Middle East peacemaking,
and its continued active involvement is indispensable.
The Quartet principals - the United Nations
Secretary-General, Russian Foreign Minister Ivanov,
United States Secretary of State Powell and, for the
European Union, High Representative Solana - have
agreed to meet later this month here in New York to
address all relevant issues. That meeting will be
significant because of the critical situation in the
region. The Quartet will review the implementation of
the road map and attempt to devise ways of putting the
process back on track.

I wish to note that the road map contains
provisions for the acceleration or the slowing down of
the process. Given the current situation, it might be
appropriate to speed up the road map process. Bold
steps related to settlements and security and involving
increased activity from the international community
might be necessary in order to improve the
environment and assist in jump-starting a resumption
of the process.

In each briefing to the Security Council, the
Secretariat has provided an update on the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. We are
again compelled to report a continued deterioration in
the living conditions of the people of the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip. Due to the continually volatile
security situation, the ongoing Israeli regime of
closures and movement restrictions continues to
devastate the Palestinian economy and impoverish the
Palestinian people.

Currently, donors are providing upwards of
$1 billion per annum in the form of budgetary and
emergency support to the Palestinians. The objective
has been both to prevent the economy from collapsing
under the weight of closures and movement restrictions
and to keep alive the hope of reconciliation and peace.
Should the present situation result in the Palestinian
Authority being unable to function politically, a critical
question is whether the donors would be willing to
continue that level of support.

Much depends on the effectiveness of a new
Palestinian Authority Government and especially on
Minister of Finance Salam Fayyad, in whom donors
have great confidence because of his efforts to promote
financial accountability and transparency. If political
developments result in the suspension or even the
disestablishment of the Palestinian Authority, it might
make it impossible to continue that work.

If that happens, the result would be the
suspension of budgetary support to the Palestinian
Authority. That could mean that up to 120,000 civil
servants, each of whom supports an extended family of
about eight persons and whose spending power is
sustaining the economy, would no longer be paid. In
the face of declining donor assistance, Israel would be
responsible for meeting the basic needs of the civilian
population.

We remain concerned by the continued
construction of the West Bank security fence or
separation wall. Of course, Israel has every right to set
up security structures on its own territory, but it is not
by any standard acceptable to put up a separation wall
on another people's land. Its construction proceeds
apace, and large parts of the occupied Palestinian
territory are physically divided from other parts. People
are separated from farms, schools and livelihoods and
are having their lands confiscated.

Despite the calls from all the members of the
Quartet, the Government of Israel persists in building
that structure. It makes the establishment of a viable
Palestinian State more difficult and the hope of peace
more distant, and it undermines any Palestinian prime
minister's efforts to muster popular support.

I turn now to the situation along the Blue Line.
Since the last briefing to the Security Council, the
situation has remained tense. On 3 September, Israeli
jets violated Lebanese airspace. Shrapnel from ensuing
Hizbullah anti-aircraft fire ignited agricultural land
close to populated areas on the Israeli side of the Blue
Line. Shortly afterwards, Israeli jets dropped two
bombs on a Hizbullah position close to a village. The
Force Commander of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) issued a statement expressing his
deep concern over the Israeli air raid and saying that
UNIFIL would continue to monitor the situation
closely. As we have stated in the past, a violation on
one side does not justify a violation from the other
side.

Those events illustrate clearly the escalatory
potential and the dangers involved. We call again upon
the Governments of Lebanon and Israel, therefore, to
live up to their responsibilities, to exercise restraint and
to refrain from all such violations of the Blue Line in
order to avoid a deterioration of the situation on the
ground.

There is a need for the parties to recommit to the
road map process because there is no alternative to its
explicit goals: the end of the occupation that started in
1967; the end of terrorism; and the establishment of a
State of Palestine living side by side with the State of
Israel in peace and security. But the lack of trust
between the parties and their inability to take the
difficult steps necessary to implement the road map
illustrate the need for continued and possibly increased
activity on the part of the international community to
move the process along. We find ourselves at an
extremely difficult juncture in the quest for peace in
the Middle East.

In briefing the Security Council, and in our
discussions with the parties, we have said that the path
to a just and comprehensive peace settlement based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002) would not be easy. We have stressed
that peace is a long, hard and demanding process. But
we have also said that that should not deter the parties
or their partners in the international community. There
is no alternative to pursuing this difficult and perilous
path.

We are now crossing dire and stormy straits.
While the situation is grave, it is alarmist to speak of
the demise of the peace process. But if we abandon the
course of peace as drawn in the road map, we would
accede to those individuals and groups that do not want
peace. We would surrender to those who want to reign
through force and terror - to rule not by the rule of
law but by that of man. If so, we would abandon the
people of the region to further generations of violence,
death and misery. At this difficult time, we have no
choice but to increase our efforts to implement the road
map and to strive for a peaceful settlement of the
conflict.

