Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Chowdhury for presenting
the report of the Panel of Experts, and I congratulate
the members of the Panel of Experts, who are sitting
behind him here in the Chamber.

First of all, I would like to say that my delegation
associates itself fully with the statement to be made by
the Ambassador of Sweden later in this debate on
behalf of the European Union.

We are pleased that the report of the Panel of
Experts set up by resolution 1306 (2000) to study the
question of the trade in diamonds and arms in
connection with Sierra Leone is today being taken up at
an open debate of the Security Council. For us, it is a
fundamental point of principle that reports that in one
way or another implicate States should be dealt with in
a two-way debate that is transparent and open to all.
This is also an important opportunity for members of
the Security Council and all Members of our
Organization to enter into a dialogue in which all can
participate and give their views.

Before turning to the content of some of the
recommendations made by the Panel of Experts, I
would like to tell Council members that France greatly
appreciates the content ofthis report. The work that has
been done by the Experts is serious and
comprehensive. The information seems to us better
supported than that of some reports presented last year.
The report demonstrates clearly that there is a complex
and confusing network of support for the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF). Above and beyond
the responsibility of Liberia, which we all hope will
change its errant ways of the past, we should all give
thought - and this includes members of the Security
Council, members of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and of African subregional organizations,
countries that buy diamonds and countries that sell
weapons - to how to put a stop to the organized
criminals who profit from and take advantage of the
Sierra Leonean conflict and, unfortunately, other
conflicts in Africa.

These criminals often act, as can be seen clearly
from the report, without the knowledge of the
competent national authorities, who, because of lack of
resources or lack of political will, are not able to
control what they do.

The same names crop up time and again in one
report after another. I shall mention only one name -
Victor Bout - who supposedly has a fleet of over 50
aircraft and who has been implicated in many illegal
trafficking operations throughout Africa, supporting
the most reprehensible movements, such as RUF and
UNITA.

It is high time the international community acted
as one and put an end to this kind of activity. All
countries must cooperate to this end.

France particularly welcomes two general
recommendations in the report. It is our deepest hope
that specific follow-up action will be taken on them.
The first deals with broadening the certification regime
for Sierra Leonean diamonds. The Experts hope that
this regime can serve as a model in the framework of
the so-called Kimberley process. We support that idea.
We also support the idea of gradually extending the
Sierra Leonean certification regime to all neighbouring
countries and to the subregion.

The second recommendation aims at better
monitoring of exports of small arms by producing
countries. Strengthening customs controls, with
appropriate support from the international community,
is a priority in this regard.

Much of the report is devoted to the role Liberian
authorities are playing in the conflict in Sierra Leone
and the ongoing support they have been giving to the
rebel movement: providing it with weapons, buying its
diamonds and giving refuge to some ofits officials. We
would like to think that the publication of this report,
the awareness of the situation on the part of the
international community and the ensuing damage done
to Liberia would lead the Liberian Government to
revise its policy drastically. However, too many
promises have been made in the past for us to be
content with nice words. Thus France supports the
principle of establishing an effective sanctions regime
against the Liberian leaders. We are not here
advocating a punitive approach, but rather a
motivational system that would complement the steps
that are to be taken at the national level. France was
particularly encouraged by the recent decision by
Liberia to expel from Monrovia all the leaders of the
RUF living there.

Beyond Liberia, the settlement of this crisis in
West Africa will also require the good will of all the
neighbouring countries and a desire to move towards
regional peace, rather than futilely pouring oil on the
flames.

In our view, in order to have a positive impact the
sanctions regime to be adopted by the Security Council
must respect the following principles.

First, the sanctions proposed must be for a limited
time. This does not mean going along in any way with
the reprehensible machinations of the Liberian
authorities; it is simply a question of making sure that
the Security Council will be able to review the whole
issue in depth and on a regular basis - including, if
necessary, evaluating at the appropriate time the
extension ofthese sanctions.

Secondly, the sanctions proposed must in no way
penalize or affect the Liberian people, who are among
the poorest in the world. The sanctions proposed must
be linked to the conflict in Sierra Leone and Liberia's
involvement in it.

Thirdly, the sanctions proposed must be
motivational and be linked to precise criteria for their
lifting. The Liberian authorities must understand well
what they have to do to get the sanctions to which they
are subject lifted.

Fourthly, the proposed sanctions must not
interfere with the possible development of a solution
that may be negotiated with the help of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). The
sanctions must be an element in an overall political
settlement, and not a replacement for such a settlement.
The views of ECOWAS - a body that is directly
involved in dealing with this crisis - must be heard
and respected by the Security Council.

Fifthly, France advocates an incremental
approach to the implementation of sanctions, so as to
allow the democratically elected Government of
Liberia to shoulder its responsibilities.

By continuing to support the RUF, the Liberian
leaders would be assuming a heavy responsibility for
increasingly isolating their country from the
international community, thus hobbling its chances for
development. We would urge these leaders not to make
this choice, but rather to cooperate fully, with a view of
establishing a lasting regional peace.

