Ms. Sison (United States of America): I want to
thank Secretary-General Guterres for laying out his
vision of how to respond to what he has rightly called a
global protection crisis.

I also want to thank Mr. Ugarte and Ms. Beerli.
Their organizations do critical work to promote
accountability and respect for and protection of
medical personnel and facilities in armed conflict. The
United States especially values the participation of civil
society organizations like theirs at these briefings, as
well as the data and reporting provided by so many civil
society groups on this issue.

There is little doubt that trends are getting worse
when it comes to the protection of civilians. Parties to
conflicts are using despicable tactics, starving entire
cities until they surrender, deliberately bombing
hospitals - sometimes the same hospital over and
over- and raping and torturing civilians who are trying
to flee. And yet as the Secretary-General has observed,

"among the international community there is a

growing sense of fatigue, even resignation, in

addressing the suffering of civilians" (S/2017/414, 
para. 2).

The protection of civilians remains the primary
responsibility of United Nations Member States, so
changing this attitude of resignation means that we on
the Council need to change our approach to responding
to protection crises on the ground. We as a Council
need to be honest with ourselves when Member States
are not living up to their commitments, and we need to
be willing to apply meaningful pressure when parties
to a conflict do not change course. We should be calling
on the United Nations to be more active and more
explicit in naming perpetrators, and then follow up on
the United Nations efforts with specific actions on the
part of the Council, whether that means naming those
responsible in our products or considering sanctions and
other mechanisms for accountability. That is the way to
start addressing the prevailing climate of impunity in
so many of the conflicts on our agenda.

The protection of health-care facilities and medical
workers in armed conflicts remains of particularly grave
concern to the United States. One year ago, the Council
adopted resolution 2286 (2016), which emphasized that
attacks directed against medical personnel and facilities
must cease and that the perpetrators of violations must
be held accountable. However, in far too many places
these attacks have not only continued but have gotten
worse, and many of these attacks are not incidental.
In some cases, warring parties are attacking hospitals
precisely because medical staff are doing their jobs of
treating the sick and the wounded.

In Syria, the Al-Assad regime, with help
from Russia, Iran and Hizbullah, has attacked and
destroyed medical facilities in a relentless campaign of
destruction. Physicians for Human Rights recorded 108
attacks against medical facilities in 2016 alone. Since
the start of Syria's civil war, the Al-Assad regime and
its allies have reportedly been responsible for 90 per
cent of the 454 attacks on medical facilities. The world
witnessed this cruelty during the offensive last year
against eastern Aleppo. Between July and November
2016, the Al-Assad regime reportedly bombed every
single hospital in eastern Aleppo, leaving as many as
250,000 civilians with virtually no access to medical
care. Some hospitals were attacked by the regime more
than once, and Al-Assad's forces would not even spare
maternity wards or children's hospitals. The Council
has heard first-hand from doctors about the horror of
treating patients in makeshift basement emergency
rooms, where doctors had to retreat to avoid the regime's
indiscriminate attacks. The attacks on medical workers
and facilities in Aleppo last year will not be forgotten.
They are a stain on the Council and on the members
that refused to stop it.

Turning to Yemen, the fighting has led to the
rapid deterioration of the country's health-care
infrastructure. Just 45 per cent of medical facilities are
still open, even as nearly 70 per cent of the population
needs humanitarian aid. The results are devastating.
Over the past three weeks, Yemen has witnessed a
quickly spreading cholera outbreak. The World Health
Organization has reported a 50-per cent increase in
cases since 27 April, and hundreds have already died
from this treatable illness. With Yemen's resources so
overstretched, all sides of the conflict in Yemen must
take all feasible precautions with a view to avoiding or,
in any event, minimizing civilian casualties and damage
to civilian infrastructure, especially medical facilities.
Attacks on health facilities and health workers only
exacerbate Yemen's humanitarian crisis. The parties
must do everything possible to facilitate access to
humanitarian aid - both getting aid into the country
and distributing it throughout the country.

Finally, in South Sudan the challenge is not about
attacks from the air but about the calculated efforts
of the Government forces and armed groups to deny
humanitarian access, intimidate aid workers and prevent
health facilities from functioning. Since December
2013, not only have 100 medical facilities closed, but
29 have reportedly been ransacked or destroyed. South
Sudan remains one of the world's most dangerous
places to be an aid worker, and the violence is getting
worse. Just two months ago, six staff members from
a UNICEF partner were killed in a vehicle marked
with the logo of their non-governmental organization
(NGO), in the worst attack on humanitarians since the
war began. Humanitarian convoys carrying life-saving
aid have come under attack attack repeatedly. Even with
famine declared and cholera on the rise in South Sudan,
the Government still imposes a never-ending series of
bureaucratic obstacles that keep the United Nations and
its partners from delivering food and medicine to the
people who need it most. We could go on and on.

One recent report issued by a coalition of NGOs
documented attacks against medical personnel and
facilities in no fewer than 23 different countries around
the world. One year after the adoption of resolution
2286 (2016), this track record is simply unacceptable.
The Council must therefore strengthen its resolve to
stop attacks directed against medical personnel and
facilities, end impunity for perpetrators of violations,
and focus on preventing harm to the tens of millions
of civilians trapped in armed conflicts. This has to be
a collective and continuous effort in the year to come.

We have a choice here today. We can let another
year go by and then sit here again to lament still more
attacks against hospitals and medical workers, or we
can come together now and take steps to reverse the
rising tide of violence on the ground by using the tools
at the Council's disposal to push warring parties to live
up to their obligations to protect civilians. That choice
should be obvious, and we need to make the choice that
saves lives.

