Mr. Johnston (United Kingdom): Allow me to
begin by aligning my delegation with the statement
that will be made later in this debate by the Permanent
Representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union.

The United Kingdom is committed to security,
stability and development in the Great Lakes region of
Africa. We are encouraged by the progress that the
people and Governments of the region have made
towards those goals. As has been noted earlier in this
debate, nowhere has that achievement been more
vividly demonstrated, particularly in recent weeks,
than in the successful conduct of the presidential
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The transformation we are witnessing in that country,
as well as in Burundi and elsewhere in the region, to a
situation in which peace, not conflict, is becoming the
norm gives us real hope, despite the many challenges
that have also been referred to in today's debate.

In support of that transformation process, my
Government is providing half a billion pounds in
bilateral development and humanitarian programmes.
We will continue to sustain a substantial donor effort in
the region, bilaterally and through the European Union.

The Great Lakes process has played its part in
this transformation. Its inherent value is that it brings
together all the key players and allows them to sit
together and talk at the highest political levels, as well
as at operational levels. The problems that the
countries and peoples of the region face are shared
problems, and therefore the solutions must also be
shared.

We therefore welcome the commitment of the
leaders of the Governments of the region to implement
the Pact on Security, Stability and Development. As
others have noted, regional ownership of this process is
going to be crucial. The Pact provides a framework that
should be conducive to revitalizing regional
cooperation, including interregional trade links, which
will help to ensure that peace and stability take root
sustainably.

I would like to place on record our belief that, in
appointing Ambassador Mulamula of Tanzania, the
countries of the region have chosen a first-rate
Executive Secretary, and we look forward to working
with her and supporting her. We welcomed her
statement. We are also grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing today and for the work he has contributed to
this process and this outcome.

It is our hope that the commitments made in
Nairobi will have, over time, a transformative effect on
security, stability and development throughout the
region. Only last month, this Council recorded its
support for efforts aimed at bringing an end to the
long-running conflict in northern Uganda, which has
had terrible regional implications; and only yesterday,
the Council reiterated its deep concern about the
worsening situation in the Darfur region of the Sudan,
which also has desperate regional implications. The
Sudan, of course, is one of the signatories of the
Nairobi Pact.

In that context, I think it is important to say that
the verbal commitments in the Pact are therefore a
necessary step, but far from sufficient to achieve the
goals we share. Ambassador Mulamula, in her
statement, noted what the Secretary-General had said
to the effect that the Pact is not just a vision - it is a
programme for action. Therefore, we feel strongly that
action and implementation will be the most important
and, indeed, the hardest part and the real test for the
Governments concerned, individually and collectively.
In that context, my delegation would endorse
wholeheartedly what the Ambassador of Denmark has
just said about the issues of protection of civilians and
impunity.

We urge the countries of the region, therefore, to
work together and urgently to achieve security,

stability and development for all their citizens. In
doing so, they can be assured of the support of my
Government and, I believe, of the United Nations as a
whole.

Finally, I should like to thank the delegation of
Tanzania for its leadership in producing the draft
presidential statement, which we look forward to
adopting. As it is also one of that delegation's final
appearances in the Council, my delegation would like
to thank it for all the work it has done on this and other
issues on the Council's agenda.

