Mr. Eide: I will try to be brief in responding to
some of what has been said. There has been repeated
mention of civilian casualties, which is a very complex
issue. Nobody is saying that there has been an intention
to cause civilian casualties. Of course we all want to
avoid them, and I would also say that the Commander
of International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
really has made a very strong effort to move in that
direction. I admire him.

We also face two other problems in that regard.
First of all, I think we will face increasing propaganda
from the insurgency over the next year in parallel with
an increase in the number of troops. Secondly, we will
face the problem that we have constantly seen, namely,
the problem of disinformation provided to the military.
That can be the result of community disputes or other
things, which are sources that contribute to this
phenomenon. It is very difficult.

The representative of Pakistan said that we need
hearts and minds. It is interesting, for if we say, "we,
the international community", we must also, on the
other hand, be striving for Afghanization. I believe that
only the Afghans can really win the hearts and minds
of their population, and therefore this Afghanization is
so important.

There were some comments on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
First of all, the gap between resources and mandates is
now closing, so more should be expected of us. There
is every reason for that. It may take a few more months
before we have the staff in place that we should, but I
do expect it.

But I have to ask, "expect what of whom?" I say
that because we have only the power of persuasion.
That is what the United Nations has. If I try with gentle
persuasion, I am told that I am too mild-mannered. If I
raise my voice, the media say that it has been a stormy
conversation. Ministers come to me and say, "We do
not like what you are saying about us", and that is
absolutely right. I will continue to say things that they
do not like when I see that the required level of
coordination is lacking.

It is a difficult situation because it is, in the end, a
question of political will. The situation is not one in
which donor countries are sitting there waiting for us
to come and say, "Would you please do this or that?".
They have their national strategies that they are
unwilling to adjust. That is the main problem we face.

We are strengthening our presence where we have
offices and are establishing new ones. We have opened
and will inaugurate the office in Tirin Kot, and we will
open others, as well. I mentioned Helmand as one
possibility. I would like to say to those who argue that
we should move faster and that we should establish
offices, particularly in the south, that most troop
contributors to ISAF do not want to send armed
military to the south. But those around the Council
table ask us to send unarmed civilians to the same
places. I just leave members with that little remark,
because I think it is important to keep in mind.

On the humanitarian side, I think it was the
representative of Canada who said "Please strengthen
the humanitarian dimension", and I would answer
"yes". I do really deplore that that part of the overall
United Nations activity has gone so slowly, really
slowly. As many participants know, that is the result of
a debate that we have had for some time. Fortunately,
and hopefully, we have been saved by a mild winter.

Finally, with regard to conferences and regional
perspectives, I hope that there is a breakthrough now
with regard to the regional dimension and regional
cooperation. That will really be important. What I hope
is that, starting with the conference in Moscow next
week, a momentum could be built where attention is
not spread over too many projects, too many
initiatives, and that we try to establish a momentum on
this and carry that momentum through the various
conferences that are planned. If that happens, I believe
that there could be success.

I thank the Council for all the support it has given
to me and to the Mission. And I thank the President for
giving me the chance to speak again.

