Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
would like to thank Special Representative De Mistura

for his important and informative briefing. We are also
grateful for the statement made by Ambassador Al
Bayati and the encouraging developments that he has
pointed to in his country. We commend the determined
and courageous work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). We deeply appreciate the
Special Representative's dedication to Iraq and its
people, in particular against the background of the
difficult circumstances he and his team continue to
encounter.

The support provided by UNAMI to the
Independent High Electoral Commission and the
Government of Iraq's diligent preparation of the recent
provincial elections have clearly contributed to their
successful conduct. Above all, however, the people of
Iraq are to be congratulated on their active
participation in those elections. By turning out across
communitarian lines, the men and women of Iraq have
thus helped their country to take a significant step
towards the consolidation of democratization and
national reconciliation.

The security preparations by the Government of
Iraq provided voters with an environment in which
they were able to cast their votes with confidence and
in relative security. While we deplore some of the
grave incidents and acts of violence that took place in
the run-up to the elections, the day of the election itself
passed in a peaceful atmosphere.

We are confident that Iraqi leaders will seize the
momentum created by the elections to overcome
obstacles towards national reconciliation. In that
context, we welcome the fact that UNAMI has been
formally requested to continue to provide assistance to
the parliamentary committee dealing with issues of
power-sharing, property and demography regarding
Kirkuk. We strongly support the good offices of the
Special Representative in building confidence among
the parties with a view to achieving a sustainable
solution.

We encourage Iraq to make maximum use of the
support provided by UNAMI in the constitutional
review process, in particular as regards hydrocarbon
regulation. Let me add that progress in that area will
certainly also facilitate foreign investment in the
country.

The European Union and its member States
remain firmly committed to supporting Iraq in building
a secure, stable, democratic, unified and prosperous
country where human rights can be enjoyed in a secure
environment by women and men alike.

We note the gradual improvement of the security
situation in recent months, but we must not lose sight
of the persistent security risk that average Iraqis
continue to face through indiscriminate attacks,
including by suicide bombers. The recent attack on
pilgrims en route to Karbala, with many women and
children amongst the dead, testifies to that ever-present
threat.

As others have said, there are still important
challenges in the area of human rights. As has also
been mentioned, the report highlights the situation of
detainees. It also pays particular attention to the
situation of women, children and persons belonging to
ethnic and religious minorities.

We hope that the return of a significant number of
Christian families to Mosul is an indication of their
growing confidence in their personal safety. There
must be no room for ethnic or sectarian violence.
Everyone must make every effort to ensure that events
like those of the fall of 2008 do not reoccur.

We welcome the commitment made by the Iraqi
Government to strengthen the protection of human
rights and the recent establishment of an Independent
High Commission for Human Rights, to which the
Special Representative referred. We hope that the High
Commission will soon become operational. We support
and commend the important work of UNAMI in the
area of human rights.

We welcome the priority that United Nations
agencies intend to place on countering violence against
women during the year 2009, improving the access of
women to justice and tackling the reform of
discriminatory penal codes. We encourage the Iraqi
leadership to seek to engage women in the rebuilding
of Iraqi society and to continue the efforts that have
already begun in that area.

We hope that the forensic capacity-building that
the UNAMI Human Rights Office has offered to the
Iraqi Ministry of Human Rights will help to advance
progress in clarifying the fate of Kuwaiti citizens who
have been missing since 1990, a point to which the
Ambassador also referred.

With regard to the situation of Iraqi refugees and
internally displaced persons, we hope that an
environment permitting their return in safety and

dignity can be sustained and that the Government of
Iraq will actively continue to promote return
initiatives. We hope that the encouraging trend to
which the Ambassador has referred will continue.
Austria commends the humanitarian work of the
United Nations and - this is particularly important -
the continued solidarity of neighbouring countries,
especially Jordan and Syria, with those uprooted by
violence and conflict.

We welcome the intention of the United Nations
to devise a comprehensive rule of law strategy in
cooperation with other partners on the ground, as well
as efforts under way between Iraqi authorities, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna
to assess compliance with the United Nations
Convention against Corruption.

Together with our European Union partners, we
continue to support the training of Iraqi law
enforcement and security personnel in the framework
of the European Union Integrated Rule of Law
Mission, which has been extended until 30 June 2009.
Since its start in July 2005, approximately 2,000 Iraqi
criminal law experts have been trained in 87 courses.
Austria is happy to have been able to participate in
those important efforts.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of Austria's
wholehearted support for his work and the work of the
entire United Nations team in Iraq.

