Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to acknowledge your presence here today,
Secretary Simmonds, to preside over our debate,
inasmuch as it reflects the importance for the Security
Council of today's topic. That importance has also been
highlighted by the delegation of the United Kingdom
under the leadership of Ambassador Sir Mark Lyall
Grant, to whom we express our renewed respect.

We appreciate the briefings made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
Mr. Martin Kobler; by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of
Africa, Mrs. Mary Robinson; and by the Minister
of Defence of Angola, Mr. Joao Manuel Goncalves
Lourenco, participating in his capacity as Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. I
would also like to take this opportunity to commend the
leadership and applaud the excellent work accomplished
by Mrs. Robinson and to wish her successor, Mr. Said
Djinnit, the utmost success as he assumes this new,
enormous responsibility. I would also like to welcome
the ministers joining us today from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Africa and Uganda.

We would recall that when Argentina joined the
Security Council in January 2013, the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) had just launched its offensive against
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It had seized the city of Goma and controlled
a large part of the country, with a high number of
internally displaced persons, numerous casualties
as a result of the hostilities, and incessant ongoing
suffering in the refugee camps. There has been great
progress since. With the help of MONUSCO and its
international partners, especially the other countries
of the region, the M-23, as Mr. Kobler noted, has been
defeated. And the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has achieved important gains in the realms of security
and reconciliation and in rebuilding a State of law that
respects and promotes the rights of all.

With respect to the reporting period, we welcome the
progress achieved and the extension of State authority
into the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We note in particular the extension until
2017 of the stabilization and reconstruction programme
for areas emerging from armed conflict, which is
currently focused on restoring State authority in areas
previously controlled by armed groups, facilitating the
return of refugees and displaced persons, protecting
civilians, combating gender-based, sexual and sexist
violence, and promoting socioeconomic reconstruction
and developing the country's infrastructure. Despite
that progress, the Allied Democratic Forces, the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and other armed
groups continue to pose a real threat to efforts to pacify
the country and, most urgently, bring the situation to an
end. For that reason, we call on MONUSCO to continue
its activities in support of the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo while also working
to promote the disarmament and the demobilization of
rebel groups.

Argentina is concerned by the lack of progress
reported in reforming the security sector, in particular
with respect to the formation ofa rapid-response force to
take over the responsibilities currently being shouldered
by MONUSCO's Force Intervention Brigade. The
formation of such a force by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is an obligation that emanates from
resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147 (2014) to replace the
Force Intervention Brigade, which, Argentina would
like to remind the Council, was established as an
exception in response to the singular circumstances the
country faced.

With regard to the humanitarian situation and human
rights, the statistics showing progress, for example
in the percentage of the population that is internally
displaced, are of little comfort to the 2.6 million
people currently in that situation - a situation that
requires not a military but a political solution based on
dialogue and trust, the state of law and social inclusion.
For that reason, the decision by the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional
agreements are vital for sustainable development
policies in the economic, social and environmental
areas that will contribute to eradicating poverty and that
will guarantee social inclusion without discrimination.
To repeat, what is needed is not militarization but the
cooperation of the international community, especially
South-South cooperation, based on the principles of
solidarity, equality and national ownership without
conditions. Those are valuable and strategic paths that
need to be broadened without, of course, discounting
or disregarding the importance of triangular or North-
South cooperation.

I see that the light is blinking. However, I cannot
refrain from mentioning that we are concerned, and
that we are prepared to contribute to the fight against
impunity.

A theme that also concerns you, Mr. President, is
the issue of serious violations and abuses of human
rights, including rape and kidnapping, that are being
committed not only by armed groups but also by the
Congolese security forces. That must come to an
end. The multiple abductions in the past few days of
women and girls in the region of Okapi, in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for the purpose
of sexual slavery, accompanied by sexual torture and
sexual humiliation, cannot go unpunished and must be
eradicated. We urge the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to investigate those acts and
bring those responsible to justice while also reinforcing
policies of prevention and protection of the human
rights, especially those ofwomen and children. We echo
the call of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, who on
21 July presented her fifth report on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We recognize that hundreds
of children have been freed, but that is not enough. To
free hundreds of children to be children, not soldiers,
requires that we too strengthen our cooperation to find
a solution to the more than 4,000 cases of boys and
girls being recruited and abused by armed groups and
security forces. That can come about only through the
effective exercise of their rights as children.

In conclusion, so long as the threat of armed
groups persists, Argentina considers it a priority, in
the first place, that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should resolve the root causes
of the conflict by implementing the reforms set out
in the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes Region. Secondly, all signatories must
fulfil their regional commitments, including respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of their
neighbouring countries. Thirdly, we, the Security
Council, must continue to support that process.
Argentina believes that in this particular case we
are working constructively and headed in the right
direction, ensuring that peace and security can be
rebuilt through the rule of law and regional cooperation
in the Great Lakes region and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
I would like to apologize to the President for the
time I took with my statement even though the light
was flashing.

