Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for his briefing, which, as usual, was very clear, and
again highlighted that the situation in Mali is at a
determining juncture.

I would also like to warmly welcome the Malian
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation, His Excellency Mr. Tie'man Hubert
Coulibaly, and thank him for traveling to New
York to participate in our work. It is an important
gesture that France and, I believe, all members of the
Council appreciate.
More than two and a half years after the signature
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
it must be acknowledged that much remains to be
done to ensure its full implementation. Indeed, it has
an impact on the ground. Now, more than ever, it is
time for all parties to make headway in honouring their
respective commitments. It is all the more important
now that there is a small window of opportunity ahead
of the 2018 elections in Mali. The security situation in
the north and centre of the country remains a source
of genuine concern for all. Without progress, all of the
gains made thus far, as well as the very relevance of the
agreement, will be called into question.

Sustainable development in the Sahel will be
impossible without the full implementation of the Malian
peace agreement. In that regard, France welcomes the
renewed commitment on the part of Malian Government
and signatory movements to implement all provisions
of the peace agreement, through the adoption a few
days ago of an emergency plan with a specific calendar
to ensure that, by March, each party will have honoured
its commitments. It is an encouraging step forward
that has been eagerly waited for some time. It should
allow for considerable short-term progress to be made
in implementing the agreement. We must move from
words to deeds and ensure that commitments are upheld
with specific measures on the ground. It is particularly
important for progress to be made in the area of
decentralization, by conducting a consensus-based
review of legislation with regard to decentralization,
adopting a law to establish a regional police force and
providing interim authorities with the human, technical
and financial resources required to fulfil their mission.

The launching of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process is also a priority, given the
eligibility criteria and quotas for combatants. In the
coming weeks we will continue to monitor the various
points closely, in conjunction with Malian stakeholders.
France also encourages the Malian authorities to make
headway in the fight against impunity. It calls upon all
parties to end human rights violations.

In accordance with the terms ofthe peace agreement,
the Council must take the necessary measures that will
encourage the parties to uphold their commitments. The
adoption in September 2017 of resolution 2374 (2017),
establishing a sanctions regime for Mali, was the first
step in that direction. Additional measures should
be envisaged if the recent commitments made by the
parties are not honoured, including imposing sanctions
on individuals who hamper the implementation of the
agreement. France is ready to shoulder its responsibility
in that area. The future reports of the Panel of Experts
and the independent observer, whose appointments
we welcome, will lay the foundation to move in that
direction if need be. All Malian parties must shoulder
their responsibilities.

The countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) continue to work together to combat the
existential threat that terrorism poses to their peoples
and States. Last week, another step was made to make
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force operational by launching a
specific road map for troop deployment, command
transfers and future operations. Now more than ever,
the goal is to send swift and positive signals about
the path to stability in the G-5 Sahel countries by
confirming, in particular, the return of Government
and public services throughout the country.

In New York, our priority must be to do our utmost
to ensure that the technical agreement outlined in
resolution 2391 (2017) can be signed at the international
donors' conference to be held on 23 February in Brussels,
in order to gather the necessary resources to finance
the support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to the Joint Force. It will be achieved by a mechanism
hosted by the European Union and should be fed by
international contributions, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 2391 (2017).

Finally, a solid framework that promotes respect for
human rights remains an important prerequisite for the
success of the joint force. We therefore encourage the
G-5 Sahel countries to establish, as soon as possible,
the compliance framework outlined in resolution 2391
(2017) so as to build on progress made in that area in
the coming weeks. It is the best way to ensure that
MINUSMA can support the joint force, in accordance
the United Nations human rights criteria.

In spite of all its challenges, MINUSMA, along
with other security forces on the ground, remains a
crucial element for ensuring Mali's stability, In the
short term, our responsibility is to mobilize to provide
MINUSMA with all the means it needs to fulfil the
robust mandate it has received from the Council. The
priority in that regard lies in the immediate deployment
on the ground of adapted capacities in order to endow
the force with its full operational strength in the coming
months. Lasting solutions must be found quickly so as
to adequately equip contingents with armored vehicles,
medium-term aerial capacities and armored convoys.

Finally, the strategic review of MINUSMA to
take place in the coming weeks will provide us with
an opportunity for more long-term consideration of the
future of the Mission and its coordination with other
security forces in place, first and foremost among which
is the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
Mali and the Sahel are optimal theatres for building the
future of peacekeeping. They offer us the opportunity
to work to establish a virtuous coordination between
a United Nations and an African operation. That will
be possible, however, only if both enjoy the necessary
tools and support from the international community.

As I have already had the opportunity to underscore
this morning, it is now urgent to make progress towards
the full implementation of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. It is the Council's responsibility
to send a strong message of encouragement to the
Malian parties in that regard. France will today submit
a proposal to the other members of the Council on a
draft presidential statement to that end.

