Mr. Bolton (United States of America): We
welcome today's discussion on the Security Council
and international law, as you have entitled it,
Mr. President, and we salute the efforts of Denmark in
holding this debate in the Council during its
presidency.

Secretary of State Rice has noted that one of the
pillars of our diplomacy is "our strong belief that
international law is a vital and powerful force in the
search for freedom". As part of our commitment, the
United States has worked actively to expand our
dialogue with other countries on international law
issues. Commitment to international law does not mean
that every treaty or every dispute-resolution
mechanism will serve to advance our interests. Nor
does it mean that we will always agree with every
interpretation of our obligations offered by others. But
international law often provides a useful foundation for
achieving common objectives and understandings with
other countries, and, where the United States agrees to
be bound through such mechanisms, we will honour
our legal obligations.

We have strongly supported international legal
institutions. The United States supports the work of the
International Court of Justice, and we welcome the
presence of President Higgins in the Council Chamber
for this debate. We look forward to working with her
and others in the international community to promote
the Court's effectiveness.

We have also supported the Security Council's
use of legal mechanisms and institutions as important
parts of its efforts to promote international peace and
security. As one example, the Council has addressed
international criminal justice issues through a number
of mechanisms in order to promote accountability for
perpetrators of serious crimes and to help societies torn
apart by such crimes to reconcile and to avoid further
conflict. In that regard, the Council has: created the
International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda to investigate and
prosecute serious crimes committed in the conflicts in
those countries; worked with the Government of Sierra
Leone to establish the Special Court for Sierra Leone
and given a mandate to United Nations peacekeepers to
facilitate the arrest and transfer to the Court of former
Liberian President Charles Taylor; and created the
International Independent Investigation Commission to
assist the Government of Lebanon in investigating the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
and begun work on establishing a tribunal of an
international character. The United States has strongly
supported those efforts and believes that each has
made, and will continue to make, meaningful
contributions to the restoration of international peace
and security in the affected regions.

The Council has also taken important steps to
deter conduct by individuals and entities that may
contribute to threats to international peace and security.
In that regard, the Council has established a number of

targeted sanctions regimes. Those regimes play a
critical role in combating international terrorism and in
efforts to end violence and establish stability in
countries including the Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There has been a good deal of recent discussion
about whether steps may be taken to increase fairness
and transparency in the implementation of targeted
sanctions. It is a priority of the United States to make
the list of individuals and entities that the Security
Council targets for sanctions as accurate as possible
and to make the process as fair and transparent as
practicable. The 1267 Committee has recently begun
consideration of several interesting proposals aimed at
increasing the fairness and transparency of the
Committee's work. We were one of the countries that
submitted a proposal. We look forward to working with
Council members in the context of those discussions in
the 1267 Committee to consider those proposals and to
ensure that the United Nations system of targeted
sanctions remains a robust tool for combating threats to
international peace and security.

In sum, we again commend Denmark for having
provided the opportunity for this discussion. The
United States will continue to recognize the importance
of international law, and we look forward to
cooperating with other members of the international
community in these matters.

