We thank the German presidency of the Security Council for convening this timely debate, which takes place just after yesterday's decision on the long-awaited resolution 2532 (2020), on the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on peace and international security. We are equally grateful for the steady, tireless efforts of Tunisia and France in continuing to push the resolution's proposed action and finally succeeding in uniting the Council when it is most needed. Chile joins the international community in the collective search for a response to COVID-19. We welcome the Council's decision because in meeting reports we have witnessed, with dismay, the depth of humanitarian crisis, an increase in human rights violations and the disproportionate impact that COVID-19 has had on women and girls. Today, in the midst of the pandemic, more than 70 million people, equivalent to 1 per cent of the world population, are refugees. According to reports from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the risk of torture and mistreatment, especially in the prison systems has increased, gender-based violence is rising and fundamental rights, such as education and health, are limited. Those vulnerabilities are exacerbated by pandemics, and we share the concern that the current one may erase hard-won achievements on the ground. We underline the importance of redoubling our collective commitment so that international cooperation, solidarity and coordination among the United Nations and its agencies, Member States and all relevant actors, can be our driving force in the fulfilment of our mandates. More than ever, the machinery of the United Nations reform begun a while ago is being tested. Hence the importance of having timely and adequate information for decision-making. In that connection, we value the Secretariat's campaign to combat false news, especially on the ground, as this can destabilize peace in volatile areas and deepen conflicts. Likewise, using the four axes prioritized in the Action for Peacekeeping initiative during the pandemic, we advocate for performance standards in the missions to be maintained without neglecting transparency and accountability, remembering that the safety and security standards of United Nations personnel, contingents and police are key to implementing mandates. We know that we must focus on prioritizing life and the protection of civilians. But we also know that this cannot be done if the United Nations presence on the ground is threatened. Chile supports the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire and echoes other countries in giving a signal of multilateral commitment in that regard by joining initiatives to support the Secretary-General and ensure the consistent, efficient and timely response of the entire United Nations system to COVID-19, including all its associated complexities. Now we have the will and decision of the Security Council to enhance this signal of multilateral unity and coherence. We also believe that this will affect civil society and all relevant actors, since, in the words of Nassim Taleb, this pandemic has become a black swan - an unexpected challenge that is having radical effects in every area of human life on a global scale. We see how it continues to advance and threatens to reappear in places that seemed to have already been through the worst. This and other threats to global health persist. In the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, we must redouble efforts to combat it, which would be very difficult without the global framework provided by the United Nations structure. We cannot foresee the future, but we can build an even more robust, resilient and sustainable multilateral system. Every day we learn something new about how this pandemic develops. We need international collaboration to move beyond the individual efforts of each State and share experiences. The COVID-19 pandemic has prompted a search for new spaces and multilateral instruments to ensure timely responses and seamless equitable medical supply channels. In that context, Chile firmly believes that the international community must redouble its commitment to coordinate best practices and alliances in the fields of prevention, preparedness and multidimensional responses to pandemics and public health emergencies. We must therefore maintain the free flow of products and supply chains, strengthen access to markets and ensure technology transfer and humanitarian corridors that enable the human mobility of those facing border closure. We also must secure the necessary support of international financial organizations to help us bear the enormous economic and social costs associated with the pandemic. That is why Chile - in New York and Geneva - has been very active in presenting various complementary proposals to address the issues already stated. We thank in advance those delegations that have expressed their support and willingness to advance those initiatives, and we also hope to clarify doubts and queries as best we can. We are confident that we will have the necessary support to improve the global response to, and our preparedness for, pandemics, which we know will continue to plague the world of the twenty-first century. We do not have all the answers, but, since our challenges are interconnected, we can work together to reach them by strengthening multilateralism and our commitment to the Organization. We must listen to and work with and for the people, so that our response is not only collective, but also legitimate and representative. Multilateralism must use this opportunity to demonstrate that it can effectively deal with global crises.
