Mr. Chastel (Belgium) (spoke in French): I too
wish to extend heartfelt condolences to China and
Myanmar.

I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this debate on post-conflict peacebuilding. Belgium
associates itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of Slovenia on behalf of the European
Union.

The concept paper before us (S/2008/29l, annex)
poses some fundamental questions, such as how to
ensure sustainable post-conflict stability and how to
avoid a relapse into conflict following a peace
agreement. The international community is still
struggling to meet those challenges. Clearly, it is not
for the Security Council alone to find the answers to
these questions. The General Assembly, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other United Nations
bodies can also enrich this process of reflection.

My statement will focus on the following areas:
the contribution of international civilian experts; the

provision of flexible financial resources; partnerships
between beneficiary States and the international
community; and coordination within the international
community.

The evolution of peacekeeping operations in
recent years has been an initial response to these
concerns. For some time, they have been more than
just military operations; they have become
multidisciplinary, and they contribute to the protection
of human rights, to transitional justice, to training
police and security forces, and to State capacity-
building. Yet we must note that it remains difficult,
following a peace agreement, speedily to dispatch
adequate numbers of civilian experts who specialize in
these spheres to the area in question. But that is the
very kind of technical assistance that can make the
difference in sustainable peacebuilding, by helping the
country to rebuild its State structures.

Many countries are not in a position to dispatch
civilian experts in a rapid and flexible manner, either
because of administrative obstacles or because, quite
simply, such experts are unavailable. We might
consider, for example, establishing a pool of
international experts for immediate deployment. That
could, moreover, be done in cooperation with regional
organizations. Belgium would favour the Secretary-
General studying this question and making
recommendations.

Last week's Security Council debate (see S/PV.5889) highlighted the importance of security
sector reform for lasting peace, and I shall therefore
not dwell on that key element.

Another major problem is the lack of financing
instruments that would make it possible to respond
flexibly enough to emergencies and to the most urgent
needs in a post-conflict situation - or at least the lack
of sufficient coherence among existing ones. The
Brahimi report (S/2000/809) had already recommended
that a certain percentage of peacekeeping mission
funds should be applied to quick-impact projects. The
goal here is for the population to immediately enjoy the
benefits of peace. Quick-impact projects add real
value, and we should consider the possibility of rapidly
mobilizing financial resources to help national
authorities carry out such projects. In that context, we
should look at financial resources and instruments that
can be mobilized as speedily as possible to benefit a
post-conflict country, and should consider how to
operationalize them in a coordinated way. Such
thinking is also under way in the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The provision of civilian experts and flexible
financial assistance are necessary elements during the
phase of stabilization. But they are not enough. The
political commitment of the country's leaders must also
be reflected in effective operational cooperation with
the international community. In that context, we must
bear in mind the realities and obstacles in the field.
Often, national authorities are unable to meet the many
challenges of a crisis - not for any lack of political
will but rather because of a lack of capacity and
resources. For that reason, we should consider
partnerships with such authorities in order to speedily
identify needs and properly respond to them together.

Better cooperation within the international
community is also needed, along with earlier planning
for possible intervention on the ground. From the very
outset, the Security Council should better integrate the
building of partnerships and the initiation of
peacebuilding into its mandates, in particular when
these involve supervising and supporting the
implementation of peace agreements.

Establishing or rebuilding the rule of law in a
country affected by conflict is by definition a long-
term undertaking. We have no illusions in that regard:
there are no miracle solutions. However, the Security
Council should consider new ways to set the
foundations for lasting peace.

