Mr. Mwakawago (Tanzania): My delegation
appreciates the opportunity to address the Security
Council in this open debate on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My delegation also welcomes
the report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
see it as a notable contribution to our collective effort
to create the necessary conditions for peace and
prosperity for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its people.

Tanzania is a country that shares a border with
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As a result of
the war in that country, we have had to host refugees
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
also painfully witnessed their suffering, even as we
have to bear the burden of hosting them. This
phenomenon has distracted us from more pressing
issues of development in our border regions.
Concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
my President, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and his
Government, nothing has been of such singular
importance as peace in that country. Peace for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is therefore not only
in the interests of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, but in our self-interest as well.
In this regard, we View with considerable concern
the allegations made by the Panel of Experts in
paragraph 145 of the report regarding the role of the
seaports and airports in Dar es Salaam as a transit point
for what are described as the commercial activities of
the RCD-Goma, as well as that of the Bank of Tanzania
as a holding point for diamonds from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo before they are allegedly
shipped to Belgium, the Netherlands and South Africa.
We consider those to be serious allegations.

It is instructive that these allegations are made
under part III of the report, entitled "Links between the
exploitation of natural resources and the continuation
of the conflict". The obvious and perhaps unintended
implication is, of course that the port, the airport and
the Bank of Tanzania are either knowingly or
unknowingly being used to finance the continuation of
the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
the event that these claims were true, such activities
would no doubt be in clear violation of the stated
policy and commitments of the Government. The
Government is therefore interested in the veracity of
the allegations.

Regrettably, the report does not offer much help
in this regard. In paragraph 145, the report alleges that
a preponderance of information obtained from
documents and individuals in Dar es Salaam and
elsewhere

"overwhelmingly suggests that RCD-Goma
and others are marketing the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - gold,
diamonds and timber - through Dar es Salaam."

That paragraph, however, proceeds to note that the
RCD-Goma has fashioned a mechanism that grants an
appearance of legitimacy to the documents covering
the shipments, "complete with the required stamps and
signatures indicating approval and issuance in
Kinshasa and Lubumbashi".

Yet surprisingly, the report fails to make a
determination about the real likelihood of parties in
Tanzania dealing with those documents at their face
value and in good faith. This is of particular
importance because, as a country, we have a legitimate
undertaking to facilitate the lawful shipment of goods
destined for or coming from the landlocked countries
along our western borders, including the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as agreed between
our two Governments.

Furthermore, it is also a matter of concern that in
paragraph 146, the report alleges that

"The shipments of gold, diamonds and
timber are also processed in Dar es Salaam in
cooperation with RCD representatives by a
company believed to be a covert business entity
created for the purpose of facilitating support for
the financial and logistical operations of RCD-
Goma."

Both the RCD representatives and the covert company
remain unnamed. It is even more puzzling that those
activities are said, in the same paragraph, to be
"exclusive of operations handled by the Government of
Rwanda, via Kigali". My Government would like to
have details so that it can investigate them.

My Government is willing and ready to play a
very constructive role in our efforts to end the war in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. But we can do
so only in the context of irrefutable facts or a
transparent process. We are too conscious that this has
not been an easy task for the Panel of Experts.
However, under the prevailing circumstances, it is
difficult for us to respond in a constructive and
meaningful way to the allegations contained in
paragraphs 145, 146, 182 and 191 ofthe report.

For my Government, the door for dialogue with
the Panel and this Council remains open. Regrettably,
notwithstanding the findings in paragraphs 145, 146,
182 and 191, apparently obtained through third-party
sources, "overwhelmingly" suggesting the use of
entities in Tanzania as a transit point for the
inappropriate marketing of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Panel chose not
to visit Dar es Salaam, as evidenced in annex II of the
report. Consequently, no Government official, nor any
known Tanzanian, was interviewed. This neglect may
have unwittingly undermined the relevance of those
parts of the report to which we are addressing
ourselves. This significant flaw requires a remedy.

We also continue to extend our hand of
cooperation. This we do in the interests not only of
peace for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but of
peace and prosperity in the region.

In conclusion, my delegation joins previous
speakers in expressing our deep regret for the loss of
life of the six workers of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo last month. We extend our sincere
condolences to the ICRC and to the bereaved families.
We condemn the perpetrators of the dastardly act; they
should not go unpunished.

