Mr. Janelidze (Georgia): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Ukrainian presidency for convening
today's important and timely debate, giving us an
opportunity to focus on our region and reflect on ways
of responding to the security challenges and continuing
instability on the continent. I would like to thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Secretary General of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE); Ms. Helga
Schmid, Secretary General of the European External
Action Service of the European Union (EU); and those
Ministers who have participated in and contributed to
the debate.

The United Nations was created to put an end to war
and serve as an international instrument for preventing
conflicts and maintaining peace and security. Today,
however, one can hardly point to any region that is free
from security threats and confrontations. The multiple
conflicts in Europe share similarities and common
patterns, including the infringement of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of neighbouring States. We have
all seen aggression, first in Georgia and then in Ukraine,
and it may happen elsewhere if no action is taken today.
In Europe, we have all witnessed the reversal of the
political culture of cooperation that is enshrined in the
landmark documents of the Commission on Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the OSCE. We have
gone back to the politics of threats and the use of force.

It is particularly alarming when the security
architecture is deliberately undermined by a permanent
member of the Security Council whose precise duty it
is to stand guard over international principles. Over the
past decade, an inability to solve protracted conflicts
and prevent the emergence of new ones has revealed the
fundamental deficiencies of the current international
security architecture. I should recall here that for 16
years, starting in the early 1990s, in this very Chamber
the Council adopted 39 resolutions on the conflict on
Georgia, reaffirming my country's territorial integrity
and sovereignty within its internationally recognized
borders, denouncing ethnic cleansing and stressing the
necessity

"to address seriously the need for a dignified
return of IDPs [internally displaced persons] and
refugees, including their security and human rights
concerns" (resolution 1666 (2006). para. 7).
In Georgia's experience, a conflict that started
in the early 19905 reached its culmination in 2008
with Russia's military intervention in Georgia and
the occupation of our territories as the international
community failed to effectively respond to the early
warning signs. Moreover, following the August war, we
even lost the minimal existing safeguards, as in 2009
both the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
and the OSCE mission to Georgia were unilaterally
blocked by Russia, despite the increased need for their
presence to monitor their situation on the ground.

It is a vivid example that all protracted or dormant
conflicts contain a threat of escalation at any time and
require regular monitoring by the Security Council,
instead of its only reacting to the crises on an ad hoc
basis. Therefore, it would be important to launch
periodic reporting by the Secretary-General to the
Security Council on protracted conflicts.

While the United Nations, the OSCE and the EU
have been engaged in international talks between
Georgia and Russia as the co-moderators of the
Geneva International Discussions for eight years now,
more needs to be done to deliver tangible results.
That requires, first and foremost, political will and
commitment from all. It requires more stewardship
on behalf of the co-chairs and the Secretary-General
in guiding and assessing the process, based on the
principles and norms of international law. We should all
support the Secretary-General in assuming a stronger
leadership role.

My country has long been committed to the
constructive and peaceful policy of reconciliation and
confidence-building. Let me stress that Georgia is
committed to strive for peace in the region. It was in
that spirit that Georgia undertook the unilateral non-use
of force commitment, which was never reciprocated.
Since 2012, the Government of Georgia has sought the
de-escalation of relations with the Russian Federation
by taking constructive and practical steps. For that
purpose we have established dialogue on issues related
to trade, transport and people-to-people relations.
which has provided some positive outcomes. We worked
constructively in the format of the Geneva International
Discussions, open to constructive negotiations.

Last year was marked by the restoration of the
Gali Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism. As
concerns the relations with our compatriots living in the
occupied territories, the ethnic Abkhaz and Ossetians

are an integral part of our common history and future,
despite the current artificial barriers, and there is
no alternative to the return of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees to their homes and to
the full reintegration of all ethnicities into a vibrant
society where human rights and individual freedoms,
as well as cultural and linguistic diversity of different
communities, are top priorities We firmly pursue the
engagement, confidence-building and reconciliation
process with the people living in the occupied
territories. We are offering all benefits, which are open
to Georgian citizens. We stand ready to offer all the
progress we will achieve along our development path.

Despite all of that, the Russian Federation continues
policies aimed at the so-called factual annexation of
the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, through illegal agreements on
integration signed with de facto authorities on the
regions. The decision by the occupation regime to
conduct the so-called referendum in the Tskhinvali
region to rename it "Republic of South Ossetia-the State
of Alania", similar to one of the federal subjects of the
Russian Federation, is another attestation of that policy.
In parallel, the occupation regime in Abkhazia region
took the decision to close the so-called checkpoints
on the occupation line, further impairing the free
movement of the local population.

We call on the international community to condemn
and counter those acts. We thus call upon the Russian
Federation to reverse its illegal policy, comply with
international obligations, including the 12 August 2008
ceasefire agreement, and grant access to international
monitoring mechanisms, first and foremost the
European Union Monitoring Mechanism, as provided
by its mandate, facilitate the creation of international
security arrangements and allow the return of hundreds
of thousands of IDPs and refugees who have been
forcefully evicted from their homes.

Georgia stands ready to settle the conflict with
the Russian Federation by exclusively peaceful means,
in accordance with relevant international agreements
and with full respect for the fundamental principles
of international law. The withdrawal of Russia's
occupation forces from Georgia would be the most
important stage towards a comprehensive settlement of
the Russia-Georgia conflict.

Finally, let me reiterate how important it is that the
international community unanimously reaffirm their
adherence to the Charter of the United Nations and the
fundamental principles and norms of international law.
In that context, I reaffirm Georgia's strong support for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of your country,
Mr. President, and that of other European States. It is
vital that we all spare no efforts in finding effective
solutions to conflicts that impact the lives of millions
of people.

