Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We too wish to
thank Mr. Pascoe, the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing on the developments
in the region over the past month. My delegation also
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Let me also welcome the participation of the
Observer Mission of Palestine and, of course, our
friend Ambassador Gillerman, who will be leaving his
post at the end of this month. Mr. Gillerman said in his
statement that, being the ambassador for Israel was not
always an easy task, and as someone who has been
here for the six years that he has served, I agree. I wish
him well in his new responsibilities as he leaves here to
pursue other tasks.

Over the last few months, we have seen various
positive initiatives aimed at finding a negotiated
settlement to the myriad of disputes in the Middle East.
Many of these initiatives are in their infancy. However,
they have already led to a relative calming of the

08-4326]
situation, and some have already produced positive
results.

As we consider these developments in the Middle
East, it is important to note that it is the parties
themselves, with the support of the countries in their
own region, including mediation efforts by the League
of Arab States, who are embarking on the initiative to
resolve these conflicts. The Security Council should
support and encourage these home-grown solutions and
regional efforts.

It is also for this reason that we welcome recent
positive developments. We support the view that the
situation in Lebanon can only be resolved through
peaceful dialogue, national reconciliation, bilateral
cooperation with Lebanon's neighbours, the
withdrawal of all Israeli forces and settlers from its
territory, and a fair solution to the Palestinian refugee
issue as part of a comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace
settlement.

My delegation joins the global condemnation of
Israeli settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territory. We believe that the settlement activity in the
occupied territory is illegal and changes the facts on
the ground and that it is a key obstacle to the peace
process. The Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, prohibits are occupying Power from
transferring parts of its own civilian population to the
territory it occupies. We urge the Council to demand
that Israel immediately and completely freeze all
settlement activity, including dismantling outposts
erected since March 2001, in order not to change facts
on the ground and prejudice final status negotiations.

My delegation welcomes the efforts of the
Egyptian Government in brokering a ceasefire between
Israel and Hamas in the Gaza Strip and urges both
Israel and Hamas to abide by their obligations in terms
of their agreement to avoid a further deterioration in
the cycle of violence in the region.
We note that discussions are continuing on
further outstanding issues, including easing border
restrictions even further. We would like to recall the
letter dated 25 June 2008 from the Permanent Observer
of Palestine addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council, in which
Ambassador Mansour stated:

"we reaffirm the imperative of extending the
ceasefire to the West Bank, as the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank constitute one geographical
unit - the occupied Palestinian territory - and,
as such, Israeli military operations and attacks in
either area have negative repercussions".
(S/2008/421)

South Africa continues to encourage both the
Israeli and the Palestinian negotiating teams to
continue their negotiations to achieve the goal of the
establishment of a Palestinian State before the end of
2008, as declared at the Annapolis Middle East peace
meeting. The parties and the international community
cannot sit back and allow the situation on the ground to
continue to deteriorate, ending all hopes for a
negotiated two-State solution.

We reiterate that the responsibility for peace and
security lies with the two sides. In that regard, it is
crucial that their actions and pronouncements be
calculated to advance the quest for peace.

Finally, every briefing that we have received
continues to indicate that the situation on the ground in
the occupied Palestinian areas has not significantly
improved. The innocent civilians on both sides, on the
Israeli side and the Palestinian side, continue to suffer
the consequences of an elusive peace. The unjustified
and illegal acts by Israel, such as the siege of Gaza, as
well the continued incursions into the West Bank, the
expansion of illegal settlements, military posts and
checkpoints, and the separation wall in the West Bank,
are not contributing to any change in the situation.

South Africa believes that the two-State solution,
one that creates a State of Palestine with East
Jerusalem as its capital living side by side in peace and
security with a State of Israel, is the only way to bring
about long-term peace to Israel. I am very pleased that
Ambassador Gillerman, in his final statement before
the Council, reiterated that the vision of the two-State
solution is the one that may finally bring peace to that
area and, once again, we wish him well in his next
venture.

