Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I should like to
thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing, and
we commend the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under his
leadership. I welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie,
Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaci of
Kosovo to the Council today. We thank both of them
for the statements they made today.

In the political arena, Rwanda welcomes the
completion of municipal elections in Kosovo last
December. It is indeed an important step in the
implementation of the 19 April Agreement between
Belgrade and Pristina.

Despite the minor challenges observed during the
elections, the good cooperation between the Kosovo
authorities and the local Kosovo Serb representatives,
which has led to the success of the elections, is very
commendable. I will use this occasion to congratulate
Mr. Ivica Dacie and Mr. Hashim Thaci for their evident
leadership with regard to the success observed in the
implementation of the Agreement. We especially
commend them for having continued to engage
under the facilitation of the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Baroness Catherine Ashton. We are confident that with
the kind of political will and spirit exhibited by the
parties, they will reach a common understanding on
their most controversial outstanding issues.

On the security situation, while we note that
Kosovo remained generally calm, we strongly condemn
the murder of an elected member of the northern
Mitrovica municipal council near his residence on
16 January. We are aware that the Kosovo authorities,
the local Kosovo Serb representatives and the Serbian
Government condemn this murder, and we stress that it
is imperative that all parties concerned work together
in order to bring the perpetrators to justice.

On human rights, we took note of the lack of
progress in the implementation of the Ombudsperson
recommendations, in particular those related to culture,
education, access and representation in the media for
minority communities. We call on the Kosovo authorities
to pay special attention to issues facing minorities. We
welcome the technical meeting organized by the "office
of good governance within the Office of the Prime
Minister" on 2 December 2013 to discuss the new
draft Kosovo strategy on human rights 2014-2018. We
believe that the participation of international partners
in this discussion, given their expertise, contributed
to the drafting of a comprehensive strategy on human
rights. We commend all partners, including UNMIK,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, UN-Women, the European Office in Kosovo
and the Council of Europe for their participation in this
discussion.

On the return of displaced persons, we value
the assessment made by the Special Rapporteur on
the Human Rights of Internally Displaced Persons,
Mr. Chaloka Beyani, who visited Kosovo in October last
year. We commend the positive developments related to
legislation and policy, and we believe that the Kosovo
authorities, together with other stakeholders, including
donors, should work together to address the identified
challenges to the voluntary and safe return of displaced
persons. There is a particular need for concerted
efforts to tackle discrimination, high unemployment
rates, poor access to education and the repossession
of illegally occupied properties. We believe that the
solutions sought for the issues identified will need to
increase the number of voluntary and safe returns of
displaced persons to their homes.

In the same vein, I commend the gesture made
by Mr. Thaci, who visited two returned families on
7 January on the occasion of Orthodox Christmas,
and the commitment he made to facilitate the return
of Kosovo Serb displaced persons to their homes and
properties. On the other hand, we regret to see that,
once again, the Rahovec municipality has not begun
to implement the Law on the Village of Velika Hoca,
despite continued pressure by the central authorities
and the international community. There is no doubt that
the persistence of that issue will continue to undermine
good coexistence between both communities.

Finally, I want to take this opportunity to commend
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo for
its invaluable contribution in monitoring and advising
in the area of the rule of law. Rwanda has taken note
of the report of the report of the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
(S/2014/68, annex I) in that area.

I also commend the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for its
continued contribution. It is very important that the
European Union and UNMIK continue their assistance
to the people of Kosovo in that regard.

