Mr. Radomski (Poland): Allow me to thank Special
Envoy Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs Mr. Thomas
Markham for their important briefings.

We are horrified by the news of another deadly
attack in eastern Ghouta, which took place on Saturday
evening. Dozens of people perished as a result of a
vicious act of violence against civilians in Douma. The
available information about the symptoms of the victims
affirm that they are consistent with those caused by a
chemical agent.

Poland condemns that barbaric attack, and
expects that it will be possible to hold the perpetrators
accountable. No military or political goal canjustify the
extermination of innocent vulnerable people, especially
those seeking help in medical facilities. That atrocious
crime seems to be a cynical response to the debates in
the Council last week, when we commemorated the
first anniversary of the attack in Khan Shaykun (see S/PV.8221).

We call on the actors affecting the situation in
Syria, especially the Russian Federation and Iran, to
take all the necessary actions to prevent any further use
of weapons of mass destruction and to achieve the full
cessation of hostilities in the whole territory of Syria.
We insist that all parties to the conflict comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.

As has been stated many times by members of
the Council, as well as United Nations officials and
European Union representatives, it is highly regrettable
that the renewal of the mandate of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism was vetoed, thereby
allowing those responsible for the subsequent chemical
attacks to remain unpunished. Today we face the results
of that impunity, witnessing further attacks against
civilians with the use of chemicals as weapons.
We urge all our partners in the Council to engage
in a serious discussion in good faith in order to
re-establish an accountability mechanism for chemical
attacks in Syria. That is the minimum that we owe the
victims of Ghouta, Khan Shaykun, Al-Lataminah and
the numerous other places where chemical weapons
have been used.

