It is with great pleasure that I welcome and thank Judge Yusuf, President of the International Court of Justice, for his second insightful briefing to the Security Council within two months (see S/PV.8653). Viet Nam attaches great importance to the crucial role of the International Court of Justice in promoting and strengthening the rule of law at the international level. In discharging its mandate as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, including in particular through its adjudicative and advisory functions, the Court has contributed significantly to reducing tension, preventing conflicts, restoring friendly relations and facilitating lasting peace and stability. As two central institutions in the robust post-war structure to ensure international peace and security, the Security Council and the International Court of Justice have separate but complementary roles. We believe there is still much space for strengthening the coordination and cooperation between these two principal organs. In this regard, we welcome today's important open debate allowing for an open exchange on a very important topic. First, Viet Nam supports enhanced cooperation between the Council and the Court in accordance with the established institutional framework. The Charter of the United Nations empowers the Council to recommend to the relevant parties procedures for the settlement of their dispute, and in doing so the Council may take into consideration that legal disputes should as a general rule be referred by the parties to the International Court of Justice in accordance with the provisions of the Statute of the Court. Yet the Corfu Channel case is the first and only case in which the Council recommended to the parties to refer their dispute to the Court. We further take note that, among the 28 advisory opinions issued by the Court, only one was made upon request of the Security Council, which was in the 1970 advisory opinion on the legal consequences for States of the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia. We believe that the Security Council can build on its good past practices to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with international law as a conflict prevention tool. Secondly, we see necessity in strengthening dialogue between the two organs on more substantive matters. Often a dispute involves aspects of law and politics. The Council retains the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. The Court has been in many instances called upon to deal with cases that relate to the same sets of events that are part of a situation of armed conflict before the Security Council. Furthermore, the Court, through its jurisprudence, applies, interprets, clarifies or otherwise reinforces the purposes and principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter and other rules of international law. We believe that the judicial expertise of the Court will make a significant contribution to the work and activities of the Security Council in dealing with burning international legal issues that might arise in thematic agenda items and in the context of conflict or post-conflict situations. Thirdly, the peaceful settlement of disputes is one of the most important fundamental principles of international law embodied in the United Nations Charter and many international and regional instruments. It is in our common interests that more efforts could be made to build capacity in effectively using international judicial and arbitration bodies as means of peacefully settling disputes. In this regard, we commend the efforts of the International Court of Justice to engage young law graduates through its Judicial Fellowship Programme. We believe that familiarizing young academics with the work of the Court and the settlement of international disputes through law is a legitimate investment that will bear long-term fruits. It is Viet Nam's consistent policy to support the peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use of force or the threat of force, enhancing the role of international legal bodies in the promotion of friendly relations among nations and the maintenance of international peace and security. Viet Nam has high regard for the work of judicial bodies, including the International Court of Justice. We have participated in and contributed to the work of the Court in several legal processes. Nowadays, the international system and international law have come under various forms of stress. Instances of violations of international law abound. Challenges to international peace and security keep evolving and proliferate. In that context, promoting adherence to the United Nations Charter and international law is more critical than ever. My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate our commitment to upholding the United Nations Charter, respecting international law and contributing to the maintenance of international peace and security.
