Mr. Williamson (United States): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
briefing. I welcome President-elect Gusmao and Chief
Minister Alkatiri, and on behalf of the United States
Government I would like to congratulate Mr. Gusmao
for his electoral victory and both of them for making
East Timor's transition to democracy and independence
a model of peace, hopefulness and success.

The most important thing now is to consolidate
gains and avoid instability in the next phase. For these
reasons, we endorse the recommendations in the
Secretary-General's recent report and expect to support
a resolution establishing the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) soon, and certainly
before independence.

To ensure that, I encourage our East Timor
colleagues and the United Nations to finalize the
memorandums which will govern the command-and-
control relationships between United Nations
peacekeepers and police and their East Timor
counterparts and institutions. We support the maximum
level of coordination and cooperation while preserving
the usual prerogatives, privileges and immunities. We
hope that the United Nations and the East Timor
Government will be looking for ways to accelerate the
proposed downsizing and devolution to leave East
Timor master of its own fate as soon as possible while
acknowledging the need to move judiciously to avoid
destabilization.

Secretary-General Annan has chosen our
colleague, the Indian Permanent Representative Mr.
Sharma, to be the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General upon the establishment of
UNMISET. We encourage the leaders of East Timor to
work closely with him and with the United Nations
leadership on the peacekeeping forces and the civilian
political side of the implementation plan for the
successor mission.

The Secretary-General's report talks specifically
about the development needs of the East Timor
Defence Force and the East Timor Police Service. We
have provided personnel and trainers to both the
Defence Force and the Police Service, and we expect to
continue those services after independence.
Furthermore, we recently started a logistics contract
that is providing crucial support to the Defence Force
in both Lospalos and Metinaro. We would join the
Secretary-General in noting how important the
development of these two institutions will be for East
Timor's future and in urging yet more countries, some
of which had constraints before East Timor became
independent, to look at providing assistance.

The Secretary-General's information about slow
progress in the judicial sector raises concern. The
United States has provided substantial assistance in
that area, and we have approved another $600,000
worth of projects on the justice/accountability issue
alone for the current year. Our justice-oriented grants
to East Timor since 1999 have totalled more than $13.5
million. We encourage East Timor to make progress in
this critical sector a priority.

The Secretary-General's report provides welcome
detail on how UNMISET and the East Timorese
Government will coordinate with international
financial institutions and bilateral donors. We have
always believed that the United Nations cannot, and
indeed should not, be the only game in town. We
encourage prompt implementation of, and full attention
to, these coordination mechanisms.

Bilaterally, the United States plans to establish
diplomatic relations with East Timor immediately after
independence. We will speak more about our donor
plans during the upcoming Dili conference. But I want
to reassure the Council that the United States remains
committed to East Timor. From 1999 to the present, we
have committed nearly $180 million in bilateral
assistance for East Timor, independent of our
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping. We have
allocated more than $26 million in bilateral assistance
to East Timor this fiscal year, which for us began
September 2001.

Even as we prepare to approve a further two-year
United Nations presence, the United States continues to
believe that a good definition of success in East Timor
will be when the last United Nations peacekeepers
leave and an independent and stable East Timor stands
up on its own. To get there, the United Nations and the
East Timorese will need to work with the widest range
of bilateral donors and interested agencies to ensure
that as the extraordinary measures, from finance
through peacekeeping, progressively diminish to
nothing within two years, other appropriate
mechanisms of support are in place.

We have previously urged that the East Timorese
help this process by avoiding political infighting,
focusing on a democratic, peaceful way forward,
practising fiscal strictness and programme rigour, and
capturing as much as the United Nations and others can
teach, and quickly, in setting the right priorities. I will
repeat those urgings, because I have two such
important East Timorese leaders alongside me. We will
also continue to encourage the United Nations to stay
on schedule with the downsizing it has set for itself,
progressively devolving responsibility to increasingly
capable East Timor institutions. When we have that, we
can truly talk about a United Nations success story. The
United States expects to participate in the East Timor
independence ceremony.

I cannot finish today without expressing for the
record the appreciation of the United States for the
outstanding work of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and the
UNTAET team. It is appropriate that we hear East
Timorese voices today as we talk about the future, but
it is equally appropriate that we commend and thank
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for his
hard work over the last two and one half years.

