The Secretary-General: I am pleased to join
members for this debate on a theme that lies at the
heart of the Security Council's responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security and, in
particular, in assisting the re-establishment of
sustainable peace after violent conflict. I am grateful to
His Excellency Jan Kubis, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Slovakia, for bringing us together under this rubric.

Security sector reform is a relatively new term for
many of us. Yet it stands for issues that have long
preoccupied our Organization: the search for
sustainable security and the recognition that security is
also a precondition for setting countries on the path to
development.

For the United Nations, security sector reform
aims to achieve effective, accountable and sustainable
security institutions that operate under a framework of
the rule of law and respect for human rights. In this
way, security sector reform embraces values and
principles that lie at the core of the United Nations:
commitment to the rule of law, commitment to the
protection of human rights and commitment to the
State as the cornerstone of international peace and
security.

The practical involvement of the United Nations
in security sector reform has been shaped by decades
of peacekeeping in post-conflict environments. From
07-24428
that experience, four fundamental lessons have come to
shape our thinking.

First, security is a crucial and immediate
condition for peacebuilding after conflict. A basic
degree of security is one of the most visible and
immediate dividends for communities, providing them
with the opportunity to reclaim their lives and dignity.
In this way, it is also a condition for initiating efforts
towards long-term development.

We have learned that the ability of our
peacekeepers to provide basic security at an early stage
is shaped by how well security issues are addressed in
the peacemaking phase. Today, we have a better
understanding of how early decisions in peace
agreements - particularly in the context of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR)- impact subsequent efforts to establish
sustainable security structures and processes. Our aim
must be to ensure that peace agreements and DDR
programmes contribute to, rather than impede, the
restoration of sustainable security.

We are making progress on this front. We are
developing our mediation capacities to support
peacemaking and peace negotiations. And we have
elaborated comprehensive, system-wide integrated
DDR standards and programmes, which increasingly
form an integral component of early peacebuilding
efforts. Those early frameworks help lay the
groundwork for sustainable security reform.

A second lesson we have learned is that security
cannot be restored and maintained in a vacuum. In
supporting efforts to achieve peace, it is vital that we
address the needs and perspectives of the State and the
communities within it. National ownership is the key to
sustainable peace. That is why United Nations peace
operations should rest on the principle that there must
be a peace to keep, and why the United Nations efforts
are focused on supporting national authorities in their
efforts to establish sustainable security.

We have also come to recognize that national
ownership in post-conflict environments is not a static
entity. Rather, it evolves as leaders and communities
are brought into the peacebuilding process. The wider
the scope of local ownership, the more sustainable
security will be. That principle guides our efforts in
Kosovo, where the United Nations family is engaged
with a wide range of State authorities and local
3
Government entities, and where we are conducting a
province-wide consultation on security sector reform.

The purpose of this consultation is to obtain a
comprehensive picture of security needs and
perspectives - of the most pressing security concerns
for local communities and how they believe those
concerns can best be met. The same underlying
principle has come to shape one of the unique aspects
of United Nations peacekeeping - that among its
contributors are a number of countries that have
successfully made the transition from conflict to
sustainable peace. The participation of those troops and
police contributors brings valuable insights and
perspectives to United Nations efforts to support
national authorities.

The third lesson the United Nations has earned is
that sustainable security goes beyond reintegrating
soldiers and units, or training and equipping individual
police officers. We have learned to our cost, in Haiti,
Timor Leste, Sierra Leone and Liberia, that without
effective, well-governed security institutions in place,
the maintenance of peace is short-lived.

Sustainable security involves strengthening
institutions and processes. It calls for capable
management, sustainable funding, and effective
oversight. That is why, in police reform, we no longer
focus only on mentoring and monitoring individual
police officers. Through such initiatives as the standing
police capacity, we also work to support national
authorities in building sustainable law enforcement
institutions. We work closely with interior and justice
ministries, with finance and public administration
bodies, and we work with human rights ombudsmen
and community groups.

Fourthly, and finally, we have learned that
building sustainable security after conflict goes beyond
the scope of any one actor. Even in the United Nations
itself, there are many capacities scattered across the
system it. We must coordinate those fully as part of an
effective response.

But the United Nations is only one actor. To build
sustainable security, many others must be engaged:
Member States, regional organizations, Bretton Woods
institutions and others, each of which brings specific
insights and expertise. All those diverse efforts are
needed, even if the combination of actors and tasks
will differ in each context, and all of them need to be
carefully coordinated. In many countries, the United
Nations supports national Governments with such
coordination. Because of its universality and its
legitimacy, the United Nations has a particular
contribution to make.

I am heartened that the Security Council has
taken note of those lessons. Increasingly, peacekeeping
mandates reflect the perspectives of security sector
reform. Examples of tasks covering current United
Nations peace operations include taking forward
security sector reform in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, carrying out institutional reforms and the
constitution of integrated security forces in Burundi,
strengthening Sierra Leone's security sector, and
supporting the restructuring of the defence and security
forces in Cote d'Ivoire.

From now on, our overall task must be to ensure
that United Nations peacekeepers are provided with the
guidance and support they need to carry out those tasks
effectively and efficiently. We must provide
peacekeepers with the standards, guidance and training
they need to provide consistent and quality assistance
to national authorities. We must ensure that mission
leaders have the knowledge and staff expertise to direct
personnel in carrying out complex support tasks, and
we must provide capable and responsive support to
field missions in security sector reform, in accordance
with Security Council mandates. Finally, we must
closely coordinate United Nations support for security
reform in post-conflict environments with ongoing
efforts to develop integrated peacebuilding strategies. I
look forward to working with all Member States in
pursuit of that important goal.

Again, let me express my appreciation, Sir, for
your initiative in holding this debate and for the
thorough way in which Slovakia has prepared for it.
Let me also thank the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom for convening an Arria formula
meeting on this topic last week. Above all, I am
grateful to all members of the Council for their
commitment to discharging effectively the serious
responsibilities facing the Council.

