Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this quarterly
debate on the Middle East.

The Middle East continues to occupy a large
portion of the Council's attention as new challenges
emerge and existing crises continue to unfold. The
lack of progress in resolving conflicts and improving
people's lives is causing frustration, especially among
young people, who are increasingly leaving the region
to seek opportunities elsewhere. Long-term political
stability and economic prosperity are tied together,
and we hope that the international community can
act as one in carrying out effective strategies towards
achieving those goals.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains one of
the central causes of instability in the region. Brazil
reiterates its support for a two-State solution to the
conflict, with Israel and Palestine living side by side
in peace and security. We encourage the parties to seek
to establish a constructive political environment that
is conducive to a return to meaningful negotiations.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains extremely
fragile and highlights the need for a fair, just and
mutually agreeable political solution to the conflict. In
that spirit, Brazil encourages all the parties involved to
engage in new and creative diplomatic efforts with an
open mind in order to achieve ajust and comprehensive
settlement. Peace will be achieved only with difficult
decisions and concessions being made by all sides.

Regarding the situation in Syria, Brazil remains
concerned about the escalation of violence throughout
the north of the country. We encourage the Council
to find common ground with a view to establishing
a lasting ceasefire in Idlib province. With regard to
developments in north-eastern Syria, Brazil urges all
parties concerned to exercise maximum restraint and
ensure safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian aid
in the region. We emphasize the obligation of all parties
to respect international humanitarian law and strongly
condemn any attack that might affect civilian lives
and infrastructure, including on medical facilities and
medical workers, who must be protected at all times.

Brazil underscores its support for the work of
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and welcomes the
establishment of the Syrian Constitutional Committee
as an encouraging step towards achieving an urgently
needed political solution, based on the parameters set
forth in the relevant Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2254 (2015), and the Sochi declaration. We
also welcome the convening of the first meeting of the
Constitutional Committee, to be held in Geneva. We
continue to believe firmly that only a Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated political
process, with due regard for the preservation of Syria's
territorial integrity, will bring about lasting peace and
alleviate the Syrian people's humanitarian suffering.

Brazil condemns in the strongest terms the
September attacks on oil facilities in Saudi Arabia
and commends the Saudi Government for inviting
international experts, including from the United
Nations, to take part in the investigations. The attacks
increased the risk that the Yemeni war could expand
into a wider regional conflict. We therefore call on
all the parties to refrain from any actions that might
lead to a further increase in hostilities and to take the
necessary steps towards the full implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement. Furthermore, we urge the
parties to continue to work with Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths regarding a comprehensive political solution
to the conflict and the provision of continued and
unimpeded humanitarian assistance. Brazil reiterates
its commitment to the monitoring of the ceasefire by
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement, to which we have agreed to deploy Brazilian
military and police officers. We hope that the activation
of the tripartite monitoring mechanism of the ceasefire
may further contribute to the prevention of military
escalation in the port city.

Lastly, Brazil is closely following developments in
Libya and urges all sides to exercise maximum restraint
in order to avoid an escalation of Violence, and to
engage with the United Nations, the African Union and
the relevant stakeholders with a view to achieving a full
and comprehensive cessation of hostilities throughout
the country. We condemn the recent attacks on the
Libyan population and United Nations personnel.
Brazil urges all parties to abide by international
humanitarian law and uphold their obligation to protect
civilians. We remain convinced that establishing peace
and national unity in Libya and countering terrorism
and transnational crime in the region ultimately require
the establishment of an inclusive Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned political process, in accordance with
the Libyan Political Agreement and the United Nations
Action Plan for Libya. We therefore call on all the
parties to work with Special Representative Ghassan
Salame with a view to reaching a comprehensive
political solution to the security crisis and the dire
humanitarian situation in Libya. We continue to hope
that a Libyan national conference will be held at the
earliest possible opportunity.

