Mr. Hilale (spoke in French): I would first like
to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to speak
before the Security Council in my capacity as Chair
of the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission to discuss the work of the
configuration and its vision for the coming months. I
also take this opportunity to congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Babacar
Gaye, on his recent appointment, which demonstrates
the confidence in and appreciation for the outstanding
work that he and his team have carried out at the head
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic and since the creation
of MINUSCA under extremely difficult conditions. I
reiterate to him my support and that of all the members
of the configuration, who wish him every success in
his endeavour. Finally, I would like to thank him for the
quality and clarity of his briefing to the Council.

Although Morocco is aware of the difficulty of
the task, it is committed to addressing the challenges
facing the configuration. I take this opportunity to
thank the transitional authorities, Council members
and members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission for this vote of confidence
in us. I use the word "challenges" because we are in a
unique situation, and we should put the configuration's
actions in the proper context. This is the first time
that the Peacebuilding Commission faces a situation
in which a country on its agenda has relapsed into
conflict and a multidimensional peacekeeping mission
has replaced a special political mission, with all that
that entails, particularly at the organizational level. It is
also difficult to establish a long-term plan or a strategic
framework for peacebuilding until the transition is
definitively completed.

Despite the difficult situation, although continuing
the configuration's activities was questioned at one
point, we believe that, given the enormous needs in the
Central African Republic, the configuration has a major
role to play. That role will be gradually reinforced with
the restoration of peace and security and the necessary
support for strengthening the State. The configuration
can make use of its unique nature and provide
comparative advantages to all those working to restore
stability in the country, in particular through its unique
role as a political platform that brings together the
Central African Republic's key partners, neighbouring
countries, international financial institutions, regional
organizations and other groups active in the Central
African Republic.

Since January 2014, the configuration has held a series
of informal restricted meetings, in a format inaugurated
by the former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
in the absence of a Chair of the configuration, in order
to encourage an open and interactive dialogue among
the Central African Republic's main partners. During
those informal meetings, we had the opportunity to
talk with religious leaders, experts from the region and
representatives of non-governmental organizations and
to brief participants on the evolution of the situation
on the ground, through briefings by the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, and on the work by configuration members,
including the World Bank and the European Union. Two
meetings of all the members of the configuration were
held, which served to reaffirm its members' interest
and support.

As for the Peacebuilding Fund, it has already
financed three projects in the Central African Republic.
The first enabled the deployment of additional
human rights observers. The second was used for the
rehabilitation of police stations and barracks and for the
purchase of vehicles. For the third, the Fund has worked
closely with the World Bank, the United Nations
Development Programme and the European Union,
whom we thank, to ensure the payment of wages. That
issue is critical to restoring calm, and we have actively
raised awareness of it among all partners. The Fund
is currently considering whether to provide financial
support to the national reconciliation plan.

Following my predecessor's visit to Bangui,
we were able to identify, in consultation with the
transitional authorities and civil society, four priorities,
namely, the restoration of security and the protection of
civilians, support for transitional authorities, national
reconciliation and political dialogue, and, finally,
regional coherence, which is crucial to helping the
country rebuild.

As we all know, the security situation remains
volatile, with sporadic clashes, as Mr. Gaye has
just highlighted, between ex-Seleka and anti-balaka
forces in Bangui and between those armed groups and
international forces, including the incident in Batangafo
that killed nearly 70 people from 4 to 6 August and,
more recently, in Mbres. We hope that the deployment
of MINUSCA, beginning on 15 September, will ensure
a rapid return to safety and protection for the civilian
population who need it most.

The ceasefire agreement signed in Brazzaville
is a first step towards stabilizing the country and
symbolizes a new momentum for the transitional
authorities, giving rise to hope among the Central
African people. In that respect, we call on all members
of the Security Council and the entire international
community to support that process, which, although
fragile, remains indispensable.

We welcome the commitment of the mediator,
His Excellency Mr. Sassou Nguesso, President of
the Republic of the Congo, and all the actors who
have facilitated the process, including the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, and the representative
of the African Union, Mr. Soumeylou Boubeye Ma'i'ga.
Also, we take note of the appointment of
Mr. Mahamat Kamoun as Prime Minister and call for
the formation of an inclusive transitional Government,
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
also highlighted, as soon as possible, given the
instability that continues to prevail in the country.

We believe that the configuration can provide
significant support to the political process, the national
reconciliation process and regional coherence. We
know the situation in the Central African Republic has
a significant regional impact, given its geographical
position and its historically close relations with
neighbouring countries. In that respect, we express our
thanks to the Heads of State of the region, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
African Union for their significant involvement in the
resolution of the conflict, and we remain committed
to greater uniformity in and coordination of regional
actions.

The developments on the ground lead us to consider
other priorities in the various areas where we believe
we can provide useful support.

Support for the electoral process is an area in which
the Peacebuilding Commission has acquired experience
and expertise that is recognized by all. Restoring
the criminal justice system is also an urgent element
in the fight against impunity, and the success of the
political transition and support for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform processes could be considered in consultation
with the relevant partners.

On resource mobilization, although the momentum
in international solidarity has enabled many projects to
be funded, the humanitarian appeal by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is unfortunately
only 39 per cent funded, according to the most recent
estimates. We deeply regret that fact. Many other needs
should also be taken into account, including those
related to the holding of elections. In that respect, we
could consider holding a donor conference to support
that important step on the road towards the restoration
of peace, stability and the rule of law in the Central
African Republic.

I will have an opportunity to speak on those topics
during my next visit to Bangui. I also intend to visit the
main partners, including neighbouring countries, the
European Union, the African Union, ECCAS and the

African Development Bank, to enhance coherence in
the international community's work.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all the members
ofthe Security Council for their continued advocacy for
the Central African Republic to ensure that the crisis in
that country does not become a forgotten crisis. Africa,
and the Central African Republic in particular, needs
the Council's support.

