Mr. Van Dunem "Mbinda" (Angola): I wish to
apologize for the delay in addressing the Council. It was
caused by the preparation of translations of my statement
into the working languages of the United Nations. I shall
deliver my statement in Portuguese; I trust that the
translations into the working languages of the United
Nations will convey the thinking and ideas of my
Government and my people.

Spoke in Portuguese (English text furnished by the delegation).

We always feel honoured to address this important
body, the Security Council; this is especially true now

 

that the peace process in my country has entered a crucial
and decisive phase.

Allow me to begin, Sir, by congratulating you
personally and on behalf of the Government of the Republic
of Angola on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I also extend my congratulations to
your predecessor, the representative of Honduras, for the
hard work he carried out during his term.

I take this opportunity also to reaffirm the deep
appreciation of the people and the Government of Angola
for the tireless diplomatic efforts pursued by the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, by his
Special Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and by
the three observer States, as well as for the special role
played by the Government of Zambia, and particularly by
His Excellency President Frederick Chiluba, whose
contribution has been a key factor in the dialogue that is
taking place between Angolans.

The prospects for the making of a final peace and for
political and economic stability - goals which the Angolan
Government has pursued for nearly 20 years, through
enormous efforts, and for the sake of which it has made
countless sacrifices - increasingly appear to be within
reach. Indeed, when the Council adopted resolution
976 (1995) authorizing the current peace-keeping operation
in Angola and the subsequent deployment of United
Nations troops, it did so in the conviction that the time had
come to put a final end to the Angolan conflict and to push
for peace and national reconciliation.

The Council's authorization of one of the largest and
most expensive peace-keeping operations ever
undertaken - it will cost about $400 million per year -
is revealing of the complexity and scope of the process
under way for the settlement of the Angolan conflict, as
well as of the international community's clear commitment
to the success of the Mission, which we would like to see
proceed in an increasingly dynamic and effective manner.
At the same time, we do not underestimate, as some did in
the past, the negative factors that could derail the process.

This step taken by the international community
following the signing by the Government and UNITA of
the Lusaka Protocol, the new instrument setting forth the
legal framework for the country's transition from war to
peace, gave a major boost to the peace process and helped
curtail initial pessimism - as did the positive unfolding of
such a difficult and complex process, shrouded at first in a
climate of deeply held mutual mistrust and hostility
rooted in a long, destructive war.

The presence and activities of United Nations "blue
helmets" on the ground, especially after the arrival of the
first infantry units from Uruguay, India, Zimbabwe and
Brazil, have generally permitted the maintenance of
detente and the observance in practice of the provisions
of the Lusaka Protocol. Nevertheless, the full discharge of
the mandate of the United Nations force will be effective
only if it continues to be provided with the necessary
adequate means for that purpose and if its activities are
extended to all areas of the country's territory envisaged
under the "Acordos de Paz" and within the spirit of the
agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Angola.

To that end, the full deployment of UNAVEM. III
troops, which is scheduled to be completed this month,
will help deter any conceivable attempts to undermine the
Peace Accords, even though we are aware that the
ultimate guarantee of their success rests on political will,
a true desire for peace, and the good faith of the
signatories.

Despite the serious difficulties that have cropped up
in the implementation of the Lusaka Accords, the
Angolan Government considers that, on balance, the
progress made so far has been positive. Still, we do not
wish to overlook certain dangerous factors, which I shall
shortly touch upon.

On the positive side, we note the cessation of large-
scale offensive military operations, the disengagement of
the troops on the ground and the beginning of the clearing
of land mines from some of the main roadways. As a
result of this, a climate of relative tranquillity has been
established in several areas. This has allowed for the free
circulation of people and goods, and the return of many
displaced people to their original localities.

In the political arena, my Government has begun a
direct dialogue with the leadership of UNITA, which has
proved to be effective as a way of speeding up the
implementation of the various aspects of the pledges
made in Lusaka.

The main effect of the recent meeting between His
Excellency President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and the
leader of UNITA was a reduction in the initial mutual
distrust that affected the unfolding of the process. My

 

Government will continue to do its utmost to implement the
commitments made at that meeting.

Despite the important progress that has been made in
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, which is
reflected in the report submitted to this Council as well as
in the results of the Secretary-General's recent visit to
Angola, some dangerous factors that seriously concern my
Government still persist.

The implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is five
months behind schedule. The key lag has to do with the
fact that so far the UNITA military forces have not been
confined to quarters and that there has been a consequent
delay in the final formation of the country's single national
army.

Isolated military actions here and there, the renewed
mining by UNITA of areas from which the mines had
earlier been cleared, the kidnapping of defenceless
individuals: all these are issues that are still on the agenda
of the Joint Commission.

These and other issues that hinder the implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol need to be solved with the utmost
urgency, since that would effectively dispel the risk of
military confrontations and of a relapse into war, with very
unpredictable consequences. In this context, it is worth
recalling that so long as UNITA's forces are not disarmed
and confined to quarters, and so long as the formation of
the single army is not completed, the implementation of the
subsequent phases of the peace process, notably the
integration of UNITA officials into the National Unity
Government, will continue to be postponed. At the same
time, this opens up the possibility of a proliferation of
cease-fire Violations.

Seeking to accelerate the conclusion of the formation
of the national army, we agreed to the principle of the full
incorporation of UNITA's forces into the Angolan armed
forces. That will increase the number of their initial
personnel to 120,000 men, following which there is to be
demobilization of the surplus troops in a more appropriate
manner, until a total number of 90,000 is reached, as set
forth in the Lusaka Protocol. This is a gigantic task, aimed
at both making up for the delay in the process and
preventing the creation of rogue armies and the acts of
banditry that could result from a hasty demobilization
without the safeguarding of the full social reintegration of
the surplus troops. In order for this wide-ranging goal to be
achieved, it will be essential that the international
community provide appropriate and multifarious assistance,
since Angola's current economic and financial situation
prevents my Government from being able to shoulder the
attendant costs on its own.

My Government is also concerned with the
psychological spectre of the climate of tension that
persists in some regions as a result of military incidents,
such as attacks, sabotage operations and the laying of
mines, and the continuation of UNITA's hostile
propaganda.

We continue to exert efforts to put an immediate end
to such actions, which, while not imperilling the peace
process yet, represent threats that it would be better to
avoid entirely. The slow pace of the release of the
prisoners of war is another issue of great concern.
Immediately after that process began, the Government
freed more than 200 prisoners, while UNITA released
only seven. In the light of that, we have been forced to
halt the process until UNITA changes its attitude. In this
regard, there is an essential role that the International
Committee of the Red Cross can play in helping to clarify
the situation and overcome this impasse.

At the outset of UNAVEM. III's new mandate,
particular attention should be paid to the removal of the
causes of the delays in the implementation of the Peace
Accords. No opportunities should be given for the
occurrence of premeditated delays aimed at evading the
obligations imposed by the Protocol, because that would
violate both its letter and its spirit.

In order to help shape the new reality created by the
peace prospects and to cement national reconciliation, the
Angolan Parliament has recently given its permission for
the specific revision of the Angolan Constitution, in order
to accommodate the leader of UNITA in one of the two
offices of Vice-President that will be part of the Angolan
political system. With the adoption of this measure, an
attempt was made to adapt the configuration of the
current political order to the evolution of the political
process in Angola in matters that pertain to the
organization of political power, while defining the
hallmarks of these changes.

Thus, the current Angolan political order will vest its
powers in the following bodies and institutions: the
President of the Republic, who is concurrently the head
of the executive branch; two Vice-Presidents of the
Republic, who will exercise the powers, the duties and the
responsibilities assigned to them; the National Assembly;
the Government; the Prime Minister, who assists the

 

President of the Republic in running the executive branch
and is politically responsible for the actions of the
Government before the Parliament under a standing
delegation of powers from the President of the Republic;
the courts; and the office of the Attorney-General of the
Republic. Those will be the constitutional bodies, and I
wished to mention them.

Within the context of these constitutional measures,
the Parliament also decided to bring to a conclusion the
process of the presidential elections, by stipulating that the
candidate who received the greatest number of votes in the
presidential election held on 29 and 30 September 1992 was
elected, and that the two offices of Vice-President of the
Republic be held by the political parties that received more
than 30 per cent of the votes in the parliamentary elections
held on 29 and 30 September 1992. Thus, the party that
received the greatest number of votes, the MPLA, will
designate, from within the ranks of its leaders, a Vice-
President, who, among other assigned responsibilities, will
substitute for the President of the Republic during his
absence or any other temporary impediment, while the other
Vice-President is to be designated by UNITA, as the party
that received the second greatest number of votes.

I cannot help but underscore the great importance and
the extensive scope of this measure, which is only the latest
in a series of other measures that were enacted earlier, such
as the amnesty for crimes committed during the crisis that
followed the elections. Suffice it to say that it was a result
of a legislative initiative by the party of the majority, the
MPLA, and its President, Jose Eduardo dos Santos, that this
gesture of great openness and political tolerance, inspired
by a spirit of acceptance and magnanimity, enabled the
Parliament to overcome an issue that seemed
insurmountable.

Thus, the necessary political and psychological
conditions have been created to enable all Angolans to
move on towards peace, democracy and multifaceted
development.

Settlement of the Angolan conflict will make an
important contribution to stability and security in southern
Africa and to the exploitation of the region's vast economic
potential and its greater integration. Moreover, it will allow
the resources that are currently devoted to humanitarian
assistance to be reallocated for development or to other
regions of the world with pressing needs.

The southern region of our continent has been
endowed with bountiful human and natural resources that
will benefit its peoples and the world at large once they
are put fully to use towards achieving the goals of
development.

In closing, I should like to express, on behalf of the
people and Government of Angola, profound gratitude to
the Governments of Argentina and Algeria for the
generous, unstinting service of their heroic soldiers who
gave their lives for the cause of peace while performing
their noble mission in Angola.

We also wish to express our appreciation to the
Government of the United Kingdom for the work of its
military contingent, which will soon conclude its mission
in Angola. To the Governments of the countries that have
provided infantry troops, as well as to those that have
integrated the military observers and civil component of
UNAVEM. III, we reiterate our deep appreciation.

And I cannot fail to note our gratitude to all
Governments, to the organizations of the United Nations
system and to the non-governmental organizations which,
moved by a keen sense of human solidarity, have been
extending humanitarian assistance to the Angolan people.

Finally, let me express our appreciation to all those
who helped to draw up the resolution that has been
adopted today.

(spoke in English)

I want, on behalf of the Government of Angola, to
thank all those who have spoken at this meeting of the
Security Council. The issues of Angola have been
covered very thoroughly. The resolution that has been
adopted, which provides for an extension of UNAVEM's
mandate for six months, is indeed a gesture of confidence
in the people of Angola.

