Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): As the
subject of this meeting is the humanitarian situation
and the consequences of the Syrian crisis, I would
like to extend my condolences to the victims and to
the bereaved families, in particular the victims of the
capsized boat in the Mediterranean who were seeking a
better life for their children.

(spoke in English)

We, like Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt, wished that the
refugees she spoke to in the region could have been
with us today to tell their stories. But let me thank
all the briefers for having spoken so genuinely and
convincingly on their behalf. Let us hope that the
resonance of their messages in the Chamber will be
acted on expeditiously.

Last February, as we approached the fourth
anniversary of the eruption of the crisis in Syria, I
addressed the Council (see S/PV.7394) and expressed
our disappointment at its continuing failure to facilitate
the realization of a political solution that would put an
end to the tragic cycle of violence that has engulfed the
country for four consecutive years, leaving more than
250,000 people dead and many more wounded, leading
to the destruction of many of the most ancient urban
centres in the history of humankind, and scarring the
fabric of its society for generations to come.

Two months later, we are back in the same
Chamber discussing the same issue, without any
realistic prospects for ending the crisis, which seems
to be escalating rather than winding down, spreading
to new areas inside the country and affecting the lives
of more civilians, including Palestinian refugees in
Yarmouk. Moreover, the crisis in Syria is contributing
directly and/or indirectly to increasing sectarian and
extremist rhetoric and violence in the region, adding an
unwelcome complication to the multiple political and
socioeconomic problems fueling many other crises.

The humanitarian impact of the crisis continues to
grow. Today, more than 7.6 million Syrians are internally
displaced; 3.9 million are refugees in neighbouring
countries. Lebanon, the smallest country in the region,
is alone hosting more than 1.2 million registered
Syrian refugees - not to mention the unregistered,
whom we cannot count - and 350,000 Palestinian
refugees, including 45,000 Palestinian refugees from
Syria, representing about one-third of my country's
total population. To illustrate the magnitude of this
unprecedented demographic impact, I shall quote a
tweet posted a few days ago by Ambassador Angelina
Eichhorst, Head of the European Union Delegation to
Lebanon. She said:

"In 2013-2014 the EU admitted 116,263 refugees
from Syria. UNHCR Lebanon registered more than
1 million, ten-fold the number for a country 400
times smaller."

In Lebanon, the crisis has had a devastating impact
on the security, development, economic activity,
social progress and the environment, overstretching
the capacity of our social services, health-care and
education systems, housing, water and sanitation
facilities, and the energy infrastructure. Poverty has
increased by 61 per cent, unemployment has doubled
and the average personal income of the local population
has significantly decreased. In this regard, I call one
more time on the donor community to meet Lebanon's
humanitarian and development needs, which that have
been identified in the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan
2015-2016, which was crafted by my Government in
coordination with the relevant United Nations agencies
and other partners and adopted in December 2014.

While we welcome Kuwait's leadership in hosting
a third international pledging conference for Syrian
refugees last month, and the generosity shown by the
donor community, we note that out of the $8.4 billion
identified by the relevant United Nations agencies to
implement the regional and national response plans,
only $3.6 billion were pledged. And, as Council
members know, not all pledged money is always
actually dispensed.

It is our belief that, unfortunately, tackling
humanitarian crises through the narrow channel
of humanitarian assistance has proven to be
insufficient; hence, there is a need to tap the wider
purse of development funds, and we call on donors,
international financial institutions and United Nations
agencies to provide neighbouring countries, including
middle-income countries like Lebanon and Jordan,
with adequate development assistance that would meet
their needs, strengthen their resilience and alleviate the
impact of the crisis.

I conclude my statement by quoting from a recent
op-ed essay by Baroness Amos in the Washington Post:

"Countries look to the United Nations to
exercise moral authority. Time after time, they are
disappointed. They want an international system
that is just, promotes equality, champions the
vulnerable and oppressed, protects human rights
and holds its members to account. In the modern
world, with the complexity of the challenges
facing us, this is becoming harder and harder. But
it is possible. It is a challenge, but one that, with
determination and commitment, we can overcome".

Finally, the call on the Council to visit the region
was powerfully articulated and reiterated today. Jordan
was a pioneer in calling for such a visit long ago.
Lebanon and Turkey supported that call then. We hope
that, after our deliberations today and in the remaining
days of Jordan's presidency, you, Madam, will succeed
in convincing your colleagues of the need for and
timeliness of such a visit, in the hope that in addition
to their political interests, they will see with their heart
and listen with their humanity.

