Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro and Albania, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Poland, the Secretary-General and
the representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their speeches.

The protection of civilians remains of the
utmost concern for the EU and its member States,
and we welcome this opportunity to speak today.
We also welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/462), along with the practical recommendations
contained therein.

One does not need to look to official documents
or reports to be made aware that we are facing a
protection crisis. Every day, news reports remind
us that civilians - including women, children and
persons with disabilities - disproportionately suffer
the consequences of conflict and instability. Schools
and hospitals are regularly attacked, with negative
effects also on the fulfilment of the right to education
and the possibility for children to pursue a better future.
That was a worrying trend throughout 2017, which
unfortunately has continued in the first months of 2018.

I would like to address four areas that are of
particular concern to us and where the EU and its member
States have taken steps to advance protection efforts:
respect for international law; preventing gender-based
violence; reducing restrictions on humanitarian access
and protection of medical and humanitarian personnel.

Only a few days ago, the Security Council,
together with numerous Member States, reaffirmed its
commitment to upholding and respecting international
law (see S/PV.8262). Notwithstanding that, civilian
populations continue to bear the brunt of armed
conflicts across the globe - whether it be as victims
of deliberate or indiscriminate attacks, such as those
suffering from the reverberating and long-term effects
of urban warfare or those forcibly displaced from
their homes.

It is our collective responsibility to ensure
respect for international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and to hold
those who violate it accountable. It needs to be said
openly that civilian victims of unimaginable atrocities
need elementary satisfaction of the sense ofjustice. We
are morally obliged to bring perpetrators of crimes to
justice, especially those who commit the most flagrant
violations of international law.

Within the EU, there has been an increasing
number of prosecutions under national legislation
against those who breach the norms of international
humanitarian law. The EU maintains strong support for
international justice and accountability, including the
work of the International Criminal Court, and urges all
States members of the United Nations to do the same.
Let us bridge the gap between what is being said in the
Council and everyday practice.

Secondly, as noted in the Secretary-General's
report, sexual and gender-based violence continues
to be employed as a tactic of war, terrorism, torture
and repression. It is a common and alarming trend
across various and otherwise diverse crises. The
victims - women and girls, men and boys - are often
those already belonging to the most vulnerable groups.

It is therefore absolutely imperative that a gender
perspective be incorporated in protection efforts,
including humanitarian action. To that end, the EU
and its member States remain committed to, among
other initiatives, the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-based Violence in Emergencies. We encourage
partners to urgently implement their commitments.

Thirdly, the year 2017 served as a sombre reminder
of the crucial link between the protection of civilians and
humanitarian access - and more often the lack thereof.
Widespread and persistent constraints on the delivery of
humanitarian aid prevented millions of civilians across
the world from meeting their most basic needs. The EU
condemns, in the strongest terms, the use of siege and
starvation tactics as a method of war. Politics have no
role to play in the delivery oflife-saving assistance. The
EU also opposes bureaucratic impediments, including
delays in permits or visas, that challenge effective
humanitarian action.
Lastly, mindful of States' legitimate security
concerns, we oppose the criminalization of principled
humanitarian activities under the pretext of countering
terrorism. Therefore, under the March 2017 European
Union directive on combating terrorism, the provision
of humanitarian assistance by impartial humanitarian
organizations recognized under international law does
not fall within the scope of that directive.

Fourthly, and related to my last point, the EU
remains concerned about the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, including those providing of
medical services in conflict. As facilitator ofthe General
Assembly resolution on this topic (General Assembly resolution 72/131), we work tirelessly to strengthen
the protection of those who risk their lives on a daily
basis to help others, including national staff. We are
also fully committed to the continued implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016), adopted by the Council two
years ago, and urge other States to join us in this effort.
Principled humanitarian action, including the provision
of medical services to the wounded and the sick, defines
our humanity and must remain an undisputed priority.

Finally, peacekeeping missions can play a pivotal
role by having the protection of civilians at the core of
their mandates, in line with the Kigali Principles. In
that regard, we must seek a better definition of possible
political strategies for the protection of civilians that
can help to improve implementation on the field, as
well as in the framework of the reform of the peace
and security architecture envisaged by the Secretary-
General and its focus on prevention.

In addition, Member States should strive to improve
the gender balance in all components of peacekeeping
operations in order to achieve more equitable gender
representation and to improve the capacity of missions
in reaching all segments of the civilian population.

