Mr. Thaci (spoke in Albanian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): I am
honoured to speak before the Council today on behalf
of the institutions and the people of the Republic of
Kosovo.

I want to thank the United Nations and the Security
Council for their continued focus on Kosovo and the
developments in the region. I will never forget the
voices of hope and calls for peace that echoed in this
Chamber during the darkest days of the citizens of
Kosovo, including myself. My people and I will never
forget that when we were facing our toughest moments,
the Council became our voice. We will remain forever
grateful for that. Thanks to the Council, the world
learned of the many ills that were suffered during the
war with Serbia, including systematic violence, ethnic
cleansing, the deaths of thousands of innocent people,
the many thousands who are still missing, and the more
than 20,000 women who continue to live with the pain
and stigma of the sexual violence that was inflicted on

them. The Council was our voice when we did not have
one.

However, we are here today two decades after
that bloody war and ten years after Kosovo gained
its independence. We have been summoned for an
extraordinary meeting during a time of complete
normality and substantial progress in Kosovo.
This is a time to demand a serious review of the
degree of engagement of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and when the
Council is called on to address the real problems the
world is facing today.

Nothing extraordinary happened in Kosovo last
week. In fact, what happened was a totally normal
decision, both in its mission and in its purpose. If
Kosovo has made any mistake, it is that of having
waited unnecessarily for five years to establish an army.
The decision to establish an army may be belated, but
it is in no way wrong. It is belated because we waited
for goodwill from those who never showed goodwill
towards Kosovo. However, the Republic of Kosovo,
which is a sovereign and independent State, has now
undertaken the natural step towards establishing its
army. I ask the Council what is extraordinary about
that? There is nothing at all extraordinary about that.
There is nothing that is in contradiction with resolution
1244 (1999), the Ahtisaari plan, the Constitution of
Kosovo or even international law.

First and foremost, resolution 1244 (1999),
and specifically paragraph 15, refers only to the
demilitarization of the Kosovo Liberation Army - a
process that was completed in record time and without
incident in September 1999. This process was highly
appreciated, even by the Security Council and the
Secretary-General at the time, Kofi Annan. It was also
highly praised by NATO, as substantiated by reports
produced by NATO and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo during that time.

Secondly, the comprehensive proposal for the
Kosovo status settlement presented by President
Ahtisaari - who was the Special Envoy for the Future
Status Process for Kosovo - clearly underscores the
right ofKosovo to have an army in article 5.2. Moreover,
the strategic review of the security sector, undertaken in
close cooperation with NATO, very clearly emphasizes
Kosovo's right to transform its Security Force into
armed forces.

Finally, and most importantly, the decision of the
International Court of Justice - which, might I add,
was made upon Serbia's request, specifically by former
Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic' - underlines the fact
that Kosovo did not violate any international laws when
it declared its independence. It is therefore Kosovo's
indisputable right to have an army. The establishment
of the army is the will of the people of Kosovo, with
the unanimous political will of the people's chosen
representatives - regardless of whether some like it or
not. The State of Serbia has expressed its aggravation,
but the Serbian citizens of Kosovo have not.

Allow me, in my capacity as the President of the
Republic of Kosovo and Commander-in-Chief, to
clearly state that Kosovo's armed forces will produce
more peace and stability. The transformation of the
mission of the Kosovo Security Force (KSF) is not a
step we have undertaken to send a message to anyone.
Kosovo's army is not and will never be a threat to
anyone. Kosovo's army is and will remain a professional
and multi-ethnic force. Over 10 per cent of the soldiers
are from non-majority communities; they include
Serbians, Montenegrins, Croats, Turks, Bosniaks,
Romas, Egyptians, Ashkali and so on. This is a force
that will protect every citizen of Kosovo throughout
Kosovo territory- every child and every youngster,
regardless of the language that they speak at home.

Until 1999, my people, owing to their tragic
past, have always been afraid of military uniforms,
precisely because they have historically been foreign
and a symbol of repression. However, Kosovo's soldiers
will be soldiers of peace and Kosovo's army will be
a contributor to stability in the region. In that regard,
Kosovo has the highest number of returnees, and that
in record time. More than 1 million citizens of Kosovo,
expelled violently by the State apparatus of Slobodan
Milosevic, have returned to the homes and property
that were totally destroyed in the summer of 1999. In
that context, I am deeply disturbed that some Kosovar
Serbs, citizens of Kosovo and members of the KSF,
were forced to resign due to immense systemic pressure
imposed upon them by elements of the Serbian State.

I was moved by the stories of some soldiers from
the Serbian community about the intimidation imposed
upon them by the Serbian State. Their families were
attacked and their homes hit with grenades, and many
of them held for hours on end by Serbian police as they
sought to travel to Serbia. This is the terrible truth. I
feel awful for them, because I know that the majority of

them handed in their uniforms with tears in their eyes
and broken hearts. Nevertheless, I want to guarantee to
everyone that we will never back down from our even
stronger commitment to including all communities in
Kosovo's army. This is an army that will serve all of
Kosovo's citizens, without exception. The only threats
to our region are irrational calls for war and conflict
coming from our northern neighbour.
In addition, allow me to assure the Council that
Kosovo will respect every existing international
agreement, including the letter sent to the Secretary
General of NATO regarding cooperation with the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). We will continue to cooperate
very closely with NATO. All our efforts will be
coordinated with NATO. The establishment ofKosovo's
army should not be perceived as an attempt to duplicate
the NATO Mission in Kosovo. On the contrary, the
decision of the Assembly of the Republic of Kosovo
to establish the army is a direct function of capacity-
building that will make our country better able to
contribute to local security and beyond. Our aim is
to shift the paradigm from a country that has been a
consumer of security to one that becomes a contributor
to peace and stability. However, this will in no way
interfere with NATO's current mission in Kosovo.
Kosovo's armed forces will, in fact, complement this
mission. Even today in Kosovo, 20 years later, KFOR is
treated as a saviour mission. The citizens of my country
respect NATO members as heroes; they still hand them
out flowers and they will be grateful to them forever.

I am proud to be the President of the most pro-
NATO and pro-European Union country in the world.
Despite the difficulties and injustices to which we are
subject, especially in the visa liberalization process,
we as a country stand unshaken in our orientation. We
do not have and do not seek any another alternative.
The future of Kosovo and our region is within the
Euro-Atlantic structures. This inevitably leads us to
the essence of today's debate. The problem that our
northern neighbour has today is not Kosovo's army but
rather the existence of Kosovo itself as an independent
and sovereign State. These circumstances make the
dialogue between our two countries crucial.

Without a dialogue or a final agreement, we will
become countries that produce endless and unnecessary
drama for domestic electoral consumption, to the
detriment of the future of our nations. I implore the
Council to take a look at the abhorrent campaign
that Serbia led against Kosovo's bid for INTERPOL
membership. I should like to know who stands to benefit
from Kosovo's lack of membership in that organization.
It is organized crime and terrorism that benefit here.

Should I demean this forum now by using the
language and methods employed by Serbia against
Kosovo? I shall not. To be frank, I feel bad about their
behaviour. It is only natural that such behaviour would
lead the Government of Kosovo to take measures with
respect to Serbian products that come into Kosovo.
However, Kosovo did not provoke the situation. That
reaction is the consequence of aggressive action on the
part of Serbia, and I want to believe that this state of
affairs will be overcome in the near future. Pristina and
Brussels are communicating intensively about the issue.

We in Kosovo remain committed to peace and
dialogue with Serbia nevertheless. To that end, a few
days ago the Parliament of Kosovo approved a resolution
on dialogue and the structure of the negotiating team,
which includes a governing coalition and representatives
of opposition parties and civil society. As long as we do
not have a final agreement that can be implemented,
situations of this kind will continue to be repeated.
Neither I nor the people of Kosovo support the conflict.
Never in our history have we instigated any conflicts,
in fact. We have always been the victims and we have
always fought for survival.

Peace does not mean having no disagreements,
but this cycle of violence is unjustifiable and must
come to an end. In democratic societies, the use of
force is a monologue, not a dialogue. It is therefore my
generation's duty to leave behind it a region without
conflicts and in sustainable peace, a functional Balkans
in which Kosovo and Serbia, as two independent
nations, aspire to a European future. I know all too
well that for leaders, building peace is much more
challenging - more dangerous, even - than going to
war, but we have an obligation to maintain peace for our
children and the generations to come. We owe them a
future without conflict. Kosovo is ready. We are ready
for dialogue. We are ready to take tough decisions,
but decisions from which both Kosovo and Serbia will
emerge as winners. However, we are also aware that
if we do not seize this historic moment, all the parties
involved will suffer the consequences.

Two decades ago, on a mundane day much like this
one, I was in uniform, fighting the regime of Slobodan
Milosevic. I am very proud of my past and that of my
fellow fighters. Today, as President of the independent
State of Kosovo, I am aware that I have another big
challenge before me, which is the battle for our future,
for peace, the battle to end the century-old conflict
between our two peoples. I know that it will not be
at all easy. I know that it will require compromises
and that agreements of this kind are not very popular.
However, they are necessary. I firmly believe that an
agreement like this has the power to transform our
entire region and can shift the priorities of our people.
It would mean that no one could win votes founded on
hate and populism or be able to stoke people's fears.
A comprehensive agreement would open the door to
new leadership, whose primary aim would be reform
and development. I truly believe in a future where
Kosovo and Serbia will sit as equals at the table of the
European family. I believe in a future where Kosovo
and Serbia's soldiers will serve alongside one another
in peacekeeping missions around the world. I believe in
that future because I have seen the unimaginable unfold
before my eyes.

I am inspired every day by Kosovan athletes who
teach us that a comeback is possible after defeat and that
our flag can be flown even in countries that have not yet
recognized our country. I am inspired by thejournalists
who criticize me daily but who also make me a better
President every day. I am inspired by the citizens of
Kosovo who, despite all the pain, suffering and loss
that they have endured, never gave up on the values and
principles that still stand - liberty, equality, justice
and dignity. I believe in a European future for Kosovo
and our region, a future without intrigue, conflict or
hatred. It is up to us to bring about that future, in the
coming weeks and months, through a peaceful, final,
legally binding agreement between Kosovo and Serbia,
without borders along ethnic lines or exchanges of
peoples, but rather through their reciprocal recognition
of each other as independent and sovereign countries
with multi-ethnic societies.

