Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank the Ambassador of Denmark, the
Ambassador of Argentina and the Ambassador of
Romania for their briefings to the Council on the
activities of the Committees that they chair. It is clear
that the fight against terrorism remains a high priority
for the international community. Acts of terrorism are
crimes against humanity, especially when they target
innocent civilians. They constitute a grave violation of
the basic values of today's world, in particular human
dignity. Terrorism's poisonous effect is further
intensifying the divisions among civilizations and
religions. In that regard, terrorism constitutes a grave
threat to international peace and security.

The fight against terrorism can be effective only
if we aim at preventing terrorist activities through
appropriate policies aimed at strengthening States'
national legislations through effective structures that
seek to enhance cooperation, both bilaterally and
multilaterally, through information exchange and
assistance to countries that need it in order to bring
their capacities up to the level of other countries.

We welcome the progress achieved by the three
Committees in guiding such cooperation, which should
be further intensified by concerted efforts on the part
of States, national and regional organizations and civil
society. In that connection, we are happy to see the
reduction in the delays in the submission of national
reports and in the analysis of those reports. Over and
above the reports, efforts should be further directed
towards the effective implementation of the measures
that States are obligated to introduce into their own
domestic legislation, as stipulated by the Council.

The efforts on the part of the three Committee
Chairmen to raise the awareness of parliamentarians
during the consultations held in New York in the
context United Nations reform efforts was a step in the
right direction, because action by national parliaments
will be decisive in the implementation of appropriate
legislation and in the creation of an operational
framework to monitor terrorist movements, to cut off
their sources of finance and to prevent them from
gaining access to weapons.

That issue is of particular relevance in the light of
the need to prevent non-State actors from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction. The success of that effort
will depend essentially on the adoption of national
legislation and regulations - and their effective
implementation - aimed at accounting for and
managing, on a daily basis, the production and
circulation of dual-use substances.

That is a matter of concern for all countries. We
call on all States that have not yet presented their first
national reports to do so and to indicate the degree of
assistance that they need in order to update their
national mechanisms for combating the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), like the two other Committees, has begun
a direct dialogue with Member States as part of the
consideration of its report. That dialogue will also
enable them to become acquainted with and gain an
understanding of the internal workings of the
Committees and the mechanisms set up to monitor the
various sanctions regimes directed against terrorist
movements.

The holding of such a dialogue will help to
eliminate any doubts and ambiguities that might
otherwise lead to reluctance on the part of certain
States. Visits to States by the Chairmen of the
Committees are a valuable instrument for maintaining
such dialogues.

We welcome the considerable efforts made by the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to move its
work forward. At the same time, the Committees must
continue to improve their working methods on the
basis of clearly defined and well-known principles.
The initiatives undertaken in that area are to be
welcomed. We invite the Committees to spare no effort
to make their activities as transparent as possible. We
express full support for the CTC work programme for
the last quarter of 2005.

Furthermore, in the context of the implementation
of counter-terrorism measures, the need to protect the
international community's achievements in terms of
human rights and fundamental freedoms cannot be
overemphasized. The appointment of Mr. Martin
Scheinin as Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism is clear proof of the
commitment of the Secretary-General in that regard.

In order to mobilize all States in the fight against
terrorism, we must also pay further attention to the
difficulties faced by some countries resulting from the
application of counter-terrorism sanctions. We need to
consider to what extent a State whose economy or
social fabric has suffered a result of sanctions against
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and other associated
individuals and entities should benefit from fair
compensation. We should establish mechanisms to that
end.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
emphasize the need for the international community to
resolve conflicts throughout the world and tackle
inequality, injustice and poverty, which provide a
fertile breeding ground for the development of violence
and extremism. Terrorism will be eliminated only if we
make constant efforts and take concrete actions to
promote peace and sustainable development to make
our world better for all through a dialogue of cultures
and an alliance of civilizations.

