Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Mr. De Mistura,
Mr. O'Brien and Mr. Cappelaere for their briefings
and commend their tireless efforts to assist Syria and
Syrians in securing a better present and brighter future.

We acknowledge our regret to be involved in this
acrimonious debate over the unbearable fate of the
Syrian people. Like the briefers and Security Council
members who preceded us, we are deeply distressed
about the intensified military operations, including
ground offensives and aerial bombardments, over the
past few days in eastern Aleppo. For almost two years,
we have called on all parties to consider the devastating
impact of the conflict on the civilian population and to
resort to dialogue in order to find appropriate solutions
to the humanitarian and political issues affecting the
Syrian population, including Aleppo.

However, the reality is that all sides have, first,
chosen the military option and, secondly, intend to
continue receiving logistical and military support,
including heavy weaponry being supplied to the various
opposition groups by international stakeholders,
including some prominent members of the Council,
while the Government is seemingly determined to
regain control of significant rebel-held areas and
reinstate the authority of the State in Aleppo and the
territorial integrity of the country.

We fully agree as to the need to urgently put in place
the means to end the hostilities and to allow humanitarian
aid to get through unhindered. The number of civilian
casualties and displaced persons is inexcusable, and we
strongly condemn all indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure.

Against such a backdrop, what are the options? To
submit yet another draft resolution, probably to no avail,
while civilians continue to die? To call urgent meetings
of the Security Council? To issue pious condemnations
of the escalating violence while continuing to supply
weapons to the rebels of the so-called moderate
opposition or to crypto-terrorists? Or to end the
irrational policy of "Al-Assad must go", accept the
Syrian Government's sovereignty and resolutely pursue
ways to bring about a political solution to the crisis?

To conclude, we wish to reiterate our position that
we in no way condone violence against the civilian
population in Syria or anywhere else. However, we
also repudiate the financial and logistical support
being provided to non-State armed groups and to rebels
who openly cooperate with terrorist groups and who
commit grave violations of human rights, including
using civilians as human shields. This is the situation
prevailing in eastern Aleppo: a civilian population
being held hostage by armed groups and terrorists that,
if given a chance, will surely flee to another life free
from the yoke of extremists and terrorists.

