Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First, I would like to join
my colleagues in expressing the gratitude of my
delegation to Mr. Jan Egeland, for his valuable
briefing. I would also like to commend his role and
active engagement in promoting and defending the
rights and freedoms of civilians in armed conflict
throughout his tenure as Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs.

We also thank the Qatari presidency for
organizing this important debate as part of the
continuing efforts of the international community and
the Council to strengthen the protection of civilians -
especially the most vulnerable groups, such as women
and children - which our leaders pledged to undertake
at the 2005 United Nations World Summit, thereby
realizing in practice the principle of the responsibility
to protect.

My delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore limit my statement to a few brief comments.

The existing legal provisions regulating the
protection of civilians in armed conflict provide a
comprehensive framework. However, they must be
fully implemented in practice in order to ensure full
respect for civilian status and the protection of all
civilians. All parties to a conflict, whether State or non-
State actors, must fully and strictly comply with the
obligations applicable to them under international law,
as well as all the relevant documents and resolutions of
the Security Council.

In that regard, it is alarming that many countries
involved in present-day armed conflict are not parties
to Additional Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions.
We therefore repeat our appeal and call upon all States
that have not yet done so to consider ratifying the
instruments pertaining to international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law. Serious gaps also
remain in the practical implementation of legal
instruments. There is a need for further enhancement in
domestic legal systems of the legal framework
concerning the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Despite the international community's growing
commitment to better address the tragic plight of

civilians trapped in situations of armed conflict -
including though the adoption of resolution 1674
(2006), which reaffirmed the responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity - we have
witnessed the ongoing killing of civilians, sexual
violence and attacks motivated by ethnic or religious
hatred or political confrontation. Unfortunately, as we
heard from Mr. Egeland's briefing, the most vulnerable
groups, such as children and women, are not excluded.
We are still witnessing the killing and maiming of
children, rape and other acts of sexual exploitation -
which are often used as a weapon of war - abduction,
denial of humanitarian access and the use of child
soldiers in many conflict situations.

The continually deteriorating situation in the
Darfur region of the Sudan - where at least 200,000
people are estimated to have been killed as a result of
the conflict between Government forces, allied militias
and rebels seeking greater autonomy, and which has
experienced an unprecedented forced displacement of
about 2 million people, widespread sexual violence and
total disrespect for human rights since 2003 -
continues to be a cause of our deepest concern.
Furthermore, the violence is increasingly spilling over
from Darfur into neighbouring regions of the Central
African Republic and Chad.

Unfortunately, since the Council's most recent
deliberations on that topic in June, the international
community has also been saddened by the number of
civilian lives claimed by the renewed conflict in
southern Lebanon and northern Israel, during which the
civilian population, including women and children,
faced deliberate missile attacks against towns, and
women and children were often used as human shields
by militias. The population on both sides continues to
be endangered by unexploded ammunition and
threatened by rocket attacks.

We are concerned by Mr. Egeland's observation
that the United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations and other humanitarian personnel, in
their efforts to provide assistance to the civilian
population, as well as journalists daily providing the
international community with valuable information
from conflict regions, also continue to be subject to
deliberate attacks and abductions. In that regard, we
appeal to all parties to conflicts to respect the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and the Additional Protocols of 1977, including the
Additional Protocol I concerning the protection of
journalists engaged in dangerous professional missions
in areas of armed conflict.

We would like to underline that impunity for war
crimes and crimes against humanity is unacceptable
and that national judicial authorities have the primary
responsibility to bring the perpetrators of crimes to
justice. In situations where the national judicial
authorities are not fully capable of addressing the
violation of international humanitarian law, Slovakia
fully supports the engagement of the international and
mixed tribunals, including the International Criminal
Court.

In conclusion, let me draw attention to the need
for the integration of basic legal and gender training
into the training of all armed forces, including
peacekeepers, which has been proved to have a clear
positive effect on the behaviour, actual conduct of duty,
and respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights of the troops deployed in conflict
situations. That need should be properly addressed in
the implementation of any security sector reform plan,
especially in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Efforts to prevent deliberate attacks against
civilians, sexual violence and the use of child soldiers
require the mainstreaming of those issues into security
sector and other governance reforms, with the active
participation of all stakeholders - Governments,
regional and subregional organizations, donors and
civil society. In that respect, I would also like to inform
the Council that, on Friday, Slovakia, in cooperation
with Canada, is organizing the second round table on
security sector reform, which will provide us with
another opportunity to address that issue in further
detail, including the situation of civilians in armed
conflict.

