Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States): The United
States condemns in the strongest possible terms the
escalation of the Al-Assad regime and the Russian
Federation's military operations in north-west Syria,
which have had a devastating impact on Syrian
civilians, medical workers, humanitarians and civilian
infrastructure, with an increasingly deadly air and
ground assault.

There is no denying that the humanitarian situation
in Syria is growing more dangerous by the day. The
number of civilians killed and injured is rising, and
water facilities, schools and hospitals are targeted
by regime and Russian forces. Despite the fact that
the coordinates of these locations are shared with
the Russian Federation through the United Nations
deconfliction mechanism, specifically to prevent
them from being hit, we have just heard devastating
statistics from Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Ms. Serkin, reminding us all of the grim facts on the
ground that should compel us all to put an immediate
end to this violence.

Over 440,000 people have already been internally
displaced since the start of the offensive in April, and
the grim reality is that there is simply nowhere else for
the more than 3.5 million people in Idlib province to
run in order to escape the next airstrike. That fact is
well known to the Al-Assad regime and the Russian
air force.

For the past three months, the United States has
called on the Al-Assad regime and the Russian Federation
to immediately stop their military campaign and their
attacks on civilians and to cease military operations
in Idlib, consistent with the Sochi agreement signed
by Turkey and the Russian Federation in 2018. Similar
calls from other Council partners and dire warnings
from the Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and other
senior United Nations officials that an offensive in Idlib
would unleash the worst humanitarian crisis in Syria to
date have all gone unheeded and ignored by Damascus
and Moscow. On 22 July, it was with utter revulsion that
the United States heard reports of yet more air strikes
by the Al-Assad regime and the Russian air force on a

market in the city of Maarat Al-Numan, in Idlib, which
killed at least 35 people and left little but rubble behind.

It is important that we be clear about the facts about
the violence in Idlib and northern Hama. Russia and the
Al-Assad regime are devastating civilian infrastructure
and hitting medical facilities. As the UnitedNations High
Commissioner for Human Rights said in a statement on
26 July, these are civilian objects and it seems highly
unlikely, given the persistent pattern of such attacks,
that they are all being hit by accident. Indeed, when the
Al-Assad regime and Russia repeatedly attack hospitals
and other civilian objects - many of which, as the
parties have been informed in advance, are sheltering
vulnerable civilians - it is difficult to deny that the
sustained pattern of strikes on markets, hospitals and
bakeries is anything but a deliberate act.

The United States also condemns the killing and
maiming of humanitarian actors, such as ambulance
drivers, health workers and White Helmet volunteers
by the Al-Assad regime and its allies' campaign. The
United States will not waver in our support for the
courageous work that White Helmets and all medical
workers and humanitarians do in Syria every day.
Doctors, nurses ambulance drivers and White Helmets
are not terrorists and deserve our protection. The
United States offers its condolences to the families,
friends and colleagues of the three ambulance workers
killed over the weekend and the four White Helmet
volunteers - Amir Al-Bunni, Anas al-Dyab, Mahmoud
Al-Ali and Zuhair Al-Rajou - recently killed as they
attempted to save victims of the air strikes. The United
States forcefully condemns those devastating impacts
on civilians in the strongest possible terms and calls for
an immediate end to ongoing hostilities. We urge the
Al-Assad regime and its allies to immediately return
to a ceasefire in the area and allow for unhindered
access to address the humanitarian disaster created by
the air strikes as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) and
numerous other Security Council resolutions.

We have said it before and must say it again:
there is no military solution to this conflict. The
latest offensive on Idlib has gained the regime and its
allies nothing and serves only to further escalate and
destabilize the region. We appreciate the participation
of Susannah Sirkin from Physicians for Human Rights
in today's briefing.

Accountability cannot be optional for the
perpetrators of violence in Syria, in particular the
regime's latest attacks, which have hit known health
facilities. The United States fully supports a full and
independent investigation into attacks that have hit
health facilities in north-west Syria and also continues
to encourage United Nations humanitarian agencies
to provide any data and information they have on
reported attacks on health facilities to the International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic as
well as to the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanismto Assist inthe InvestigationandProsecution
of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, for further action and to
ensure that those actions are appropriately documented.

The United States is also deeply concerned by United
Nations reports that the military operations in north-
west Syria are impeding the delivery of humanitarian
aid to 3 million civilians in Idlib governorate. Those
communities are deeply dependent upon United
Nations cross-border aid. The United States calls on all
Security Council members and our regional partners to
ensure that the United Nations has the ability to freely
implement cross-border aid deliveries throughout all
agreed border crossings, in accordance with resolution
2449 (2018). There is no substitute for the United Nations
cross-border operations, set forth in resolution 2449
(2018), through all four authorized border crossings,
and it is particularly important now, given that we are
witnessing a deteriorating humanitarian situation in
southern Syria.

The United States also remains gravely concerned
about the fate of the thousands of civilians in Rukban.
Although as many as 17,000 people have voluntarily
left the camp, according to United Nations estimates,
as many as 24,000 people remain there and have
systematically been denied aid because of bureaucratic
delays by the regime and the Russian Federation since
the last United Nations convoy reached the camp in
February. The United States also strongly urges the
Russian Federation to expedite and secure, on behalf
of the Al-Assad regime, all the necessary regime
approvals for a new United Nations assessment team
and aid convoy to Rukban immediately.

The United States affirms the right ofthe internally
displaced persons in Rukban to make their decisions to
leave the camp voluntarily. However, it is important to
recall that many who remain in Rukban are choosing
to stay in the most difficult of humanitarian conditions
because either they cannot afford to pay for their
own transportation out of the camp or, as was noted
in the United Nations assessment in February, they
do not wish to return to areas under the control of the
Al-Assad regime out of fear of reprisal attacks, forced
conscriptions, despite Russian-brokered deals to the
contrary, and arbitrary detentions.

The plight of Syrian civilians arbitrarily detained
by the Al-Assad regime is one humanitarian issue that
is often overshadowed by the barbarity of the regime's
military campaign in broad daylight, the continued
forced-starvation siege of Rukban and the ongoing
restrictions on United Nations access. There is both a
humanitarian and a political imperative for advancing
progress on improving transparency and access to
regime prisons and securing the release of those
Syrians arbitrarily detained by the regime, especially
women, children and the elderly. Progress on detainee
issues, as Special Envoy Geir Pedersen has said,
could be a confidence-building measure to generate
trust among the Syrian people, the Syrian-opposition
representatives and the Al-Assad regime that will
help create momentum towards a political solution.
Accordingly, in the coming weeks, the United States
intends to call for a Security Council briefing on the
topic of detainees and missing persons in Syria in order
to mobilize urgently needed action on this issue.

Finally, the reinvigoration of the political process
in line with the resolution 2254 (2015) must start
with a verifiable ceasefire across all of Syria, and in
particular in Idlib and northern Hama. Until then, the
United States will continue to apply pressure through
all available means in order to isolate the regime and
its allies.

