Ms. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to join others in congratulating the Dominican
Republic on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council, and for bringing this important matter to the
attention of the Council. The length of the speakers list
today attests to the importance of this issue to many
Member States. As others have said, there is no doubt
that climate change is the defining issue of our time,
and I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic, Mr. Miguel Vargas
Maldonado, for convening today's critical discussion,
and this morning's briefers for their presentations.

The United Arab Emirates is committed to climate
action and we eagerly await the Secretary-General's
climate summit later this year. We applaud his leadership
and his tireless work to fight climate change. We are
therefore proud to be hosting the summit's preparatory
meeting in June in Abu Dhabi, as announced by the
Secretary-General yesterday.

Climate change has long ceased to be a concern
only for environmentalists. Coping with climate
change - or "adaptation", in the words of experts-is
now a fact of life as United Nations Member States face
extreme temperatures, increasingly intense natural
disasters and climate-influenced human migration.
This adaptation is furthermore often synonymous with
humanitarian relief and planning.

Though not strictly a security issue in the traditional
sense, as many have said here today, and while other
matters discussed before the Council are equally
important to us, we must recognize that climate change
will worsen existing security concerns in the future and,
potentially, create new ones. In fact, military experts in

many countries concluded long ago that the changing
climate poses existential threats of displacement and
extinction to some nations. Furthermore, food and
water insecurity, the loss of shelter, the deterioration
of livelihoods and the sense of powerlessness in the
wake of repeated disasters create breeding grounds for
desperation, extremism and, therefore, instability.

The United Arab Emirates is deeply concerned
over the impact of these pressing climate-related
challenges, not only within our own borders but around
the world, because we know that the security of our
country is contingent on the security of others, and
because we know that this is actually an issue that
we can collectively tackle together. In the Pacific and
Indian Oceans, climate change poses a threat to the very
survival of many small island States, so if we fail to act
on climate change a number of these countries could be
continually devastated or even submerged under water,
triggering population movements and creating new
challenges around territorial control and integrity.

Addressing the link between climate change and
international security does not necessarily require a
change in the mechanics of the Security Council, but
we should do more to reframe climate action. Curbing
greenhouse gas emissions and funding livelihoods in
drought-stricken regions, though traditionally regarded
as development or humanitarian matters, are in fact
investments in security and should be understood
as such.

In general, Member States, donors and the United
Nations system need to explicitly target insecurity
through climate action. This could come in the form
of commitments to scaling up development work in
places that are most likely to experience climate-linked
insecurity or are already experiencing it. For example,
many of the countries vulnerable to climate change have
high unemployment rates, particularly among young
people. Targeted development and humanitarian work
that provides livelihoods, education or training could
mitigate the risk that climate-related unemployment
contributes to insecurity.

Similarly, Member States, donors and the United
Nations system could combine their existing efforts
to cut greenhouse gas emissions with a renewed effort
to build resilient infrastructure in climate-vulnerable
communities. For example, using solar energy to
power health centres, schools and businesses could
simultaneously mitigate climate change and factors that
contribute to insecurity.
Donor countries and international development
agencies could also allocate their funding based on
scientific models that predict where climate disasters
are likely to occur. Forecast-based financing can build
resilience in at-risk communities and contain the
fallout of a natural disaster that triggers insecurity and
population migrations. These are the kind of practical
options and possible commitments we hope to showcase
at the climate summit preparatory meeting in June in
the United Arab Emirates. We very much look forward
to welcoming all Member States there.

Today's meeting is proof that the link between
climate change and insecurity is real and is recognized
as such by the international community. It demands
concrete action and attention from this Chamber.

