Mr. Schwaiger: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for giving the floor to the European
Union (EU).

The following countries align themselves with
this declaration: Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia, and Iceland, as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia.

Let me join others in expressing our support for
the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
(S/2010/ 127) and its recommendations. The EU looks
forward to working with the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura, and wishes him much success in leading
UNAMA.
The European Union welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General's report takes on the key priorities
agreed at the London Conference, highlighting in
particular the transition to the Afghan Government of
the responsibility for the security of the country and
the need for more Afghan ownership of reconstruction
and development efforts. We also note the report's
emphasis on the balance between military and civilian
efforts in the transition process, and we renew our
commitment to building Afghan civilian capacity.

The EU agrees that reconciliation and
reintegration are key elements of a sustainable political
development in Afghanistan. This process should be
Afghan-led and be in conformity with the Constitution
and Afghanistan's international commitments,
including those on human rights. Reconciliation should
not lead to impunity. We welcome the organization of
the peace jirga and the recent contacts between leaders
in the region aimed at confidence-building. The EU
supports the political good offices of UNAMA in that
regard. We also stand ready to contribute to a
reintegration fund and look forward to the further
clarification of its modalities.

Transition is also highly dependent on economic
and social development. As a major donor of
assistance, the EU welcomes the implementation of the
cluster approach intended to accelerate the
implementation of the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and expects the presentation of
concrete plans before the Kabul conference. The EU
encourages the establishment of a governance cluster.
As pledged at the London Conference, the EU will
increase the percentage of its aid allocated to the
sectors prioritized in the National Strategy and
channelled through the Afghan Government.

Contributions to improving governance, the rule
of law, respect for human rights and Afghan institution-
building are at the heart of our support to Afghanistan.
Through our European Police Mission in Afghanistan
(EUPOL), for example, we contribute to making the
Afghan police more sustainable, effective and
respectful of the rule of law and human rights.

The EU notes with concern recent reports of
increased restrictions on freedom of expression and
continued violations of human rights, as well as the
recent publication of the law on public amnesty and
national stability. We reiterate the importance of
upholding international obligations, as enshrined in the
Afghan Constitution.

Given the lessons learned from the monitoring of
the 2009 elections, the EU considers electoral reforms
to be of crucial importance. Future elections must be
credible, inclusive and secure and must reflect the will
of the Afghan people. This should be clearly expressed
in the resolution to be adopted by the Council next
week.

We concur on the need for structural reforms of
the electoral process. Short-term reforms are also
urgently needed before the parliamentary elections,
notably regarding the composition of the two
Commissions and the vetting mechanism, also in order
to make it possible for the international community to
lend effective support to the electoral process.

As this year is the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, we
think it would also be appropriate for the Security
Council to strengthen the UNAMA resolution as
concerns women and gender equality, and for the
Secretary-General to report in greater detail on those
issues in the future. The Government could be
encouraged to accelerate the implementation of the
National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan
and to strengthen women's participation in public life,
including in the upcoming elections and ongoing
processes to ensure sustainable peace, stability and
reconciliation.

By the adoption of its action plan, the EU has
pledged further European contributions to
Afghanistan's long-term development and has
committed to improved internal EU coordination. The
imminent appointment of former Lithuanian Foreign
Minister Vygaudas Usackas as our new EU Special
Representative and head of our delegation in Kabul not
only confirms the strong European commitment to
Afghanistan, but should also serve to strengthen
common EU action and improve the coordination with
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the NATO senior civilian representative.
Let me stress in that context that we continue to
believe that the roles of UNAMA and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in civilian
coordination are particularly important.

We support the United Nations plans for
enhancing coordination among donors and within the
United Nations system while ensuring strong Afghan
ownership. We understand that UNAMA needs the
capacity to deliver on this task; therefore staff
recruitment should be addressed as a priority.

Finally, the EU would like to highlight again the
importance of the regional dimension as the third pillar
of the overall stabilization, together with security and
development, as recognized in London.

The EU supports the renewal of the UNAMA
mandate for a further 12 months, as recommended by
the Secretary-General. With new lead personnel on the
ground and the upcoming mandate renewal, the United
Nations and the international community at large can
reinvigorate their contributions to Afghanistan's
development. The EU hopes that the Government will
seize the current opportunities to make real progress
towards security and prosperity for the sake of the
Afghan people and the stability of the whole region.

