Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me to take the floor during this meeting of
the Security Council on the situation in Mali. First,
I would like to sincerely congratulate Rwanda on its
Council presidency - a very agreeable task - as
well as all members of the Security Council for the
remarkable work that they have accomplished during
the month of April. I would also like to express my
gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
untiring efforts, not only towards a lasting solution to
the serious Malian crisis but also for everything that
he has done for peace, stability and development in the
Sahel.

Security Council resolution 2100 (2013), which has
just been adopted, is an important step in a process
to stem the activities of terrorists and rebel groups
in Mali - Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, the
Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western Africa, Ansar
Dine and the National Movement for the Liberation
of Azawad - to promote dialogue and reconciliation
between Malians and to ensure peace and stability
throughout the national territory. My delegation is
particularly pleased by the adoption of that resolution,
which seeks to transfer functions from the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) to
the new United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), created
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Mali is fully prepared to welcome the United Nations
Mission, which will focus, inter alia, on stabilizing the
main urban centres in the north, restoring the authority
of the State, and providing support for the road map,
including political dialogue and the electoral process,
the protection of civilians, the promotion and protection
of human rights as well as humanitarian assistance.

Thanks to the joint action of Operation Serval,
the troops of AFISMA and the Malian security forces,
significant progress has been achieved in the security
area, particularly in taking back the main cities of the
northern and central regions. Despite the hope raised
by the success of the military operations, which has
made it possible to progressively restore administration
in certain areas, small cells of armed terrorists and
rebels continue to present a serious threat to stability
and the territorial integrity of Mali, as well as to peace
and security in the region. That is why the Government
of Mali welcomes the commitment of the international
community to taking active measures to deter and
prevent the return of armed rebel groups. As required
by resolution 2100 (2013), the armed rebel groups must
not only lay down their arms, but also immediately
cease hostilities and unconditionally recognize the
unity and territorial integrity of the Republic of Mali.
Wars and conflicts have devastating consequences
on development. There can be no doubt that there can
be no sustainable development without peace and
without security. That is why I would like, in this
Chamber, to appeal to the international community for
better coordination of its action in order to effectively
respond to the immediate and long-term needs of Mali
and the countries of the region in the areas of security,
governance, development and humanitarian action.
We dare to hope that the international conference of
donors to be held in Brussels on 15 May to help Mali
in its development will achieve the desired results.
We take this opportunity to thank the countries that
have announced donations to the conference organized
by the African Union in Addis Ababa on 29 January
for their support to AFISMA and the Malian security
and defence forces. We would also ask them to honour
their pledges, and we invite other Member States and
regional and international organizations to join in the
wave of solidarity.

As we speak, the transitional Government is
actively involved in the implementation of the road
map through, inter alia, the organization of fair, free
and transparent elections and the beginning of an
inclusive inter-Malian dialogue. Part of the dynamic
is a dialogue and reconciliation commission, with the
appointment of its Chairman and two Vice-Chairmen
and 30 Commissioners representing the diversity of the
Malian nation.

On behalf of the President of the Republic of Mali,
Mr. Dioncounda Traore, allow me, Mr. President, to
thank you, the members of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General for the untiring efforts that
have led to the adoption of today's resolution. Along
those lines, I would like to reiterate the determination
of the transitional Government to fully cooperate
with the Security Council and to play its role in the
implementation of the resolution.

I would also like to pay a sincere tribute to France for
having been able, while fully respecting international
legality, to put an end to the crimes of the terrorists in
Mali and for its commitment to support MINUSMA.

In conclusion, Iwould also like to express the sincere
thanks of the Government of Mali to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
the African Union, the European Union, the United
Nations, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
all our bilateral and multilateral partners, neighbouring
countries and States of the region for their precious
help as we deal with the Malian crisis. I would like to
very much thank you for your kind attention.
