Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
introduced the draft resolution whose adoption has made it
possible to continue the United Nations Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) until 15 March 2000. We did
this at the end of a long process regarding the transition
from peacekeeping missions to missions of post-conflict
peace-building and reconstruction. It is important to recall
that it was Brazil that brought this matter to the Council
and that, as that country's representative has noted, Brazil
has worked in the Economic and Social Council and along
with the Friends of the Secretary-General for Haiti to define
a new approach to making the transition from peacekeeping
missions to peace-building missions.

We supported the resolution because we agree with the
conclusions set out in the 18 November 1999 report of the
Secretary-General on MIPONUH. MIPONUH has made an
important contribution to the institutional development
attained by the police force and to reform of that force,
and it has helped to establish the basis for the
development of an independent and professional police
service in Haiti. Moreover, the work of the Representative
of the Secretary-General in Haiti has provided the
political presence the international community needs for
coordinated and effective monitoring of Haitian efforts.
These achievements of MIPONUH make it possible to
move today, at the request of President Preval, to a more
flexible mechanism adapted to the priority needs of Haiti.

The future International Civilian Support Mission in
Haiti (MICAH), which is being considered by the General
Assembly, will complete the ongoing transition from a
military peacekeeping presence to a civilian police
presence evolving towards a long-term programme of
cooperation. MICAH has been designed to provide wider-
ranging, better targeted and better coordinated support for
Haiti while reducing the number of staff and the total cost
of the mission.

Haiti and the Friends of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, which prepared the General Assembly draft
resolution on this matter, are focusing on the difficult
period that follows the termination of a peacekeeping
mission. They understand that the practical task of
organizing and setting up MICAH will require a great
deal of care and time. For that reason, the transition
period the Council has just adopted by its decision to
continue MIPONUH until 15 March 2000 is essential if
MICAH is to be organized, deployed and utilized to its
full potential.

MICAH will be a new mission, fundamentally
different from a peacekeeping mission, and the choice of
the experts who will constitute the mission will be a key
element of success. Recruiting them will take time. It will
take time also to coordinate the activities of MICAH with
those of the many existing multilateral and bilateral
programmes in Haiti, such as the Canadian support
programme for the police and the justice system. Above
all, we must ensure that MICAH will be not a stop-gap
measure, but the instrument for consolidating the
achievements of United Nations action and for putting in
place the elements needed for long-term support for Haiti.

(spoke in English)

It is the people and the Government of Haiti that
bear the ultimate responsibility for reconstruction and for
the maintenance of a secure and stable political
environment in their country. In that regard, the

 

legislative elections planned for 19 March 2000 will be an
important milestone. As they are fundamental to Haiti's
democratic development, it is essential that those elections
take place as set out in the electoral calendar, and in a
secure environment, in order to ensure the political stability
to which Haitians aspire.

Finally, our decision to continue MIPONUH in order
to build MICAH is based on a desire to support the will of
the Haitian people to advance their development. Ensuring
a peaceful and smooth transition is also a responsibility of
the Security Council, and we sincerely hope that today's
decision signals a spirit of cooperation between the
Council and the General Assembly in advancing this
common cause.

