Mr. Williamson (United States): I join other
speakers in welcoming Catherine Bertini to the
Security Council again.

It has been my pleasure to know Ms. Bertini for
almost 20 years. We both hail from Chicago. She
served an outstanding tenure as an Assistant Secretary
of the United States Department of Agriculture prior to
becoming an international civil servant. Ms. Bertini has
been an outstanding public servant in all her positions.
She is a strong leader and a person with an effective
and good heart. She has done an outstanding job during
her 10 years at the helm of the World Food Programme
(WFP), bringing assistance to some of the world's
neediest people.

The United States supports the World Food
Programme through its contributions, both in dollars
and in food. Overall donor support to WFP from 1992
to 2001 totalled $15.54 billion. Ofthat total, the United
States contributed $6.34 billion, or 41 per cent.

While WFP provides food in all the areas where
there are peacekeeping operations, it is also present in
many places where peacekeepers are not. The
dedicated men and women who work for WFP endure
difficult and dangerous conditions, bringing lifesaving
food aid to hungry people, mostly women and children,
in war-torn regions. These needy people are often
internally displaced or refugees, uprooted from their
homes. Fighting makes it impossible for them to plant
and harvest their own crops. The deprivation that war
brings to civilians in Angola, Afghanistan, western
Africa and the Congo would be unimaginably higher if
not for the valiant efforts of WFP to feed hungry
people in those places.

We commend WFP for focusing on feeding
women and children, those mostly likely to starve in a
crisis situation. In just one example of the vital
difference WFP makes in the lives of women and
children, the women's bakeries run by WFP in
Afghanistan, as described by Ms. Bertini earlier,
provide a livelihood and restore dignity to women who
would otherwise be reduced to begging for food for
their families.

The basic needs of civilians affected by armed
conflict do not end when a ceasefire agreement is
signed. Ms. Bertini has often pointed that out, and
nowhere is it more true than in Afghanistan today. The
fighting may have stopped, but homes need to be
rebuilt, landmines must be removed, damaged
irrigation systems must be repaired and crops must be
planted. In other post-conflict countries, needs are
similar. The challenge to the international community
is to find the mechanisms and resources to address
those needs. Our shared experience with both natural
and man-made disasters tells us that we must focus on
prevention, preparation and reducing risks beforehand.

In Afghanistan, the international community has
recognized the need to move from relief to recovery
with ongoing international engagement. Despite
significant contributions of food aid from the United
States, WFP is facing a significant shortfall in its latest
emergency appeal for Afghanistan. The United State
calls on all donors to work closely together so that we
can close that gap.

In Monterrey, President Bush announced that the
United States is doubling its official development
assistance contributions within the next three years.
Some of those resources may be available for helping
post-conflict countries recover. The United States
Agency for International Development, USAID, has
restructured to coordinate humanitarian assistance
more effectively in post-conflict situations. In order to
increase food security in poor countries, American
development efforts will have more of a focus on
agricultural activities.

The United States thanks Executive Director
Catherine Bertini and her staff for their extraordinary
efforts over the past decade to advance both WFP's
internal reforms and the overall United Nations reform
agenda. Again, we wish to compliment her for her
considerable accomplishments and success with WFP.

The United States will continue to work with
WFP under the new leadership of James Morris to
ensure that the nutritional needs of people in dire
circumstances are met, and we look forward to working
closely with other members of the international
community to meet that goal.

Once again, thank you, Ms. Bertini, for ajob well
done.

