Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important briefing by Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC).

Peru has noted with concern the impact of the
world drug problem on West Africa, a subregion that
in recent years has become an area of production and
consumption as well as one of transit to European
markets. Inadequate border controls and political and
socioeconomic crises have encouraged transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking, which corrupt
institutions and erode the social fabric. In some parts
of the region, rivalries between drug traffickers over
control of areas of influence exacerbate intercommunal
tensions. In some cases, a country's authorities and
security forces may be co-opted. In many others,
links are established with armed groups and terrorist
organizations. Illicit drug trafficking often results
in vicious circles of violence and corruption that can
destabilize countries, undermine public safety and
increase the risk of violent conflict. We would like to
highlight three actionable areas where we believe the
Security Council can contribute to combating those
threats. We consider them essential to preventing
conflicts, combating terrorism and consolidating
sustainable peace.

The first area is identifying and combating the ties
between organized crime and terrorism. Resolution
2195 (2014) recognizes the existence ofthat connection,
particularly in Africa. In May (see S/PV.8247),
the Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2018/9) stressing the importance ofincreasing
our understanding of those ties in order to improve our
response. To that end, we believe it is important that
the Council and its Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
continue to expand their understanding of this issue
and adopt the necessary measures to deal with it
wherever it appears.

The second area is focusing on root causes. Peru
acknowledges that if we are to tackle transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking we need a
multidimensional approach that among other things
builds and strengthens capacities and institutions to
promote human rights, the rule of law and sustainable
development, in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We must also fight
corruption and promote the creation of opportunities
and decent employment, especially for young people
and rural communities. In that regard, despite the
challenges we continue to face, we would like to
highlight Peru's successful model of alternative,
comprehensive and sustainable development, which has
enabled us to combat the flow of drugs by promoting
rural development.

We believe the third area to be strengthening
regional and neighbourhood cooperation. We think
that it is essential for the international community
to fight threats from a regional and neighbourhood
approach since we face a phenomenon that is usually
cross-border in scope and develops patterns based on
the various geographic contexts in which it operates.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the Regional
Action Plan to Address Illicit Drug Trafficking,
Related Organized Crime and Drug Abuse in West
Africa, which was developed by the Economic
Community of West African States, with the support
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In
addition to other initiatives supported by that Office,
we also underscore the launch of the Compendium
of Best Practices on Drug Use. Prevention, Drug Use
Disorders Treatment and Harm Reduction in Africa, in
partnership with the African Union and in coordination
with the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
We also highlight the role ofneighbourhood cooperation
through the establishment ofjoint commissions, which
in addition to helping combat criminal networks, serve
to strengthen the intelligence services and border
control required to combat illicit drug trafficking and
trafficking in persons, natural resources and weapons.

