My delegation would like once again to express its thanks and appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your successful and outstanding management of the work of the Security Council this month. This meeting will be the last for several non-permanent Security Council members, whose terms will end in a few days. In addition, this statement might be the last that I deliver with regard to the political and humanitarian situations before I take up my post as Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates in my country. I would therefore like to address the role that the Council has played over the past several years and what it has done after certain Western and Arab Governments embroiled it in the situation in my country and dragged it into efforts to repeat catastrophic scenarios that have been played out in other countries under misleading titles and terminology, as well as the devastating effects that have been confirmed by events. As the end of the year approaches and the holidays are upon us, the Syrian State and people had been hoping that they would hear a more mature political and diplomatic discourse today from Western colleagues in the Council. For 10 years, the meetings of the Council on the political and humanitarian situations in my country, Syria, have been marked by the use of stilted language. Perhaps the time has come to admit that Western policies have led to grave mistakes, not only in Syria but in our entire region. Those mistakes have directly resulted in much bloodshed, pain and frustration. Politics should be an empirical science that is subject to periodic assessment, not a series of absurd, quixotic adventures in which one tilts at windmills meeting after meeting. The great Russian writer Maxim Gorky said that, when work is pleasure, life is a joy. However, if work is an obligation, then it becomes slavery. We are not new to the Security Council. We know it well and are familiar with its working methods and dynamics. Moreover, we are neither delusional nor one of those who imagines that the Council is part of Plato's Utopia. Syria is a founding member of the United Nations and was one of the 50 countries that signed the Charter of the United Nations at the San Francisco Conference. It has held a non- permanent seat in the Council four times, most recently in 2002 and 2003, and is fully aware of the true state of affairs. In addition, my country, Syria, has witnessed, over several decades, the failure of the Security Council to address many threats to international peace and security in our region and around the world, the most significant of which are the occupation by Israel of Arab territory in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon, the Balkan wars, the partition of Yugoslavia, the Rwanda massacres, African affairs, the invasion of Iraq by the United States and the United Kingdom, the destruction of Libya by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and countless others threats. That is why my country, from the start of what has been labelled the Syrian crisis, has opposed the attempts by certain Western Governments and their proxies in our region to internationalize the crisis and resisted their desperate efforts to use the Security Council in order to turn the Syrian State into an enemy and defame it, and to create justifications for external intervention and aggression. Of course, everyone is aware that we have made determined efforts to resolve the crisis - and to do so without outside assistance. However, that did not satisfy the whims of the Governments of those States that are hostile to Syria. Accordingly, the laboratories of their deep States concocted what has been called the "Arab Spring", which they used destabilize Syria, erode its security, undermine its achievements in respect of culture and development and disparage the choices that it has made as a nation. The Governments of those States have supported terrorism, recruited, financed and armed transnational terrorists, launched unilateral and tripartite acts of aggression, formed illegal alliances outside the aegis of the United Nations, occupied territory, caused death, destruction and displacement, looted antiquities, oil, gas and agricultural crops and robbed the wealth of the Syrian State and the property of Syrians. The rest of the story is known to all. Over the 10 years of the crisis and during the 14 years that I have served as the Permanent Representative of my country in New York, I have delivered nearly 1,000 statements before various United Nations bodies and at various United Nations meetings and events. In those statements, I tried to draw attention to violations of international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter that occurred around the world, as well as to efforts to enshrine the law of the jungle and put the law of power above the power of the law. When the Council began to discuss the situation in my country nine years ago, we called upon members to uphold the principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter, respect the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of my country, support efforts to arrive at a solution based on intra-Syrian national dialogue and local reconciliation, implement rigorously and seriously the counter- terrorism instruments and establish an international coalition under the aegis of the United Nations to combat terrorism and support the efforts of the Syrian State and its allies in that regard. However, as everyone here knows, some members exhorted their political, economic and media proxies to promote their allegations, cover up their crimes, fabricate accusations and suppress our appeals and demands. Everyone remembers that, for years, some members of the Security Council made statements in which they denied that there was transnational terrorism in Syria. In fact, some went so far as to deny that the terrorist group the Islamic State in Iraq and the Leant (ISIL) was present in my country and used the term "moderate armed Syrian opposition" to refer to foreign terrorists. Today, nearly 10 years after the Council intervened and began discussing the situation in my country, the United States occupies parts of north-east Syria and is supporting terrorist entities, separatist militias and illegal administrative bodies. The United States also occupies the Tanf area and the Rukban camp, near the border between Syria, Jordan and Iraq, and American forces provide support for ISIL, the Revolutionary Commandos and other terrorist organizations in that area. Turkey occupies parts of north and north-west Syria, and the Turkish regime, which has delusions of reviving the Ottoman Empire, supports terrorism and recruits mercenaries and sells them in the marketplace of international war. Moreover, the Turkish regime and its proxies have targeted Syria and the Syrian people, committing war crimes, crimes against humanity, acts of terrorism and murder in Syria, causing displacement and demographic change, looting, stealing and burning crops and cutting off drinking water. I should now like to dwell for a moment on the suffering being endured by 1 million Syrians in Hasakah, whom the Erdogan regime is victimizing for the seventeenth time through its use of water as a weapon of war, having cut off the supply of water from the Allouk station for nearly 20 days. The plant has been out of service since 30 November 2020. The interruption in service has caused tremendous suffering, and we are thankful to the Secretary-General for having used his good offices nearly two months ago to ameliorate the situation. In addition, the Erdogan regime and its mercenaries have dismantled and stolen electricity poles in several villages in Hasakah governorate and transferred them to the warehouses of the Turkish occupiers in preparation for sale to Turkish brokers. Naturally, the countries of NATO, which support Erdogan's criminality, have reneged on their humanitarian slogans and claims and remained silent in the face of such crimes and theft. In the south of Syria, the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan continues, and the occupying authorities continue to systematically commit crimes against our people there. Most recently, the occupying Israeli forces closed the main entrance to several villages in the occupied Syrian Golan and attacked the Syrian Arab residents of the Golan and prevented them from reaching their agricultural lands, which the occupiers are seeking to confiscate in order to install wind turbines for generating electricity. In addition, Israel has repeatedly attacked my country's territory. Those actions all occur under the cover provided by the current United States Administration, which has been evading its international responsibilities, shirking its obligations under Security Council resolutions and international law and attempting to change the political, legal and geographical status of the Golan, which is occupied Syrian territory that will be restored, sooner or later, to its motherland, Syria. What have the Western States members of the Security Council done to enable it to fulfil its obligations and carry out the task that we gave it to end the American, Turkish and Israeli occupation of my country's territory? What have those States done to express the strong commitment of the Council to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, a phrase that appears in all Security Council resolutions concerning the situation in my country? How many resolutions, presidential statements, press releases and press elements have the delegations of the Western States submitted to Council in pursuit of that aim? None. Zero. What have the Western States members of the Security Council done to enable it to play an active role in the fight against terrorism and ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front and associated terrorist groups, which commit the most heinous crimes in my country and use civilians as human shields, loot their property and rob them of their livelihoods and even the humanitarian assistance that we deliver to them? What have the Western States members done to uphold the resolutions of the Council concerning counter-terrorism and to hold accountable the Governments of known State sponsors of terrorism? What have they done to ensure that the Council acts to prevent terrorists from using chemical weapons, fabricating incidents and directing accusations against the Syrian Government? They have done nothing, zero, other than to keep the issue open in order to politically coerce the Syrian State. Since we are on the subject of terrorism, what have the Western States members of the Security Council done to enable it to improve the humanitarian situation and put right the outcomes of their actions by standing up to economic terrorism and the collective punishment of peoples, including the imposition of unilateral coercive measures against my country, Syria, and other countries such as Cuba, Venezuela, Belarus, North Korea and Zimbabwe, which have had a devastating impact on Syrian civilians and deprived them of food, medicine, fuel, electricity, basic daily needs and essential medical care? Nothing, zero, other than to allow the suffering to continue for the purpose of political coercion. The only thing that the delegations of the permanent and non-permanent Western States members have done is to exacerbate, complicate and prolong the Syrian crisis and obstruct efforts to resolve it, just as they have done with many other issues, some of which have been on the agenda of the Security Council for decades. We wholeheartedly support the role that the United Nations and the Security Council play in maintaining international peace and security, and we regret the efforts of certain Western Governments to obstruct the work of the Council and their attempts to divert it from its mandate under the Charter - which is our common denominator and our point of reference - and to turn into a tool to serve their political agendas and another platform that NATO can use to transform certain States into enemies and target, isolate and defame them. My country's delegation once again calls upon the Governments of the six permanent and non-permanent Western States members to abandon this approach and instead uphold the mandate of the Security Council, which is based on the purposes and principles of the United Nations, and stop efforts aimed at undermining the United Nations, just as the League of Nations before it was undermined. The fourth round of meetings of the Constitutional Committee was held a few days ago, and the Syrian national delegation played a positive role in facilitating the Committee's work. We had hoped that the other side would do likewise, but the dominance of certain Powers over it prevented that from happening. Preparations are currently under way for the fifth round, which will be held next month. My delegation reaffirms that the political process being facilitated by the United Nations must be Syrian-owned and Syrian-led. It also reaffirms that the Committee's agreed-upon rules of procedure must be respected if the Committee is to succeed in its work. Any outside intervention in its work or any attempts by certain Governments to impose artificial timetables must be rejected. The Constitutional Committee is autonomous, and only the Syrian people have the exclusive right to determine its future.
