Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The reversal of
democracy in Sierra Leone last May has been a
continuing source of grave concern to the international
community. The Republic of Korea once again condemns
the military coup in Sierra Leone, which overthrew the
legitimate Government of President Kabbah. It has
deprived the Sierra Leone people of their hard-won peace
grounded in democracy and the rule of law. We are
concerned about the future of Sierra Leone, in which the
United Nations has invested heavily to help its people
bring peace and democracy to the country. This
unacceptable coup has had a very serious destabilizing
impact on the whole region by reversing the new wave of
democracy that is spreading across the African continent.
It is also inflicting unbearable suffering upon innocent
civilians. The humanitarian situation has drastically
deteriorated since the coup, and the flow of refugees is
placing an enormous burden upon neighbouring countries.

The international community has made persistent
efforts to restore the legitimate Government of Sierra
Leone. The Security Council has issued several
presidential statements which strongly condemned the
coup and demanded the immediate restoration of
constitutional order. The Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) has also intervened for this
cause in cooperation with the United Nations.
Unfortunately, however, the military junta has not only
defied the repeated calls of the international community
but has blatantly attempted to entrench itself in power.
Given these circumstances, we believe that now the time
has come for the international community to take more
resolute action against the illegal regime.

In this regard, we welcome the regional initiative led
by ECOWAS to bring maximum pressure to bear upon
the junta with sanctions. In supporting that regional effort,
we view it as essential that an unequivocal signal should
be sent to the junta that the whole international
community firmly stands behind the legitimate

 

Government of Sierra Leone under the popularly elected
President, Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah. We believe that
imposing sanctions as provided for in the draft resolution
before us is an inevitable choice to help restore the
constitutional Government. My delegation also finds that
the draft resolution is well targeted in the scope of its
sanctions and is balanced as it allows humanitarian
exemptions. We will therefore vote in its favour.

My delegation is of the view that the sanctions regime,
once authorized by the Council, should be implemented in
an effective manner. In this connection, we welcome the
commitment of ECOWAS countries to assume
responsibility for enforcement action under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. We have full confidence
in ECOWAS and expect it to discharge the responsibility
conferred upon it in a way that will contribute positively to
the peaceful resolution of the Sierra Leone crisis.

As we all know well, sanctions are an instrument
employed to help achieve specific political purposes.
Therefore, we believe that the door for negotiation should
remain open while pressure is exerted on the junta through
sanctions.

We expect that ECOWAS will continue to coordinate
closely with the legitimate Government of Sierra Leone and
this Council to that end. We share the view that the
Security Council and regional organizations should make a
coordinated response to conflicts, a view that was
advocated by many delegations at the special ministerial
meeting held in this Chamber two weeks ago. In our view,
ECOWAS should be commended in this regard, as it once
again commits itself fully to resolution of the Sierra
Leonean crisis, following the recent successful intervention
in Liberia. It is our sincere hope that action we take today
will set yet another example for the success of coordinated
approaches between the Security Council and regional
organizations in addressing conflict situations in Africa.

In concluding, we once again remind the junta in
Sierra Leone that, in the interests of peace and democracy
in their own country, they should agree immediately to the
restoration of the legitimate Government. As is aptly put in
the letter from the Secretary-General, strongly echoed by
the Ambassador of Sierra Leone, what is at stake is the
great cause of democracy, and we therefore believe that the
international community should continue to stand as one in
bringing home to the junta that there is no compromise on
this principle.

