Mr. Hachani (President of the Economic and Social Council) (spoke in French): It is an honour and
a pleasure to address this meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in Haiti in my capacity as
President of the Economic and Social Council. I would
like to thank the Argentine presidency of the Council
for this opportunity. I also would like to express my
sincere congratulations to Prime Minister Latortue for
his excellent efforts over the last two years, as well as
the President-elect, Rene Preval. I ask him to accept
our wishes for success in his office and the assurances
of our trust in his ability, based on his political
experience at the highest level, to set Haiti on the path
of stability and development.

Haiti is at a turning point in its history. Following
the political transition over the last two years, the
country is now able to put into place a stable
administrative and institutional system that can free the
vital forces of the nation and strengthen the workings
of government to meet the basic needs of its
population. The fight against poverty, an aim that
brings together the entire international community, can
be undertaken only in a climate that is politically and
socially peaceful and through strengthening public
structures.

The correlation between social and economic
development and political stability no longer needs to
be demonstrated. Several bodies within the United
Nations have underscored the clear risk of
destabilization and political violence in poor countries
and the difficulty of maintaining stability when
massive international assistance is lacking. Haiti is an
illustration of this. It is therefore crucial for the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council
to work hand in hand to respond to the problems of that
country.

Haiti has been on the agenda of the Economic
and Social Council for a number of years. The Ad Hoc
Advisory Group, established in 1999 to put together
recommendations on Haiti's development in the long
term, was reactivated in November 2004 and has
become ever more relevant today, now that the country
is experiencing a restored stability. In its report to the
Economic and Social Council last year, this Group
underscored the seriousness of not only the economic
crisis, but also that of the social and environmental
crises across the country.

We are all aware of the magnitude of the task
facing the Haitian authorities. In this context, only a
long-term partnership between the authorities and the
international community can bring about the long-
awaited recovery. Over recent months, the Ad Hoc
Group has met with the Haitian authorities who deal
with planning and coordination of foreign assistance
and who are working to draft a poverty reduction
strategy. Quite recently, it met members of the
Strategic Brainstorming Cell, which is under the
umbrella of the Ministry of Planning and is responsible
for working out tracks for thinking on development
over the long term. We believe that such efforts are
promising, for an agreement on the major pillars of
development of that country, bolstered by a nationally
shared vision, is a prerequisite to recovery. This
thinking could also contribute to bringing about a
national dialogue, to which we are looking forward.

The international community needs to contribute
to Haiti's development and to be responsive and
generous over the long term. The Economic and Social
Council has made a commitment to monitoring and
guiding this process, in particular through its Ad Hoc
Advisory Group. It will continue to do so at the 2006
substantive session in Geneva based on the
forthcoming report of the Group and the
recommendations to be put forward therein, with an
emphasis on the consistency and sustainability of
international assistance.

By virtue of the combined efforts of various
parties, Haitian and international, Haiti can resolve the
crisis and have prospects for development in keeping
with the aspirations of its people within a broad
national consensus. Everyone must make every
possible effort to that end. Rest assured that the
Economic and Social Council will do its part for Haiti.

