Mr. Meece: I am pleased to brief the Security
Council in connection with the first report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) (S/20lO/512).

(spoke in French)

Since my arrival in Kinshasa about three months
ago, I set myself the immediate priority of fostering an
ongoing and constructive dialogue with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
However, my settling-in period was interrupted by a
sequence of serious events in the east of the country,
namely, the mass rapes and attacks in the areas of
Kibua and Mpofi, in North Kivu, and a direct assault
against a MONUSCO base in Kirumba, also in North
Kivu, as well as by the worrying general escalation of
violence.

I therefore spent a good part of my first weeks in
the eastern part of the country. Nevertheless, I believe
that the dialogue with Government officials began on a
sound footing, although much work remains to be
done. I believe this effort to be crucial, both for the
satisfactory execution of our ongoing operations,
especially with regard to efforts to protect the civilian
population and humanitarian efforts, and for carrying
out longer-term goals associated with stabilization and
security efforts.

(spoke in English)

The horrific attacks in late July and early August
in North Kivu clearly underscored the importance of
civilian protection and provoked a major internal
review of our programmes related to MONUSCO
protection activities. The Council has received
briefings and updates from Under-Secretary-General
Le Roy, Assistant Secretary-General Khare and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wallstrom
with regard to many of the specific measures and new
initiatives we have taken to address deficiencies and to
improve our effectiveness in this area. I can assure the
Council that this review will not be a one-time activity
with a defined time frame.
10-58489
In the past, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) pioneered many innovative tactics to
increase the Mission's reach and impact. However, we
are committed to doing more. The report of the
Secretary-General provides details of our ongoing
efforts in that regard.

Given the apparently escalating violence in North
Kivu of July and August, however, the Force
Commander and I also thought it important to establish
a more visible and active MONUSCO military posture.
In that regard, we planned and launched Operation
Shop Window, in the Pinga and Walikale area, from I to
18 September, involving roughly 750 MONUSCO
troops. Although we kept the Forces arme'es de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) fully
briefed on the Operation, it was a unilateral
MONUSCO operation, the first of its kind in a very
long time.

Among other goals, it was our intent to check the
freedom of operations seemingly enjoyed by armed
elements in the area and to generally change the
immediate dynamic of violence. The Operation was
well received by the FARDC and Government leaders.
I believe it accomplished its essential goals, at least for
the short term. It is our intent and interest to continue a
more active military stance, resources permitting. I
consider this to be an essential component of the
strategy to improve general security.

I should note that the number of forward
MONUSCO bases, which are referred to as company
operating bases and temporary operating bases, has
greatly multiplied over the past year as we have better
identified high-risk zones. We currently have over 90
of those bases, a level which, frankly, is reaching, if
not exceeding, our present support capacity. We are
now at the point where new bases will have to be
balanced by the closure of others. Overall helicopter-
lift capability is a critical factor in that calculation, as
are budgetary limits.

I must be frank, however, to underscore that all of
those MONUSCO activities cannot serve as the
complete answer to the security problems of the east.
The scale of the problem is enormous.

The best data available, for example, suggests
that over 15,000 rapes were committed last year in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Armed groups operate in many widely dispersed areas,
10-58489

not only in proximity to villages and towns but indeed
often intermixed with the civilian population. In that
vast area - larger than Afghanistan - it is not
possible for MONUSCO to ensure full protection for
all civilians. To approach that goal would require
vastly greater force levels and resources. In that
context, Government security forces of course have the
primary responsibility to ensure security for the people
of the Congo.

I must also note, however, that even good short-
term military operations alone will not be sufficient to
ensure long-term security. The fundamental threat
posed by armed groups requires a broader strategy, also
requiring our continued focus. Such a strategy must
include military pressure but must also go well beyond
to a daunting array of issues.

Our operational collaboration with the FARDC is
predicated on the basis of conditionality, intended to
ensure that support to FARDC operations is consistent
with human rights principles. However, many aspects
of our collaboration have been increasingly viewed by
FARDC commanders as an obstacle to be avoided,
which has led to an increase in FARDC unilateral
operations without MONUSCO involvement or
support. In that regard, I have been seeking to shift the
nature of our conversation, basically to one of
opportunity rather than problems.

Another major issue has been the lack of support
to holding battalions to prevent the return of negative
forces to cleared areas. That has long been a problem
area, and we are addressing it. By implementing such
support, subject to conditionality, we reinforce our
human rights efforts, potentially significantly
increasing military effectiveness in targeting armed
groups while also improving the overall relationship
with the FARDC.

The general discussion of the future strategy in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo includes a
central focus on security sector reform, which covers a
vast range of activities from training and operations of
the military to military and civilian justice systems and
police training and reform. MONUSCO is involved in
many of those areas, together with other international
partners. Indeed, just two weeks ago, MONUSCO
launched a six-month training programme for 500
recently integrated Congolese national police, with
support from the Japan International Cooperation
Agency.
3

That is a small part of the needed effort, however.
We have been requested by the Congolese Government
to expand the training programmes very significantly,
and we wish to do so. That will require significantly
increased resources from donors as well as from the
United Nations, and we welcome all expressions of
support. Significantly, one key element will be
providing equipment to trained police personnel and
units, an authority that the Council has not granted to
MONUSCO.

As I have noted, justice systems also remain a
very important area in facilitating progress and long-
term stability. A key objective here is ending any
culture of impunity. In that regard, I am pleased to note
the successful efforts by MONUSCO forces, in
cooperation with the military prosecutor's office in
North Kivu, to arrest "Lieutenant Colonel" Mayele, a
major commander implicated in the incidence of mass
rapes of late July and early August. I also applaud the
arrest of Caliixte Mbarushimana in Europe under a
warrant of the International Criminal Court. These are
encouraging steps forward, but they also underscore
the continuing need for the strengthening of both
military and civilian justice systems.

I have been engaged in early discussions with
both Congolese leaders and international community
partners as to how to improve our overall dialogue
regarding those vitally important areas of needed
security sector improvements. I am convinced that it is
feasible to substantially improve the ongoing process
of consultations in all those sectors - I hope with a
focus on concrete programmes. This area, however, as
is the case with many other issues, will require
sustained engagement from the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its international
partners over a substantial period of time.

There are other related areas that must be
addressed to establish long-term stability in the east
and throughout the country. Among them is the issue of
the illegal exploitation of mineral resources, a major
area of concern. There are no easy or quick answers.
But simultaneous efforts are required on a number of
fronts, from, among many other things, bolstering
domestic Congolese capabilities to international efforts
to establish an acceptable regulatory framework for the
mineral trade.

As I look to the future of MONUSCO and the
region, I must of course make reference to the new
procedures to effect a joint evaluation with Congolese
authorities of security conditions. I am pleased to say
that the process has gone well. Differences over
specifics have been discussed and resolved, and the
process itself has been useful in providing an ongoing
institutional mechanism for collaboration. I have had
an ongoing open discussion with Congolese officials
on the subject. I can say that the initial assessment
cycle does not indicate a need for any significant
adjustments to the MONUSCO deployments or focus.

I must also mention a new and very important
priority for the Congolese Government and for us, and
that is the conduct of national elections scheduled for
November 2011. President Kabila and other
Government leaders have made it very clear that the
conduct of democratic, transparent and credible
elections is a major priority. A good deal of concrete
progress has been made. Budgets have been approved
by national and international authorities; initial
planning for needed logistics support by MONUSCO
has been completed, and there are ongoing operations
for voter registration and other early preparatory steps.

The United Nations Development Programme is
also fully committed to playing its necessary role in
providing technical and other assistance. Further work
will be needed in future for the conduct of the
subsequent local elections planned, now targeted for
2013. It is worth noting that the share of the 2011
election budget to be supported by the Congolese
Government is considerably larger than its share during
the first round of democratic elections, in 2006.

I would also note that I have been greatly
encouraged by the improvement in regional relations.
These are of critical importance to the future stability
of the region, and of course there is currently a
particular focus on how to deal with the major threat
posed by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) in several
countries. That is an ongoing priority, and in fact the
latest meeting at the ministerial level has just taken
place in Bangui under the general auspices of the
African Union, a meeting in which we participated. I
can assure the Council of our readiness and willingness
to continue to support such regional efforts.

In presenting these observations, I do not in any
way wish to minimize the extent and scope of the
challenges ahead. They are daunting. I have always
believed, however, that they can be met and resolved
with sufficient will and commitment on the part of the
Congolese Government and population, and by
sufficient support from the international community.

On behalf of MONUSCO, I can firmly state that
we want to do our part, in terms of stepped-up military
activities, enhanced civilian protection and
stabilization programmes, and activities to address
short- and long-term needs. However, we require the
resources and the political support needed to carry out
that mission fully. We will be frankly laying out what
we view as key budget requirements, and we are ready
to use them with the highest degree of effectiveness
possible.

As long as armed groups are still active,
peacekeeping activities will have to go hand in hand
with peacebuilding activities and with support for
socio-economic recovery. I hope that together with the
Government and bilateral partners, the needed support
will be available for all the areas of the Democratic
Republic where peace has been restored, but where
people wait for a peace dividend.

(spoke in French)

Having been afforded the honour of appearing
before the Council for the first time as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, I would be
remiss if I concluded my statement without paying
tribute to the achievements of my predecessors, who
have assisted the Democratic Republic of the Congo
throughout a peace process that has been both long and
difficult and who were able on numerous occasions to
10-58489
guide MONUC so skilfully through the various crises
that have marked its existence. I remain greatly
impressed by the commitment and dedication of
MONUC staff, as well as the staff of MONUSCO and
the other United Nations agencies, and the enormous
work they have accomplished. I myself witnessed the
scale of MONUC'S contribution, as well as that of the
specialized agencies, to the peace process, the conduct
of elections and the overall objective of forging peace
and security in the region. Council resolution 1925
(2010), which changed the name of the Mission to
MONUSCO, is yet another step accomplished within
the framework of its transition to a peacebuilding
mission. In my view, it forms a solid basis for our work.

(spoke in English)

I have no illusions as to the difficulty of the road
ahead. The problems are great in scope and complexity.
I remain fundamentally optimistic, however, that with
sufficient will and resources, progress can and must be
achieved. It is important to pursue that path.

