Mr. Mukerji (India): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me the floor and for the concept note prepared by
your delegation (S/2014/238, annex). It is a sign of the
importance you attach to this issue, Sir, that we are
discussing it once again under Nigeria's presidency.
We would recall that we participated in the meeting
presided over by Nigeria on 12 October 2011 (see S/PV.6630). I also thank the Secretary-General for his
contribution to this discussion.

India has experience relevant to the subject we
are discussing today, having participated in 43 United
Nations peacekeeping missions, in which almost
170,000 Indian peacekeepers have served. Security
sector reform (SSR) is mentioned in several Security
Council resolutions. We note that as many as 24 of the
47 resolutions adopted by the Council in 2013 include
an explicit reference to SSR. Also, six peacekeeping
operations and eight special political missions have
been mandated to carry out SSR. In many of those
peacekeeping operations, troops from my country are
directly involved.

It was only a few days ago that two Indian
peacekeepers wearing the Blue Helmet were injured
while protecting civilians at the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan base in Bor, South Sudan. That
attack is another example of the unresolved political
issues in South Sudan and reflects the importance of
understanding the complex political environment of
peacekeeping missions, where SSR has to take root
as part of the internal political process of the Member
State concerned.

SSR is an important element of post-conflict
peacebuilding. Our Heads of State and Government in
2005 agreed that that issue would be best considered by
a specialized body created for that very purpose, that is,
the Peacebuilding Commission. The fact that, despite
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Council
still feels it necessary to discuss this issue today shows
the complexity of the subject. It is therefore for reasons
of pragmatism that we will use this opportunity to
outline three basic principles that, in our view, must
guide SSR.

First, it is important to keep in mind that the most
sustainable way to achieve effective SSR is by ensuring
national ownership of the process. It is because of
this that General Assembly resolution 60/180, which
established the Peacebuilding Commission, affirms
the primary responsibility of the national Governments
of countries emerging from conflict to identify
priorities and strategies for peacebuilding in order to
ensure national ownership. We have, in the past, also
emphasized that the footprint of external elements,
including the United Nations, should be light in order
to avoid any possible overtones of neocolonialism.

Secondly, the establishment and maintenance of
public order is important. A security vacuum after a
peace agreement is dangerous. The late Sergio Vieira
de Mello noted:

"Unlike other nation-building tasks, the
maintenance of law and order cannot wait. If there
is no law from day one, criminal activity thrives."

Although vitally important, the focus has to be on what
is doable, and not on an agenda driven by the priorities
of donor countries. We hear, at times, references to
the importance of cultural change in police reform.
The concept note itself decries what it refers to as an
excessive focus on issues of training and equipment at
the cost of democratic governance and management.
That is a prescription that we find difficult to agree
with. Given the importance of national ownership and
the scarcity of resources, priority, in our view, should
be given to issues such as ensuring impartiality in
recruitment, vetting new recruits and training. A focus
on the political dimension of police reform will only be
controversial and perhaps counter-productive.

Thirdly, we would also like to take this opportunity
to caution against an over-reliance on what are often
termed "innovative" approaches, particularly when
there is a need to cut costs. There is, somehow, a belief
that United Nations missions can be asked to do more
with less. We can understand that, at some level, such
logic will appeal to some people. The truth, however, is
that costs cannot be cut without also cutting corners. We
would therefore urge Member States to recognize that
and to be pragmatic by including only mandates that
are deliverable and for which resources are available.

I would, in conclusion, like to underline our View
that SSR capacity-building needs to necessarily occupy
centre stage in the entire process of security sector
reform. Such an approach would be both cost-effective
and sustainable.

