I would like to thank the President of the Security Council. I would also like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, in particular. Through the Secretary-General, I have been following all of Martin's meticulous work and I find his cautious optimism quite contagious. We have people rooting for him back here, especially in Kentucky. I know that this is a critical time for Yemen and that this is issue is extremely delicate. The Special Envoy has our support. We know first-hand the many countless hours that he is investing in peace and security in Yemen. I also thank Mr. Rajasingham for his briefing, as well as both briefers' teams for all their work to achieve peace and security in Yemen. The United States stands with the Yemeni people, who have suffered every imaginable hardship and are simply trying to survive in the midst of conflict, food insecurity, devastating floods and now the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). In the light of those hardships, we welcome the Saudi-led coalition's extension of its unilateral ceasefire in support of the United Nations peace process and efforts to fight COVID-19. The United States strongly urges the Houthis to join the Government of Yemen in support of this ceasefire by halting offensive operations so that all parties can focus their efforts on countering COVID-19 and working towards a lasting political resolution of the conflict. The Houthis must recommit to de-escalation, followed by a resumption of talks aimed at reaching a political solution. We urge the parties to the conflict to continue to review and provide meaningful feedback on the Special Envoy's draft proposals, which represent the spirit of consensus required to move towards a lasting political settlement. We note with concern the recent declaration by the Southern Transitional Council of its so-called self-administration of Yemen's southern governorates. Such actions by the Southern Transitional Council will only distract from United Nations- led efforts to secure a nationwide ceasefire and a political solution. We are also concerned by reports of increasing interference by the Southern Transitional Council in the operations of the Central Bank of Yemen. All parties must continue to respect the Government institutions underpinning Yemen's political and economic stability. We call on the Southern Transitional Council and the Government of the Republic of Yemen to re-engage in the political process provided for under the Riyadh agreement. In addition, we remain concerned about the limitations on humanitarian access in Houthi-controlled areas. The Houthis' deliberate interference in assistance operations, which is in flagrant defiance of humanitarian principles, continues to limit the ability of the United Nations and other humanitarian organizations to provide for the needs of the most vulnerable Yemenis. We acknowledge some steps taken by the Houthis in certain areas. These include the decision to lift the 2 per cent levy on aid projects, sign agreements with non-governmental organizations and approve key independent needs assessments. But further progress is critical, especially on biometric registration and ensuring that humanitarian staff can implement and monitor their programmes. The United States also strongly encourages the Houthis to be fully transparent and report COVID-19 cases in order to facilitate an effective response for the Yemeni people. As we have said on previous occasions, the United States again calls on the Houthis to allow United Nations inspection and maintenance of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. United Nations officials must have immediate access to the FSO Safer in order to prevent an environmental catastrophe, which would have far-reaching effects in Yemen and around the Red Sea. We are grateful to Martin Griffiths for continuing to raise this issue in Sana'a. The Houthis must stop blocking a solution to this problem and permit required assessments and repairs. Finally, we urge all Member States to fully comply with the targeted arms embargo established by resolution 2216 (2015), and we note our continued concern at ongoing reports of Iranian interference in the conflict, including through the provision of lethal aid to the Houthis.
