Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month, and I thank Belgium for the excellent job it did in February. I also welcome our good colleague the Ambassador of Iraq to the Council and would like also to thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her informative briefing. I wish also to extend my appreciation for the continued work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq under challenging circumstances. Iraq is facing significant challenges on its way to peace, stability and prosperity. In the context of increasing regional tensions, the continued support of the international community for Iraq's security and reconstruction remains crucial. All actors have to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. At the same time, I call on the Government of Iraq to continue engaging with international stakeholders. In that context, we also condemn the numerous rocket attacks on the military bases hosting foreign troops as well as the United States Embassy in Baghdad. Another challenge Iraq is facing is the continued political crisis. I urge all political parties and factions in Iraq to urgently resolve their differences and agree on a consensus candidate for Prime Minister. It is high time to put national interests first and overcome the prolonged political crisis. Hopefully, anew Government will be formed promptly, which will make it possible to respond to the legitimate aspirations of the Iraqi people. It is vital that the Government continue with credible economic reforms, create jobs, provide basic services, improve governance and take effective measures to counter corruption and implement the rule of law. A greater presence by women and young people should also be secured when appointing new ministers. I also call on Iraq to complete the electoral reform process and to continue engaging with the United Nations in that regard in order to ensure free, credible and fair elections. It is deeply worrisome to hear continued reports of human rights violations in the context of public demonstrations, which have now entered their sixth month. The use of live ammunition against unarmed protesters, threats against activists and journalists and detainments without due process have not stopped. I call on all actors to exercise maximum restraint, and I stress the Government's responsibility to protect peaceful protesters and to conduct thorough investigations into violations. Taking note of the latest report by the Secretary- General on children and armed conflict in Iraq (S/2019/984), I commend the important steps taken by the Government of Iraq to prevent the recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts. I look forward to further efforts in that regard. There is also a need to find a sustainable solution to the situation of internally displaced persons, as their voluntary, safe and dignified return is not secured. I encourage the Government of Iraq to engage with the United Nations and respective non-governmental organizations in efforts to bring about reconciliation and social cohesion. In conclusion, it is crucial that all Iraqi political actors put aside their differences and engage, with the support of the United Nations and international partners, to overcome the multiple challenges they are facing and respond to the legitimate aspirations of their people for stability, security, prosperity and peace. They can count on our support.
