Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I draw the
attention of the Council to a fuller version of our
statement that has been distributed in the Chamber. I
shall limit my comments to the renewal of the
sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban later
this year.

Efforts to improve the effectiveness and
perceived legitimacy of this important tool in the fight
against terrorism are important. We have, therefore, for
a number of years now, worked together with other
States on this issue. We endorse the statement that will
be made later during this debate on behalf of the group
of like-minded countries by the representative of the
Netherlands. We also recall the discussion paper
submitted by the Group in May 2008. The proposal
contained therein regarding the establishment of a
panel of experts to advise sanctions committees on
requests for de-listing remains as relevant as ever.

We appreciate the progress made by the 1267
Committee through its review process and other
improvements brought about by resolution 1822
(2008), and we applaud your leadership, Ambassador
Mayr-Harting, in this respect. Nevertheless, the lack of
independent elements in the review and in the
de-listing procedure continues to cause concern
regarding the fairness of the regime, as evidenced in
various legal proceedings cited in the tenth report of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
(see S/2009/502).

A review panel, as proposed by the group in May
2008, could be a good way to address these concerns,
but we are not wedded to any terminology or any
specific institutional solution. There can certainly be
different ways to achieve the goal of safeguarding
standards of due process and addressing legal
challenges that are potentially detrimental to the
authority of the Council.

With regard to the working paper drawn up by a
group of like-minded countries, I would like to
highlight two important substantive areas. First, any
future mechanism for de-listing should improve the
possibility for the applicant to be effectively heard and,
in particular, to respond to and refute allegations on
which the listing is based. That requires a more
substantive and more interactive dialogue between the
applicants and the mechanism than that which is
currently taking place through the focal point process.
The procedure should be designed in such a manner
that the mechanism can receive all relevant
information, including confidential information, from
the designating and other cooperating States, as well as
from other sources. In order to enable the mechanism
to satisfy the confidentiality conditions set out by a
State, it may be necessary, on a case-by-case basis, to
allow direct interaction between the mechanism and
the capital-based authorities of that State. Finally, it is
crucial that the mechanism be in a position to present
its own findings and recommendations to the
Committee.

Secondly, recent legal developments point to the
need to treat de-listing requests that enjoy the support
of the designating State with particular priority. States
that present names for listing currently assume the risk
that subsequent developments that would warrant
de-listing will not be honoured by the Committee and
that the continued listing will be perceived as the
continued responsibility and fault of that State. Where
designating States revoke their support for a listing, the
entry loses its original justification and should be
automatically removed, except, of course, where the
Committee, on the basis of a new designation by a
different State, confirms the entry.

What transpires from the latest report submitted
by the Monitoring Team and from other sources is the
need for the Council to address the issue of fair and
clear procedures head-on. The uncertainties about
whether the future reform will fully satisfy the
multitude of actors that have weighed in on the subject
in recent years do not justify inaction. The practical
challenge of sharing confidential information, which
may make a future mechanism less than perfect, can
also not justify inaction but requires creative
engagement and thinking. The argument that sanctions
are preventive rather than punitive in nature - in itself
a questionable statement - can equally not dispel the
need for fair procedures.

The fairness of sanctions procedures has to be
measured in relation to the impact that such measures
have on the targets. By design and with good reason,
sanctions are intended to hit the targeted individuals
hard in order to prevent them from engaging in terrorist
activities and support. Any person so targeted, rightly
or wrongly, by the Security Council experiences a
massive interference in his or her rights. That fact
alone warrants procedures that give the listed persons
or entities the equivalent level of protection against the
continuation of unjustified listings that would be
required from any State in its autonomous listing
system in implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

We have high expectations regarding the ongoing
reform process and we stand ready to contribute to it,
including through individual or collective engagement
with Security Council members.

