Mr. Antenio (African Union) (spoke in French):
Like representatives who have spoken before us, we,
too, would like to convey our condolences to Nigeria
and to the United Nations following the attack that
took place in the historic African city of Abuja. Nigeria
is dear to us, including in the area of peacekeeping.

This is also an opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on having organized this debate, and to
underscore the fact that India is an exemplary reference
point in the area of peacekeeping. We pay tribute to the
sacrifices made by your fellow citizens in the field,
including in Africa.

We particularly welcome the fact that in your
concept note (S/2011/496, annex), you place special
emphasis on the issue of partnership and on the need to
enhance the capacities of the African Union. Indeed, in
parallel to the efforts that we have made within the
African Union to bolster its peace and security
architecture, we have also been involved in various
consultations within the United Nations that have led
to the issuance of relevant documents, Security
Council presidential statements and reports, such as
that of the joint African Union-United Nations panel
(S/2008/813).

Here, it is especially important to underscore the
excellent relations that we have developed between the
African Union Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat, which have strengthened certain
consultation mechanisms, such as the Joint Task Force
on Peace and Security, launched by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and African Union Chairman Jean Ping
on 25 September 2010. As Council members will be
aware, we have also strengthened consultations
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council. In that regard, we could
further build upon these consultations and strengthen
cooperation mechanisms between the two bodies.

We are also active in other areas, such as
humanitarian assistance, which is a new area of activity
for the African Union, thanks to cooperation with
United Nations bodies such as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. It is of note that
the African Union recently organized a donors'
conference for Somalia, the preparations for which
benefited greatly from the capacities we have begun to
develop in the area of humanitarian assistance.

The African Union organized a retreat last year in
Cairo that brought together representatives of the
United Nations, the African Union and other countries
and organizations, with the aim of achieving more
effective coordination and harmonization at the
strategic and operational levels. We intend to hold
another such event next month in Cairo to continue
strengthening the mechanisms for cooperation among
the various stakeholders involved in peacekeeping.

Initiatives are also under way to build African
Union capacities in the area of civilian capacity. As the
Council knows, this is an area in which we and the
international system have certain weaknesses. We
believe that the African Union will, in the near future,
have an asset base in the form of a pool of human
resources, from which civilian capacity can be
deployed on the ground when necessary.

On the ground, we have developed a number of
practical and innovative approaches to meet peace and
security challenges. It is important to emphasize in
particular the initial support units and reinforcements
authorized by the Security Council. Members will no
doubt recall the United Nations Mission in Angola, but
we would like to focus on ongoing operations: the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

With regard to AMISOM, we would like first to
thank all the partners who have contributed so far to
this peacekeeping operation. We would like especially
to take this opportunity to reiterate the need for
predictable funding in order to effectively carry out the
work of that African Union Mission on the ground.

In the light of recent developments on the ground,
the African Union has been taking stock of the
situation. We held a workshop on 17 and 18 August in
Addis Ababa to consider how to improve our work,
given the tangible results being achieved by African
Union forces in Somalia.
In the coming months, AMISOM. will therefore
focus its efforts on securing Mogadishu in order to
create conditions for reconciliation and to facilitate the
free movement of international personnel; the
implementation, within its limited resources and in a
gradual manner, of phase II of the concept of
operations; and above all the extension of the authority
of the Transitional Federal Government, thereby
creating the conditions not only for reconciliation but
also for the distribution of humanitarian aid, which is,
of course, difficult to do in conditions of insecurity.

I would like to focus on the recommendations
that emerged from the workshop, to which I would like
to draw the attention of the members of the Security
Council. First, the deployment of additional troops by
contributing countries should be accelerated in order to
attain as soon as possible the force level of 12,000
personnel and thereby safeguard the gains made in
recent months on the ground. The strengthening of
United Nations support is also of great importance, as
is the deployment of police to maintain law and order
in Mogadishu.

Secondly, it was proposed to establish, as an
integral part of AMISOM, a guard force to facilitate
the deployment of civilian personnel and to ensure the
protection of the African Union and United Nations
staff in Mogadishu. The personnel of such a force
should not be included within the 12,000 personnel
authorized by the Security Council. This, in our view,
is another aspect which it is important to bear in mind.

It is important that any evaluation of progress
achieved in peacekeeping to date be accompanied by
an analysis of the progress made in the coordination
and harmonization, depending on the case, of the
decisions taken by our political bodies. In practice, we
are all pursuing the same goal: a return to peace and
the creation of conditions for lasting security in
countries in conflict where peacekeeping operations are
deployed.

With regard to UNAMID, the African Union
closely followed the process that led to the adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 2003 (2011), which,
among other things, renewed UNAMID's mandate. The
Council's adoption of that resolution followed the
adoption on 19 July 2011 by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union of a decision whereby it
not only requested the renewal of the UNAMID
mandate but also underlined the need to launch the
Darfur political process on the basis of the progress
made in light of the Doha document for peace in
Darfur as a means of supporting the progress achieved
and ensuring that Darfur take effective ownership of
the quest for peace, justice and reconciliation in the
region.

The African Union is of the view that the
questions which arose following our efforts for the
resumption of the Darfur process make it clear that
there is a need to consider the importance to be
attached to the positions of the African Union on the
situation in Darfur, as articulated by the relevant
political bodies, in particular the Peace and Security
Council. Those issues raised by certain members of the
Security Council also strengthen the need to bolster
mechanisms for coordination in the context of the
strategic United Nations-African Union partnership on
the peace and security challenges in Africa, of which
the African Union remains continuously seized.

The African Union therefore calls on all parties
concerned to demonstrate their ongoing commitment to
respecting the hybrid nature of UNAMID and the
implementation of its mandate under the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the decisions of
the African Union Peace and Security Council. In
practice, we see respect for the hybrid nature of
UNAMID as a prerequisite for the effective
implementation of the Mission's mandate, which will
be a source of inspiration for future endeavours of this
sort.

As I said at the outset, your delegation, Sir, was
correct to underscore that peacekeeping is above all a
partnership. I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
commitment of the African Union to continuing to
work with the Security Council, the entire United
Nations family, Member States and international
partners, including non-governmental organizations,
which also make great sacrifices on the ground,
including in Africa.

