The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2006/601, which contains the text of a
letter dated 1 August 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Council.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2006/629, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document 8/2006/609, which contains the text of a
letter dated 3 August 2006 from the representative of
Iraq addressed to the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1700 (2006).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.
06-46179

