Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to start by
thanking Special Representative Nicholas Haysom for
his perceptive briefing.

Today Afghanistan stands on the cusp of challenge
and opportunity. Its path into the Transformation
Decade is challenging on every front, dealing as it
must with insecurity, economic fragility and the illicit
economy, to name only a few issues. We are encouraged
to see that the process of forming a Government has
been completed, and we also welcome the nomination
of the first woman to the country's Supreme Court.
All of that marks an auspicious beginning. But much
more needs to be done, and as Afghanistan negotiates
its many challenges, the international community must
continue to stand by it. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has a critical role in
that regard. Its work, in line with the priorities set by
the Afghan Government, is much valued. All of us have
a crucial stake in the stability ofAfghanistan, and all of
us will have to contribute to that end.

As is noted in the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/422), during the last quarter, we
travelled further along a positive trajectory of enhanced
engagement between Afghanistan and Pakistan. Last
month, my Prime Minister visited Kabul for the second
time, his first since the advent of the Government
of National Unity. The two leaders agreed that our
bilateral relationship would continue to be guided by
three core principles, the first being adherence to the
policy of non-interference; the second, ensuring that
our respective territories are not used against each
other; and the third, seeing to it that the enemies of
Afghanistan are treated as enemies of Pakistan, and
vice versa. The two leaders also agreed to expand trade
and deepen regional cooperation, which we hope will
usher in a new era of peace and development in our
region - a win-win situation for everyone.

Pakistan has the highest possible stake in a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan. Terrorism remains a
challenge for both our countries and the entire region.
We have roundly condemned the recent rise in violence
in Afghanistan and the civilian casualties that have
been its grim consequence. Nothingjustifies the killing
of innocent people, the atrocious attack this morning
on the Afghan Parliament or, as we saw last week, the
destruction of hospitals. We are committed to fighting
that menace together and are increasing our military
and intelligence cooperation with Kabul. For our part,
we have just completed a successful first year for our
military operation against terrorists and armed militants
in North Waziristan. We are committed to eliminating
all terrorists, without distinction. And let me be clear
that we will be relentless in rooting out terrorism,
whoever its sponsors are, external or internal. Any
attempt to destabilize parts of our country or attack its
territorial integrity will be responded to forcefully.

Pakistan can and will play a constructive role in
promoting peace and security in Afghanistan. That
can best be achieved through a process of national
reconciliation undertaken and led by the Afghans
themselves. We welcome the first tentative steps taken
in recent months to advance the reconciliation process,
and we hope they will lead to direct talks as well as to
a de-escalation ofviolence. Pakistan will do everything
possible to encourage that process. Success will require
reciprocal accommodation and, above all, strategic
patience.

Sustainable peace in Afghanistan will lead to
regional stability, which is the cornerstone of the Heart
of Asia process. As co-Chair of the process, Pakistan
hosted a meeting of its senior officials in Islamabad in
May, providing an opportunity for in-depth discussions
on a range of issues, including trans-regional projects
such as the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-
India gas pipeline and the China-Pakistan Economic
Corridor.

The Secretary-General's report notes an increase
in the voluntary return of Afghan refugees from both
Pakistan and Iran. However, Pakistan continues to
be one of the top two countries hosting the world's
largest refugee population. We welcome the Afghan
Government's commitment to the refugees' return and
reintegration and hope that UNAMA will continue to
assist in that regard. My Prime Minister has assured
President Ghani that Afghan refugees will not be
forcibly repatriated.

The Secretary-General's report also states that
opiates still account for the equivalent of 13 per cent
of Afghanistan's gross domestic product. While we
welcome efforts by the Afghan law-enforcement
authorities to counter that menace, more focused action
is required, with international support.

Finally, the ties between Pakistan and Afghanistan
transcend the boundaries of time and space. Our
destinies are intertwined. As our Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif said in Kabul, "We have stood shoulder
to shoulder through every trial and tribulation" that the
people of Afghanistan have faced. I would therefore
like to assure Afghanistan of our continued resolve
to remain by its side and help the Afghan people in
whatever way we can to accomplish the goals of the
Transformation Decade and achieve lasting peace.

