Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin
by extending my thanks to the briefers: the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui; Monseigneur Marcel Utembi, President of
the Conference episcopale nationale du Congo; and
Ms. Solange Lwashiga Furaha, spokesperson for Rien
Sans Les Femmes, for their informative briefings.

The election process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is entering its final phase. In that regard, we
welcome President Joseph Kabila Kabange's decision
to respect the Constitution of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to step down at the end of the year.

The timely holding of the elections is crucial to
ensuring the stabilization of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We therefore call on the Government,
the Independent National Electoral Commission and
all stakeholders to work together towards the holding
of elections in December, with full respect for the
Constitution and the 31 December 2016 agreement.
Close cooperation with civil society, in particular
women's representatives, and women's involvement in
the electoral process are crucial to ensuring equal the
representation of women and men in decision-taking
at all levels in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of Rien Sans
Les Femme aimed at ensuring the broadest possible
participation of women in the upcoming elections and
at supporting female candidates.

Poland also reiterates its call for the peaceful and
timely transfer of power in January 2019, as set out
in the electoral calendar and in accordance with the
Congolese Constitution.

We strongly believe that the effective
implementation of the December agreement, including
confidence-building measures, as well as compliance
with the electoral timeline, is essential to a peaceful
and credible electoral process. Respect for fundamental
human rights, including freedom of expression and
freedom ofpeaceful assembly, is crucial to a democratic
transition of power and the peace and stability of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It goes without
saying that the political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has a significant impact on the
stability of Central and sub-Saharan Africa. A peaceful
and developing Congo could provide a huge boost to the
whole continent.

Finally, let me reiterate our full support to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as to the
men and women of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

