Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. His presentations on
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are always detailed
and well-considered. But, as we have pointed out, as a
survey of the threats to peace and security in the Middle
East, Mr. Mladenov's briefings are, by their mandate,
very incomplete. While the Council remains focused
on the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, it
ignores other, very serious conflicts in the Middle East.

One such conflict has in recent months come to the
doorstep of Europe and the United States - that is the
continued evidence of increased international terrorist
activity by the Iranian regime. Iranian assassinations
ofpolitical opponents are as old as the Islamic Republic
itself. While United States diplomats were still being
held hostage by Islamic revolutionaries in the United
States embassy in Tehran, Iranian agents and proxies
began a campaign of political murder in Europe, North
Africa and across the Middle East.

Iranian malign behaviour does not target one
country alone; it targets us all. We have seen that no
more profoundly than over the past months, in which
multiple European countries have publicly decried
Iranian attempts to murder dissidents on their own soil.
Since Mr. Mladenov's previous briefing, on 30 October
Danish officials revealed a plot by Iranian intelligence
agents to murder three exiled Iranian dissidents on
Danish soil. The Danish Government arrested an
Iranian regime assassin in Norway on 21 October.
Danish officials are outraged, and rightly so. The
Iranian plot was such a blatant violation of Denmark's
sovereignty that one Danish politician compared the
plot to Russia's attempted poisoning of the Skripals on
British soil earlier this year.

But Denmark is not the only country that has been
targeted by the regime. The Danish allegations came
just days after the French Government accused Iranian
intelligence of plotting a bomb attack on an Iranian
opposition rally in Paris in June. In that plot, a Belgian
husband and wife of Iranian origin were arrested, along
with a high-ranking Iranian diplomat in Austria. The
diplomat provided the directions and explosives for the
husband-and-wife team to bomb the Iranian resistance
gathering, which included United States citizens. All
three were arrested. Of course, all of that follows an
Iranian-backed attack on the United States consulate
in Basra, following months of the Iranian regime's
violations of Iraqi national sovereignty.

Those attempts to murder their political opponents
on foreign soil reflect the true nature of the Iranian
regime. Those attacks are precisely the sort of behaviour
that led the United States to reimpose sanctions against
Iran on 5 November. That was the largest sanctions
action against Iran ever undertaken by the United
States. Our Administration long ago came to the
conclusion that much more needed to be done if there
was to be any chance to prod the Iranian Government
into the community of peaceful, law-abiding nations.

We have seen the tragic legacy of appeasement
before. The Council was, in many ways, created as a
counter to that failed diplomatic strategy. The Tehran
regime has proven itself to be the same violent and
predatory group of murderers that it was in the 1980s.
Our European allies are increasingly finding proof
of that in their own front yards. We must unite in our
efforts to stop that behaviour before it reaches more
innocent people across the world.

In fairness to Mr. Mladenov, his briefing on this
month's events in the Middle East did touch on the
current violence in Gaza, but his reporting misses the
mark when he calls for restraint from both sides. Yes,
Israel launched air strikes on military posts, weapon
depots and intelligence assets in Gaza, but it did so
in response to the over 400 rockets and mortars that
were fired indiscriminately from Gaza into Israel.
Neighbourhoods were targeted. A bus was bombed by
an anti-tank missile. Families were forced into bomb
shelters to escape the barrage.

Even if those present accept the Hamas excuse
that it launched its missiles in response to an Israeli
covert operation, the fact cannot be escaped that the
Gaza militants targeted civilians in response. Their
actions were the actions not of a nation exercising self-
defence, but of a terrorist group seizing a pretext to kill
civilians. Neither can the fact be escaped that the group
responsible for the rocket attacks, Palestinian Islamic
Jihad, is an Iranian-supported group. Palestinian
Islamic Jihad is yet another terrorist proxy that Iran
calls on to stoke violence and instability in the region,
and those missing facts are crucial. The fact is that there
is only one side that attacks indiscriminately; one side
that targets civilians; one side that terrorizes to achieve
its objectives.

But I will close by agreeing with Mr. Mladenov on
one point. Both sides must work to resolve the conflict
in the Middle East. Neither side can get everything that
it wants. Both sides must compromise, and compromise
can begin only with a clear, honest and complete
appraisal of the facts on the ground. Without that, this
monthly discussion is doomed to fail in its objective of
helping to achieve peace.

