Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President on Bolivia's
assumption of the Security Council's presidency in
June. We thank you for convening today's open debate
on the situation in Afghanistan to take stock of the
overall situation in our country. I am pleased by the
presence of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ambassador Yamamoto. We thank him for the
comprehensive briefing.

We meet at a time when Afghanistan is undergoing
another phase in its test to overcome adversity. Much
has happened since the Council's deliberations on
Afghanistan in March (see S/PV.7896). I will focus
my remarks on some of the most pressing issues of my
country's security and stability, as well as regional and
international cooperation.

After almost four decades of imposed conflict,
with hundreds of thousands of casualties and
millions of displaced people - I emphasize millions
of displaced people - our country remains under
almost constant attack. Earlier this year, thanks to the
effective measures taken by our security forces and
their pre-emptive strikes, the so-called Taliban spring
offensive came later than expected and was dealt
heavy blows in different parts of the country. Unable
to confront our forces directly, the orchestrators of our
insecurity resorted to desperate urban terrorist attacks
on soft targets and attempts to sow discord among
our people.
In recent months, we have seen attacks of an
unprecedented nature across Afghanistan - on the
streets, in hospitals, cemeteries, mosques, diplomatic
missions and political institutions. Since the start of
2017, major terrorist attacks in urban centres have
caused significant losses of lives and property - more
than 500 killed and more than 1,100 wounded in Kabul,
Mazar-e Sharif, Kandahar, Lashkar Gah, Khost and
Herat. The most recent barbarous attack took place last
week when worshippers were offering evening prayers
in a Kabul mosque.

While all attacks are equally condemnable, the sheer
carnage of the 31 May attack was unprecedented in its
kind in the history of Afghanistan. The truck-bombing
in the heart of Kabul was by all accounts a crime against
humanity and Islamic values, spreading horror instead
of peace and piety during the holy month of Ramadan.
More than 150 innocent souls were lost, including
women, children and some of our young journalists.
Several disappeared, without a trace, from the impact
of the explosion. In fact, this morning, I was watching a
television programme showing a young mother and her
children walking around town on the streets of Kabul
looking for her husband and their father - not knowing
what happened him. The nation was plunged into deep
mourning. The attack reaffirmed the obvious - that the
enemies of Afghanistan know no limit in their brutality
to break our pride and prevent peace and stability from
taking root in our society. Beyond the human tragedy,
the local economy lost millions of dollars and several
diplomatic missions suffered damages.

The attack triggered the culmination of social
frustration and a wave of angry protests seeking
security reform, which unfortunately has been leaving
more death and injury in its wake, including a triple
terrorist attack at one of the slain protester's funeral.
We firmly believe in the constitutional right of our
people to protest and know that, if the door of dialogue
is shut down between the Government and protestors,
violence will increase. No element of the Afghan
security forces, supported by national and international
taxpayers, should ever inflict unnecessary harm
upon civilians. Given recent events, the commander
of the Kabul garrison and the police chief have been
suspended and the incidents are being investigated. We
remain committed to reassuring our people that our
security forces are there to protect all Afghans and are
at their disposal and service. In short, what transpired
on that dreadful Wednesday morning was an attack
on our people, our democracy, our economy and our
partnership with the international community.
While Afghanistan continues to bleed, we have
witnessed increased terrorist attacks in the United
Kingdom, France, Turkey, Iraq, Syria, Mali, Russia,
Sweden and Egypt - proving that terrorism has
no boundaries and continues to threaten people
everywhere. It is important that the civilized world,
in its modern meaning, stand united in defiance of
terror and secure peace and prosperity for current and
future generations. We Afghans will do so in a spirit
of national and global unity, which has enabled us to
overcome difficult moments in our nation's life.

Reversing the tide against terror is contingent upon
eliminating support centres beyond our frontiers that
produce, nurture and empower terrorists operating
in Afghanistan. The recently released outcome of a
joint investigation by Afghanistan, the United Arab
Emirates and the United States clearly establishes that
the 10 January Kandahar attack was planned in Quetta,
Pakistan. Similarly, early investigations verified the
link between the Kabul truck bombing of 31 May
and the Haqqani Network, based in Pakistan. A joint
Afghan-German comprehensive investigation on the
attack is currently under way. We shall release the
outcome in due course.

The other external threat to Afghan sovereignty
is the number of cross-frontier violations, which have
increased dramatically - almost four-fold - since my
presentation to the Council in March. Those violations,
ranging from the firing of artillery shells, airspace
violations and the construction of military posts and
barriers to the digging of deep ditches - all of which
exacerbate the current situation - if left unaddressed,
will undoubtedly continue to undermine peace and
security in our region.

In the Council, we have heard from a known
neighbouring State that our Government "should not
externalize its internal problems and blame others for its
own failures." It is the same State that has been highly
determined to do all it can to weaken and destabilize our
country while accusing us of weakness. Let me remind
everyone that those who would attribute Afghanistan's
security and other challenges solely to internal issues
are doing so to detract focus and attention from their
long-standing policy of propagating violence and
disorder in our country.
In dealing with the situation, we have been pursuing
a three-pronged strategy: first, strengthening global
counter-terrorism consensus with a focus on engaging
Pakistan in genuine cooperation, ending cross-frontier
violations and facilitating the peace process; secondly,
strengthening our security and defensive capabilities;
and, thirdly, improving national unity, governance and
service-delivery to our people. Given the nature of
the conflict, the success of our strategy depends upon
collaborative and sustained work at national, regional
and global levels.

Despite the enormous violence imposed on us over
nearly four decades, especially this year, we remain
firmly committed to the goal of sustaining peace. In
that light, the 6 June Kabul process conference marked
the resumption of an important initiative for stability in
Afghanistan. The conference brought together regional
countries, key international partners and relevant
international institutions to focus on two imperatives:
first, garnering a new level of commitment in support of
our peace agenda and, secondly, identifying a common
approach to end the cycle of terror and violence in
the country.

We are pleased with the outcome ofthat conference,
which reinstated cooperation mechanisms to promote
peace and security. Naturally, Pakistan has an
important role to play in ending violent extremism and
promoting peace. We hope it will seize the opportunity
for the benefit of its own citizens and stability in the
region. Meeting on the margins of the recent Shanghai
Cooperation Organization Summit in Astana, President
Ghani Ahmadzai and Prime Minister Sharif agreed to
hold a bilateral working group meeting in Kabul in the
near future on confronting terrorism. Moreover, we
also look forward to additional discussion within the
framework of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group,
with the participation of China and the United States.

Despite the difficult situation in the country, our
security forces stand vigilant, protecting our people and
infrastructure and preventing terrorists from capturing
and establishing a presence in different provinces.
They have responded robustly despite various logistical
constraints in terms of resources, heavy weaponry and
air capability. Let me pay tribute to the commitment and
professionalism of those police officers who sacrificed
their lives to prevent both the truck bomber of3l May and
last week's Kabul mosque attackers from reaching their
intended targets and causing maximum casualties. The
enemy is doing its best to stage so-called green-on-blue
attacks in order to undermine international training
programmes and support of our security forces. In
addition, through selective targeting and the careful
allocation of responsibility claims for terrorist attacks,
the handlers of terrorism in the neighbourhood seek
to create discord and distrust between our people and
security forces. We will leave no room for any possible
enemy infiltrators in our security forces.

The Government of National Unity is currently
in the process of a national dialogue to strengthen
consensus on relevant issues and address political
grievances. We believe good governance can flourish
only in an environment free of any particular ethnic
or linguistic considerations. We will continue to
focus on the greater task at hand - working towards
economic self-sufficiency, tackling corruption and
providing humanitarian relief for our people. Increasing
economic development opportunities, with a focus
on alleviating poverty and creating jobs, remains our
key priority. Recent projects such as the Afghanistan-
India air cargo corridor, the inauguration of public
transport infrastructure in Kabul and the World Bank's
$500 million financing for various development sector
investments are few examples.

Today, the world faces an enemy united in its sole
desire to bring death and destruction, dismantle State
institutions and create chaos. Hence, it is imperative
that the United Nations act decisively on its mandate,
which is to maintain international peace and security.
Last week, Secretary-General Guterres paid a visit to
Kabul to express his solidarity with, and support for,
the people and the Government of Afghanistan. That
was a strong sign of his personal commitment to peace
and security in our country, for which we are deeply
grateful. In the broader context, his visit reaffirmed
that the United Nations would remain beside us over
the coming years as we continue our journey towards
prosperity. We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and hope that its
activities and mandate will help bring real and tangible
change to counter-terrorism efforts in Afghanistan
and elsewhere.

In the past two years, we have reiterated time and
again two key concerns for Afghanistan: first, concrete
action against regional safe havens and logistical
support to terrorists and ,secondly, cross-frontier
violations, which I referred to before. On both issues,
we have provided full briefings to the Secretary-
General and the Security Council. The Council is yet
to take the necessary and appropriate action to address
those two issues of concern. In our view, had it done
so in the past, the situation would be different today.
Another outstanding issue for the Council to act upon
is the strict enforcement and strengthening of the
sanctions regimes. Furthermore, the irreconcilable
Taliban should be recognized as a terrorist group after
its failure to engage meaningfully in the peace talks.
The United Nations must also specify concrete criteria
to clearly define State sponsorship of terrorism.

Itake this opportunity to thank the Security Council
for initiating a review of the structure, resources and
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. We consider it a necessary initiative for
ensuring a more efficient and effective United Nations
support role in the country. During the review process,
we highlighted the imperative of the One United
Nations initiative and an adjusted assistance role that
would be in conformity with the principles of Afghan
ownership and leadership, as well as the priority needs
of Afghanistan. We wholeheartedly thank Under-
Secretary-General Jan Kubis for leading the review
process in the most able manner, and the United
Nations team on the ground for their contributions to
the process.

In conclusion, despite all the challenges, our people
are looking to the future with confidence. They have
made enormous sacrifices thus far. As such, failure is
not an option. That said, the support of the international
community, including the Council, will be critically
important for our success.

I would like to reiterate our gratitude for the
Council's expression of firm support for the stability
and prosperity of Afghanistan. Today, as we stand at
a crossroads in our stabilization efforts, we look to
the Security Council to help us overcome our security
challenges by confronting the source of the ongoing
conflict, and not by dealing with the consequences. In
that connection, the need for an appropriate response
by the Council to the task at hand cannot be overstated.
We hope that that is realized so that our people are able
to meet their basic aspirations of living in peace and
security - free of terror, violence and destruction.

