The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/287, which contains the first report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi. I should like to draw the
attention of the members of the Council also to
document S/2007/92, containing a letter dated
13 February 2007 from the Permanent Representative
of France, transmitting the conclusions of the Security
Council Working Group on children and armed conflict
with respect to the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict in Burundi (S/2006/851 and Corr. 1).

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
political developments in Burundi whereby the
Government has taken a number of corrective
steps aimed at promoting dialogue, national
reconciliation and social harmony. It also takes
note with appreciation of the measures taken to
improve economic governance and the
transparency and accountability of public
institutions. It encourages the authorities to
remain committed to pursuing these measures and
to completing the reforms agreed upon in the
agreements reached in Arusha in 2000, in Pretoria
in 2003 and in Dar-es-Salaam in 2006, and calls
on all Burundian political stakeholders to
maintain the spirit of dialogue, consensus-
building and inclusiveness, including in
addressing the issue of power-sharing in an
equitable manner, that enabled them to achieve a
successful transition in their country.
"The Security Council welcomes the
establishment of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi (BINUB) and the support it
provides to the peace consolidation process.

"The Security Council commends the
efforts undertaken by the African Union Special
Task Force and the South African Facilitation, in
support of the Dar-es-Salaam Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement of 7 September 2006. The
Security Council calls on both parties to pursue
their efforts to resolve outstanding issues in a
spirit of cooperation. It welcomes the resumption
of the work of the Joint Verification Monitoring
Mechanism (JMMV) on 28 May 2007 in order to
address and remove the obstacles in the
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement. It
encourages in particular the Government of
Burundi to remain committed to finding a
political solution to the current deadlock, and
urges the Forces Nationales de Liberation
(Palipehutu-FNL) to fulfil expeditiously their
obligations under the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement. It also invites BINUB and the
African Union to continue to support these
efforts.

"The Security Council urges the
Government to intensify its efforts on all aspects
of reform of the security sector and to address the
issue of human rights abuses committed by
members of the security services, including by
bringing perpetrators to justice, and encourages
international partners, including BINUB in
accordance with its mandate, to increase their
support for this endeavour.

"The Security Council urges the
Government to step up its efforts to combat
impunity and to promote and protect human
rights, paying in this context particular attention
to reducing the high level of gender-based
violence and of violence against children. It
encourages the Secretary-General and the
Burundian authorities to pursue their dialogue
with a View to agreeing on the establishment of a
transitional justice mechanism based on the
highest standards of justice and international
human rights.

"The Security Council recalls the
conclusions of its Working Group on children and
07-36273
armed conflict pertaining to parties in the
situation of armed conflict in Burundi
(S/2007/92), and calls upon the Government of
Burundi and all parties, as well as United Nations
agencies and donor Governments, to cooperate
with the Working Group with a View to following
up on those conclusions.

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the Chair of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission on
its activities relating to Burundi and, in this
context, encourages the Government of Burundi
and BINUB to work closely with all stakeholders
in order to devise a sound strategic framework to
foster the commitment of the Government of
Burundi and all its partners to the priorities for
consolidating peace in Burundi. The Security
Council stresses the need to ensure broad national
ownership of the Strategic Framework, and looks
forward to receiving further advice on Burundi
from the Peacebuilding Commission, particularly
on those issues covered by the Strategic
Framework. It welcomes the outcome of the
the

round table convened by the Government with the
support of the United Nations on 24 and 25 May
in Bujumbura and urges donors to disburse the
funds pledged at this occasion.

"The Security Council welcomes the revival
of the Economic Community of the Countries of
the Great Lakes Region (CEPGL), the Great
Lakes Conference process and the upcoming
formal accession of Burundi to the East African
Community. It also welcomes the Government's
commitment to the ratification of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region at the next parliamentary session. It
encourages Burundi and all countries in the
region to sustain their efforts to foster peace,
stability and mutually beneficial development."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/l6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.
