Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is our first intervention under your presidency of
the Security Council, Sir, allow me to wish you every
success in your efforts. You can count on our support
and full confidence that with your wisdom, you will
conduct our work successfully. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev for his excellent
presidency during the month of May.

We thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing
and for the report presented to the Council. As this is
the last report that he will present in his capacity as
Prosecutor, we would like to take this opportunity to
express to him our deepest gratitude for his exceptional
performance and professionalism at the Court. We would
have still done so without having been a State party to
the Court. However, now that we have finally completed
all the steps necessary to deposit our accession to the
Rome Statue, barely two months ago, we do this with an
even greater sense of ownership. Likewise, we wish the
Prosecutor every success in his future endeavours.

As set out in paragraph 2 of resolution 1593 (2005),
the Government of the Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate to assist the Court
and the Prosecutor in their activities. On that legally
binding basis, investigations and activities related to the
investigations of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide are being carried out, in accordance with
the scope of the Rome Statue.

We understand the extreme sensitivity that those
investigations represent for the Government of the
Sudan. However, from our perspective, there continue
to be enormous shortcomings related to the lack of
cooperation of the Sudanese Government with the
International Criminal Court with regard to investigating
the cases under its jurisdiction. The absence of internal
processes of the special courts created in 2005 and the
failure of the Government of the Sudan to implement the
resolutions that have been adopted by the Council, above
all the most recent resolutions, including resolution
2035 (2012), in our view reflect the ongoing obstacles
to guaranteeing effective accountability with regard to
the crimes committed since 2003.

We view with concern that the judicial investigations
mentioned in the Prosecutor's report have shown that
there have been specific orders to attack civilians,
including aerial bombardments and the deliberate
maintenance of conditions hostile to the living conditions
of the displaced population, which will lead to severe
damage in the long term. The information presented
with respect to the constant restrictions standing in the
way of the distribution of humanitarian assistance and
to alleviating the suffering of the vulnerable population
is something that we fail to understand.

It is in that same context that, as members of the
Council and from our national perspective as a State
party to the Court, we cannot turn a blind eye to the
suffering caused to the population and the serious acts
committed in Darfur since 2003, as well as to the recent
investigations that detail systematic and lamentable
facts, which by any measure constitute crimes against
humanity.

While I underscore that we understand the
complexity involved in bringing to justice those parties
indicated in the Prosecutor's report as responsible
for the crimes committed in Darfur, we believe that
the evidence collected and the judicial investigations
carried out adhere to the principles of impartiality,
independence and non-interference in politics. If we
accept the premise, and we do, that there can be no
peace without justice, then the atrocities committed
cannot remain unresolved.

As members of the Council, we are certain we will
be able to resolve internal differences that may exist
and, in that context, renew institutional cooperation
between the International Criminal Court and the
Security Council. Likewise, we recognize that efforts
are being undertaken in the current peace process being
implemented in Darfur, in particular the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and the
establishment of institutions tasked with monitoring
respect for human rights and the crimes committed in
Darfur since 2003 , all ofwhich we think is commendable.

