Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, for taking up this important
cause, as you have done throughout your career. Let me
also take this occasion to welcome our new members:
Sweden, Italy, Bolivia, Ethiopia and Kazakhstan. We
look forward to working with each of them.

I welcome Secretary-General Guterres for his first
briefing to the Security Council. We knew he would
hit the ground running, but I am not sure that we knew
that he would be doing so at an Olympic pace, so we
congratulate him on his energy and the ambitious
vision that he has brought to the cause of conflict
prevention, conflict response and, as he put it, the cause
of sustaining peace. I think that it is really important
that he has wasted no time reforming the capacity of
the United Nation to be more nimble in the face of the
crises that confront us.

This debate is also timely for me personally, as
it will be one of the last times that I have the honour
of representing the United States in the Chamber. For
the past eight years since he took office, President
Barack Obama has been committed to showing United
States leadership here at the United Nations. The
United Nations matters as the only global institution
dedicated to finding solutions to transnational threats
and challenges that all of us face. The Security Council
remains at the forefront.

The Council matters because 100,000 troops
and police are deployed worldwide on the basis of
our resolutions and our words. The Council matters
because we make international law, we set standards,
we authorize the use of force, we enable the delivery of
life-saving humanitarian aid, and we impose financial
sanctions and arms embargoes to address threats to
international peace and security. We help set the rules for
how States should behave. The Council matters because
when we come together, as others have noted, we can
respond to crises in ways no other institutions can.

But let us compare those capabilities with the
reality of the world around us - the reality of suffering
in places like Syria, South Sudan, Yemen, Libya, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Nigeria
and Mali. It is obvious that we, as the Council, can do
better. The question becomes this: When we have the
tools, the authority and such a strong partner in the
Secretary-General, what is holding us back? Why are
we not delivering more? I want to make four points to
explain how we, as members of the Security Council,
can show leadership to narrow the gap between what
this institution can achieve and where it has fallen
short, particularly as it relates to prevention.

First, if we are serious about preventing conflict,
the important principle of State sovereignty cannot
be a straitjacket to keep the Security Council and the
Secretary-General from taking necessary action to
respond to urgent, life-threatening crises. No Member
of the United Nations would suggest that we dispense
with respect for State sovereignty or that it is not an
essential bedrock of the international order. It is. The
United States aspires to a world of States that, as the
Charter of the United Nations States, should "live
together in peace with one another as good neighbours".

Countries must respect one another. It is a very
simple proposition. But sovereignty cannot be a shield
to prevent outside scrutiny over actions taken in
defiance of the principles in the Charter of the United
Nations. We have seen too many countries invoking
State sovereignty as a means of securing full impunity
for themselves - impunity to do what they want to their
own people, in defiance of the Charter, and impunity to
do what they want to do, ironically, to their neighbours,
in defiance of the Charter. In 2014, Russia violated the
sovereignty of another State Member of the United
Nations and current member of the Security Council,
Ukraine, by invading and then attempting to annex
Crimea, which Russia holds to this day. Yet Russia has
suggested in the Chamber - and probably will again
today - that failure to respect State sovereignty is the
main driver of conflict, even as Russia has used its veto
to insulate itself from consequences in the Council for
trampling on Ukraine's sovereignty.

The perversion of sovereignty undermines our
work in less obvious ways. Let us take peacekeeping.
We generally authorize peacekeepers only when
members of the Council see an imminent risk of mass
violence - too often, as has been noted, after attacks
have started. We are supposed to deploy Blue Helmets
to help people, but in some cases Council members
have suggested that peacekeepers should not do
anything without checking first with the Governments
that are responsible for harming their citizens, thereby
warranting the deployment of peacekeepers in the
first place.

In South Sudan, the Council authorized the urgent
deployment of the Regional Protection Force (RPF) for
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) last August to help restore security
in the capital. The Government accepted the force.
Five months later, not a single RPF soldier has been
deployed, even as Government forces have continued
killing civilians, used sexual violence as a systematic
weapon of war, and positioned themselves to carry
out large-scale mass atrocities. And the Government
routinely blocks UNMISS patrols, to a point where
UNMISS had to ask its permission to evacuate Chinese
peacekeepers - permission that was not forthcoming,
although the soldiers' lives hung in the balance. That
was sovereignty ofa perverse kind being exercised when
one of our own peacekeepers was in grave jeopardy.
Yet there has been no further action by the Council
showing South Sudan's leaders that such obstruction
has consequences.

I would like to anticipate the rebuttal to what I
am saying. Some will accuse the United States of also
invoking sovereignty when it is convenient. And in the
past, the United States has on occasion taken actions
that contradicted the principle that people should be
able to choose their own path. As President Obama
made clear when he took office, the United States
strives to lead by example. Sometimes we still fall short
of what we could achieve through deeper multilateral
cooperation. Indeed, we have a long-standing debate in
our Congress about international human rights treaties,
in which some argue that sovereignty precludes
ratifying treaties such as the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, even when United States law
already enshrines the treaty's standards. We strongly
believe that we are better off - and better - when
we strengthen the rule-based international order, and
that means living by the norms that protect all of our
common security and common humanity.

Secondly, if we are to sustain peace we first have to

tell things as they are. We as diplomats have developed a
lexicon of bureaucratic jargon that allows us to sidestep
the issues that we are supposed to be tackling. Our
statements in the Council fill up with empty phrases
at the moments that demand the greatest precision
and clarity. The result is that we often leave Security
Council meetings without even knowing what each of
us stands for. I recall all the times that our statements
in the Council have used the passive voice. We say that
dialogue must be pursued, violence must be ended, a
ceasefire must be respected. How? By whom? Who has
to do what? Let us be precise. We convene emergency
meetings of the Council to discuss attacks by one party
on another, but instead of doing the obvious - telling
that party to stop - we dodge. We use the phrase
"all parties" when we actually mean "one party". We
resort to lines such as "There is no military solution",
rather than identifying the actors who are pursuing a
military solution.

Of course, words alone are not enough to stop
suffering on the ground, but identifying who is
responsible for abuses and violations of the Charter
of the United Nations, in public, in the Council, is at
least a modest form of accountability and an antidote to
impunity. It may have some deterrent effect. It at least
puts those responsible for violence on notice that we are
watching. Now, I acknowledge that naming names can
be harder for some countries than it is for a permanent
member of the Security Council such as the United
States. I completely understand those countries that
say that they are afraid of retribution if they call out a
larger, more powerful country for its actions. But that
is precisely the reason to speak up, because all Member
States are collectively more secure in a world where big
and small Governments alike are held accountable for
their actions.

Similarly, many on the Council focus on the
importance of consensus. Again, for diplomats that
is an understandable impulse and, as I said at the
outset, we are so much stronger when we are united.
But if our only goal is consensus, the risk is a lowest-
common-denominator solution. That balance is tricky.
In November, for example, when the Council renewed
the mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism to investigate the use of chemical weapons
in Syria (see S/PV.7815), the United States spent weeks
in painstaking negotiations with Russia on the terms.
There was a similar negotiation process with China on
the toughest-ever sanctions imposed on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea after the Kim Jong Un
regime conducted two nuclear tests this year (resolution 2321 (2016)). But in both cases the resolutions were
valuable, not only because the Council adopted them
unanimously but because of their impact - attributing
responsibility for chemical-weapons use in Syria
and cutting off sources of revenue to the nuclear
and ballistic-missile programmes of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

We can contrast that with the recent Council
resolution 2336 (2016), on Syria, aimed at monitoring
evacuations from eastern Aleppo. We can trumpet
reaching consensus on that resolution, but we have to
be careful not to miss the point. The resolution was
adopted at the very end of a merciless military assault
on Aleppo by Russia and the Al-Assad regime, after
Russia had twice used its veto to block calls for a
ceasefire that would have saved countless lives. I want
to be clear today that we are rooting wholeheartedly
for the efforts that Russia and Turkey are making to
achieve a ceasefire, and we agree with Russia that
we in the Council should do what we can to support
that effort. Anything that could save lives or reduce
violence is something that we should look at and offer
to support. But again, consensus is not the measure of
our success. That measure is our impact and whether,
given the articulation of a ceasefire, the Al-Assad
regime has in fact stopped bombing civilian areas,
notably the Damascus suburbs and Idlib, where such
attacks continue as we sit here.

Thirdly, we as Member States should empower the
Secretary-General and his team to do theirjobs. Part of
that means encouraging the Secretary-General to bring
issues to the Council's attention, and the United States
therefore strongly supports the Secretary-General's use
of Article 99 of the Charter, so that he can more actively
warn the Council, early and often, when he believes it
is warranted. Of course, that means that the Secretary-
General deserves respect for the decisions he takes in
order to manage the Organization.

Let us consider the issue of sexual exploitation
and abuse in peacekeeping missions, which Secretary-
General Guterres has already made a top priority
through the creation of a new task force. That is an issue
where we ought to agree that the Secretary-General
must be able to do everything possible to stamp out this
scourge, including by repatriating the units responsible
for widespread and systematic abuses. Resolution 2272
(2016), adopted last year, endorsed the then-Secretary-
General's decision to use that authority. But we should
remember that during those negotiations, several
Council members focused instead on how to limit the
Secretary-General's powers to send troops home. We
should think about that - countries that responded
to the issue of sexual exploitation by trying to tie the
Secretary-General's hands. That was their focus, not
the protection of potential victims.

A similar principle should apply for holding
peacekeepers accountable for implementing their
mandates. We were all very concerned when UNMISS
personnel were either incapable of or unwilling to
respond to calls for help after South Sudanese soldiers
attacked the Terrain compound in July. If, however, we
demand more from the United Nations in sustaining
peace, we must respect the Secretary-General's
decisions - including his personnel decisions - to
strengthen systems that fall short. The United States
claims no special exemption here when it comes to
empowering the Secretary-General. We supported the
selection of Antonio Guterres precisely because he was
independent-minded and prepared to stand up for the
principles of the United Nations Charter and against
bullying and lawlessness among Member States.

I would like to make a final point about how we can
push ourselves to use our capabilities as the Security
Council in order to promote peace. We have to look for
ways to hear from the actual people whose lives our
decisions affect. Here in the Council, or over at the
General Assembly, it is still out of the ordinary to hear
a voice that is not that of a diplomat or bureaucrat. So
our discussions become sterile. We lose sight of the
human stakes that should drive our work. One might
think that the unprecedented number of trips that the
Security Council has taken in recent years would help us
understand what actual people are facing - and they do
help. But during those trips, believe it or not, we spend
too much time sitting in formal, scripted conversations
in conference room after conference room. Incredibly,
some Member States here in New York want even less
access for representatives of civil society to come in and
share different perspectives. They fight accreditation
requests to the Non-Governmental Organization
Committee of the Economic and Social Council in
order to block non-governmental organizations from
being part of United Nations deliberations.

As Permanent Representative for the past three
and a half years, I know that the Council's richest,
most meaningful exchanges have come when we have
heard from real people - when Nadia Murad Basee
Taha, a Yazidi woman trafficked by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), implored the Council to
take action because ISIL, in her words, was using rape
"to ensure that women could never again lead a normal
life" (S/PV. 7585, p. 6); or when Dr. Zaher Sahloul
returned from eastern Aleppo to relay the pleas of the
city's doctors that wounded children be allowed to be
evacuated; or when Jackson Niamah, a Liberian health-
care worker, briefed the Council (see S/PV.7268), at the
height of the Ebola crisis, on the anguish of turning
away infected patients and their children for a lack
of supplies and beds. When we on the Council show
leadership and put people at the centre of our decisions,
the effect is powerful. It can change minds.

We, as Council members, have helped keep people
safe by adopting resolutions to cut off financing for
terrorist organizations and to rally the world to stop the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters. We helped enforce
a rule against the use of chemical weapons when
we adopted a resolution to dismantle the Al-Assad
regime's stockpile of chemical weapons. We helped
protect people from ethnic killings by deploying
peacekeepers to the Central African Republic when a
genocide seemed imminent. We helped set up a novel
United Nations mission to fight the Ebola outbreak in
West Africa, after delivering a wake-up call by holding
our first-ever emergency meeting on a public health
crisis here in the Council. The point is that the Council
is essential. It is an essential tool for promoting a more
peaceful world. But we need to work far harder and
dig deep within ourselves to make sure that we use the
capabilities at our disposal to help those who need us.

