Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): The civil war in Angola has
gone on for too long, at enormous cost to the country. The
fratricidal conflict has caused thousands of deaths and
resulted in considerable material damage that has sapped
the fragile economy and diverted energy from economic
and social development. We have had a generation of
Angolans who have known nothing but war, starting from
the struggle for independence. Angola, a country that is
well endowed with human and natural resources, has never
had the peace and stability necessary to develop its vast
potentials for the fulfilment of the socio-economic
aspirations of its people. Instead of having one of the
greatest economies of Africa, Angola is today one of the
least developed countries in the world.

It was unfortunate that the cold war exacerbated and
for so long prevented a resolution of this conflict. The cold
war ended over five years ago, and the peace dividends
have reached southern African countries such as, Namibia,
Mozambique and South Africa. Sadly this is taking a very
long time to occur in Angola.

 

In recent years, the relatively positive developments
in Angola, along with the active support and participation
of the international community, particularly the United
Nations, the troika of observer States, the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and neighbouring States, have
produced the framework for a peaceful resolution of the
crisis. The Lusaka Protocol of 4 November 1994, a
product of painstaking and arduous negotiations, provides
the basis for a peaceful settlement of the crisis. And we
have devoted a lot of political efforts and financial
resources, including the deployment of the largest United
Nations peacekeeping operation today, towards the full
implementation and realization of the provisions of the
Protocol.

Regrettably, however, the Angolan peace process is
being implemented in fits and starts, largely due to the
continued intransigence of UNITA. The latest report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Angola, for
which we are grateful, contains a catalogue of broken
promises, half-hearted implementation and non-
compliance, mostly if not entirely by UNITA, of the
obligations assumed under the peace accords, particularly
the Lusaka Protocol. The string of breaches and violations
have accumulated to a point where the Secretary-General,
in his latest report, observed that UNITA must now
decide whether it will implement in good faith all its
commitments under the peace agreements. This
observation, although in the characteristically restrained
Secretariat tone, raises serious concerns for my
delegation, including grave doubts about whether the
UNITA leadership genuinely intends to help remove the
last blight of conflict from that part of Africa.

The people of Angola and the entire southern
African region expect and earnestly hope for peace, and
rightly so. The international community has also expended
considerable resources and continues to do so, and thus
can legitimately insist that nothing should be allowed to
jeopardize the commendable and considerable gains that
have been made in the peace process. We have
undoubtedly witnessed many positive developments and
tremendous progress in the peace process, in spite of the
grudging compliance with the provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol, usually after protracted delays and last-minute
concessions.

For example, the ceasefire has generally been
holding, and the process of quartering UN ITA troops has
been largely accomplished. So too is the quartering of the
rapid reaction police of the Government of Angola, the
promulgation of the amnesty law, the demining of roads

 

and the expansion of humanitarian assistance coverage.
There have been four important face-to-face talks between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi, in addition to a
series of high-level contacts and interactions between the
civilian and military officials of both sides. These are no
mean achievements considering where we were in 1992 and
1993. Unfortunately, the peace process is well behind
schedule; the continuing stalemate is very worrisome. While
the Government of Angola has continued to bend over
backwards to fulfil its side of the bargain and accommodate
the concerns of UNITA, we note with grave concern the
continuing delays by UNITA in fulfilling its obligations in
line with the Lusaka Protocol, inter alia by failing to hand
over heavy weapons to United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III), procrastinating on the
incorporation of UNITA troops into the unified Angolan
Armed Forces, obstructing the extension of State
administration throughout the country, and restricting
UNAVEM. III activities, including demining operations.

Faced with this situation and in keeping with the
increasing involvement of regional and subregional
organizations in the resolution of conflicts in their
respective areas, we note with satisfaction the outcome of
the recent meeting of the Southern African Development
Community's (SADC) Organ on Politics, Defence and
Security, held on 2 October, which considered the critical
situation in Angola, particularly ways of energizing and
reinvigorating the peace process. We share the
disappointment of the Secretary-General over the absence
of Mr. Savimbi from that meeting, and regret the
opportunity that was missed for a face-to-face dialogue with
President Dos Santos.

We therefore call on UNITA to respond positively and
promptly to all the appeals that have been made to it by
well-meaning African and other world leaders. We equally
call on those with leverage with the Angolan parties and
bearing special responsibility for the events in Angola to
bring their weight to bear in favour of full cooperation with
the peace process by both parties, particularly UNITA. In
this regard, we note with special delight the continued
declared commitment of UNITA to the peace process and
the Lusaka Protocol. My Government therefore urges Mr.
Savimbi to take steps, as a matter of urgency, to bring up
to date UNITA's implementation of the key military and
political issues, including UNITA's contributions to the
formation of a new FAA, the inclusion of UNITA generals
in the armed forces high command, the return of UNITA
deputies to Lusaka and the acceptance of a position within
the Angolan Government. It is also important for there to

 

be another meeting between President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi as soon as possible.

We have listened to the briefing of the SADC
Foreign Ministers, and while we believe that further
pressure should be brought to bear on UNITA to deliver
on its commitments, we would want a little more time to
be given to enable the UNITA leadership to restore our
faith in its expressed desire for peace. However, failure
on its part to respond accordingly would lead my
delegation to support the new additional measures that
have been proposed by SADC, including the strict
compliance with and implementation by Member States
of the measures contained in section B of resolution 864
(1993). We remain hopeful, however, that UNITA and
Mr. Savimbi will make the imposition of those measures
unnecessary by implementing, in good faith and without
further delay, all their commitments under the various
peace agreements. The international community demands
this of Mr. Savimbi. The people of Angola, and indeed all
of Africa, desperately hope for such a positive response.

Concerning the renewal of the mandate of
UNAVEM. III, while my delegation does not usually
favour short periods of renewal for ongoing United
Nations undertakings, in this instance we see some merit
in the recommendation of the Secretary-General for a
two-month renewal so as to keep the pressure on the
parties, in particular UNITA.

