Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, let
me congratulate you, Sir, for organizing this debate,
considering the importance of the issue to the core
mandate of the Security Council, namely, the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Let me also thank Under-Secretary-General
Tanaka for his presentation and the representatives of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the World Customs Organization (WCO)
for their briefings.

Although the international community's resolve
to overcome the twin scourge of terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction has
yielded some modest results, it has failed to assuage
concerns over that foremost threat to global peace and
security. The fear of terrorists' acquiring and using
weapons of mass destruction has become more serious
given the current growing interest in civilian nuclear
programmes.

It is against that backdrop that my delegation
considers resolution 1540 (2004) to be a landmark
document that addresses a formidable challenge to
global security in the twenty-first century. Although it
is not a panacea for containing weapons of mass
destruction proliferation, the resolution seeks to close a
critical gap by preventing the acquisition of such
weapons by non-State actors.

The maximum gains that resolution 1540 (2004)
seeks to achieve can be realized only through
adherence to and implementation of its provisions.
Three years since its inception, the Committee
established pursuant to the resolution has made
significant strides in the discharge of its onerous
responsibility. Through its outreach programmes and
participation in workshops and seminars, it has
sensitized the international community, increased
awareness of the importance of the resolution, and
encouraged and assisted countries to fulfil their
obligations. The Committee's efforts have yielded
positive dividends, with about 135 countries having
submitted their first reports and 85 identified as
providing additional information. While we welcome
that positive development, we should be mindful of the
fact that the resolution enjoys universal support and
was adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter, which
obliges all Member States to comply faithfully and
fully with its provisions. Thus, nothing short of
universal adherence is expected and acceptable.

Having successfully endorsed an elaborate work
programme, we hold the View that 2007 should be a
year of implementation if we are to make substantial
progress. Given the tremendous efforts still required, it
is vital that the Committee adopt strategies that would
enhance efforts towards fulfilling its mandate.

As the Committee pursues efforts to ensure the
submission of first reports by all Member States, it is
our candid view that equal attention should be focused
on implementation, since resolution 1540 (2004) is
also suffering from an implementation deficit within
and between countries. After all, the crux of the
resolution is for States to ensure that adequate
measures have been instituted to address the threat of
non-State actors' acquiring and using weapons of mass
destruction. If we do not focus our attention on its
implementation, the resolution may remain a mere
declaration as States make minimal efforts at
compliance, while achieving little improvements in
global control over the proliferation of the world's
most heinous weapons. We will, however, be the first
to admit that, given the gamut of control elements
within resolution 1540 (2004) and the disparate
resources among countries, even a satisfactory
universal level of implementation will take years, if not
decades, to accomplish.

The ideal of international control over the spread
of weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors
requires a strategy that would counter the current
challenges in order to remove the limitations to
universality. The resolution recognized that reality and
provided tools that should be used effectively for that
purpose, such as the provision of assistance to less
endowed States. It is my delegation's strong View,
however, that despite its tireless efforts, the 1540
Committee with its current mandate lacks the capacity
to provide the requisite assistance needed to attain the
long-term lofty goal of full implementation of all the
provisions of the resolution by all States. It would need
the support of relevant international and regional
organizations that have the technical expertise in that
sphere, such as IAEA, OPCW and WCO. The
resolution recognized that crucial factor when it called,
among other things, for the intensification of
cooperation with international and regional
organizations on the issue. We are therefore pleased to
note that, in the Committee's new work programme,
priority has been placed on that relationship.

The Committee's role as a clearing house for
assistance has grave limitations that should be
addressed through active partnership with IAEA, since
the latter also provides assistance to States on the
prevention of nuclear materials and related
technologies falling into the hands of non-State actors
and offers legal and technical advice to States on
adherence to and implementation of international
instruments relevant to enhancing protection against
nuclear terrorism. Again, not only has its safeguards
regime provided a degree of security in itself, but its
efforts to address safety and security - especially
security measures put in place under the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material - have
enhanced control over nuclear materials and facilities.
Moreover, the Agency is considering offering
legislative assistance to support States in their
development of a comprehensive nuclear law
governing a range of control measures, including
nuclear safeguards and physical protection, a cardinal
obligation under resolution 1540 (2004).

It is also imperative that the current relationship
with OPCW be strengthened within the realm of
chemical weapons aspects under resolution 1540
(2004). The organization has a wealth of experience
and expertise which could be of tremendous assistance
to the Committee and the implementation of the
resolution. IAEA and OPCW could also assist in
ascertaining the implementation of obligations by
States during field visits by its experts to countries.

In the same vein, the 1540 Committee could also
benefit from the useful information and expertise of the
World Customs Organization regarding good customs
practices, dual-use goods, labelling requirements, and
how best to accomplish non-proliferation goals without
disrupting global trade.

My delegation also welcomes the recognition by
the Committee of the need to forge close partnerships
with regional organizations, such as the European
Union, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the
Caribbean Community, the Organization of American
States, the League of Arab States and the African
Union. Those institutions have the appropriate
mechanisms for the pooling of resources for the
implementation of such obligations under resolution
1540 (2004) as border controls and illicit financial
networks within the regional context. Given their
respective characteristics, they are able to develop
more effective and contextually-driven means to fulfil
the obligations of resolution 1540 (2004), rather than
simply transplanting measures from States with
different values and cultures. Moreover, such bodies
can place the fulfilment of the resolution on the
regional agenda and thereby promote its universal
adherence by all States in the region. While we support
the current engagement with some of those bodies, we
call on the Committee to extend such partnerships to
other regional groups.

Finally, the coming months will be critical for the
Committee, since its report to the Council at the end of
its mandate will determine whether its efforts meet the
general expectations of the international community.
However, its success will also be a reflection of the
commitment of Member States to abide by their
obligations. We should work together collectively to
keep the world's most dangerous weapons from the
hands of the most dangerous individuals and groups.
That is a challenge we must strive to overcome if we
are to save humankind from a catastrophe of
unprecedented and unimaginable magnitude.

Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement that the President's delegation has kindly
prepared.

