Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate and
for this opportunity to speak before the Council. We
join others in congratulating the United States on its
assumption of the presidency.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/339)
describes exhaustively and in detail the dire situation
of children recruited, killed, maimed and violated by
groups in situations of armed conflict. My Government
reaffirms its resolve to protect children and their rights
in situations of armed conflict. We note the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict. The international
community must exert its utmost efforts to protect
children, particularly those in extremely difficult
situations.

My Government continues to work steadfastly
to protect our children. Last march, the Philippine
Government under the Aquino Administration signed
with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front the historic
Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro,
presaging greater peace, progress and prosperity for
the southern Philippines. That concrete result of our
commitment to the peace process was achieved through
hard work with our domestic stakeholders and with the
support of the international community. We must all
do our part to ensure that the vision ofthe Bangsamoro
is fully achieved. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, working with the Philippine
Government, can help build on that achievement by
working closely to delist the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front.

President Aquino also signed executive order
No. 138 in 2013, which provides for the establishment
of the Monitoring, Reporting, and Response System for
Grave Child Rights Violations in Situations of Armed
Conflict. The Response System serves as a monitoring
arm of the children and armed conflict programme
framework. Its primary objective of prevention and
timely response falls squarely within the overall agenda
of the Philippine Government to protect Filipino
children.

We acknowledge the due recognition given to the
positive developments that have taken place in the
Philippines. Those institutional and legal developments
need to be appreciated within the larger context of
inclusive and sustainable growth and the peace and
development agenda of my country. The United Nations
should be mindful that the work for children should
also support the good work that is being done on peace
processes such as those in my country.

The Philippines continues to work very closely
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. More frequent and regular
interaction and deeper engagement by the Special
Representative with stakeholders, including with
Member States Missions to the United Nations, may
help move the relevant processes forward and help
identify possible solutions to outstanding issues. Such
interaction may further help the Special Representative
in the preparation of a balanced, impartial and candid
report.

In the same vein, the Philippines reiterates the
Non-Aligned Movement's position that we should all
continue to work closely to ensure that the reports issued
by the Special Representative and that the documents
emanating from the Working Group are based on
clear, accurate, current and verifiable data. It is, after
all, that data that provide the basis for the Secretary-
General's reports and upon which all comments and
recommendations are based.

My Government has stressed this before and will
continue to stress this point: gaps in the monitoring
process should be addressed and efforts be made
continuously to improve the reporting process, including
through enhanced cooperation and coordination
between the countries concerned and the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict and the Working Group.

Likewise, the listing and delisting criteria for parties
should be clear, transparent, objective and balanced. As
the Philippines has stated before, the Security Council
may wish to assess the level of commitment, the reach
of mechanisms and the efforts and outcomes on the
ground as indicators for the delisting of parties. As we
remain focused on those goals, the Security Council
may wish to consider a stronger focus on how delisting
can work to encourage and sustain the efforts to protect
children in armed conflict.

It would in fact be an indication of failure on the part
of the Security Council and the United Nations if the
lists continued to expand. There should be movement
in, and subsequent graduation from, the lists so that the
Council and the Office of the Special Representative
can dedicate precious resources and energy to those
situations requiring urgent utmost attention. Let the
appropriate United Nations agencies do their job in
securing the improvement of situations for children.

It is important as well that the discussion of the
issue of persistent perpetrators be in keeping with
the mandate of the Security Council and its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The current
monitoring efforts also must be in keeping with
paragraph 2 (d) of resolution 1612 (2005), which
"stresses that any dialogue established under
the framework of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism by United Nations entities with
non-State armed groups in order to ensure protection
for and access to children must be conducted in the
context of peace processes where they exist and
the cooperation framework between the United
Nations and the concerned Government".

Allow me to reiterate the position of the Philippine
Government. We value the sanctity of every human
life. We need to protect each life, particularly those
of our children and youth. Our position is unchanged.
The situation in the Philippines does not warrant any
inclusion or mere mention in the report. It is our hope
that the concrete developments and the concerns we
have expressed, particularly on data and reporting, will
be taken into full account in subsequent reports. The
Philippines offers more positive lessons learned and
points to advancements - not setbacks - that warrant
our exclusion from the list.

For its part, the Philippine Government will
continue to do its utmost to sustain its accomplishments
in advancing and protecting the welfare of our children,
and to work even more vigorously to help ensure that our
children grow up safely and without fear to become the
people they want to be. The children are our posterity
and need all our help. Let us help them in the best way
that we can.

