The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Angola.

I should like to start by expressing my
appreciation to Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and to
Mr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), for their
comprehensive briefings on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1308 (2000) - an
important step taken by the Security Council in
addressing the AIDS pandemic and responding to the
international community's great concern about this
very sensitive issue.

The goals set out in the resolution of ensuring
responsible and safe behaviour among humanitarian
staff and peacekeeping troops and promoting their
awareness of preventive measures, as well as the call
for increased collaboration among national
organizations and those in uniform and the integration
of their activities into broader national responses are,
in my delegation's view, important strategies for the
achievement of progress in the global fight against the
HIV/AIDS pandemic.

We commend the efforts of United Nations
bodies, and in particular the ongoing commitment of
the Secretary-General, in the fight against AIDS. In
this context, the creation of the Global Fund was a far-
reaching initiative.

We also commend the efforts of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and UNAIDS to strengthen
international cooperation aimed at formulating
multisectoral and multifaceted responses to meet the
challenges ahead.

The AIDS pandemic is a health, development and
security issue. Because its impact is mainly on young
people, it has a devastating effect on reproductive
health. It has consequences for all levels of society -
families, communities, the productive sector and
nations as a whole.

The Southern African Development Community
Summit on HIV, held in Maseru, Lesotho, in July 2003,
noted that the impact of the pandemic in the region is
having consequences at the social and economic levels,
on families and on food security, and adopted a global
strategy to combat AIDS through the prevention of new
infections and the mitigation of the effects of the
disease.

Angola has a rate of HIV infection of about 5 per
cent of the adult population - a relatively low rate
when compared with other countries in our region.
That relatively low rate of infection is due mainly to
the reduced movement of the population during the
long years of war. Now, given the situation of peace
and increased population mobility, the danger has
arisen of an explosion in the rate of infection. This
situation calls for a determined Government policy and
will require the support of the international community
in order to ensure that Angola can benefit from
achievements made elsewhere to contain the pandemic.

In this regard, I would like to assure the Council
that the issue of HIV/AIDS is at the top of our list of
concerns and priorities and under consideration at the
highest level of Government. Translating this
commitment into reality, the President of the Republic,
in line with resolutions adopted at the special session
of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS, the Durban
Conference and the 2001 Abuja Conference, has taken
the lead in the fight against the pandemic in Angola by
coordinating the National Commission to fight
HIV/AIDS.

A special fund has been established to fight AIDS
and the other major epidemics. The national strategy
has been reformulated in line with the new challenges
resulting from the attainment of peace. The response to
new challenges include, among other actions, the
intensification of education and prevention
programmes, better treatment, including the provision
of antiretroviral therapies, better care and assistance for
orphans and vulnerable groups and advances in the
fight against stigmatization and discrimination.

Many nations are facing increased difficulties in
recruiting for the armed forces with a View to ensuring
their national defence. The AIDS pandemic became a
serious national security problem with unforeseeable
but surely very grave consequences for many countries.
Global mobilization to face that tremendous security
threat is an imperative to which my country fully
subscribes. The Angolan armed forces have been
specifically targeted in the national strategic policies to
fight AIDS. We are counting on this effort with the
assistance of the United States Department of Defense
under the premise that we must run faster than the
epidemic. Under this cooperation programme, massive
testing of uniformed personnel is being conducted. An
AIDS prevention plan among the military has been
established. Information and education campaigns are
being set up and condoms are being freely distributed.
The armed forces have been taking a leading role in
information and education campaigns of vulnerable
groups with military personnel being trained as
educators.

An enormous challenge lies ahead for Angola.
However, a determined prevention programme has
been set in motion and we are sure that it will bear
positive results in the near future if the Angolan
military continues to benefit from sustained
international assistance - the programme sponsored
by the United States Department of Defense being an
exemplary model for other international partners. This
programme is working and producing tangible results
in the fight against the AIDS pandemic in Angola.

The Angolan authorities have expressed a
willingness to participate, particularly with the
Angolan armed forces involved in peacekeeping
operations. The awareness campaign that we are
conducting can be characterized by this objective: to
ensure that the standards for the Angolan armed forces
are in line with the standards set for participation in
peacekeeping operations.

To conclude, it is our conviction that success in
the fight against the AIDS pandemic depends on
international cooperation and on practical and effective
steps that all States should take to implement the
commitments on HIV/AIDS. The pandemic is
spreading at an alarming speed. It is a threat to survival
in a large number of the most affected societies and a
threat to security. We must run faster than the
pandemic if we are to succeed.

I now return to my position as President of the
Security Council and I would like to give the floor to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno to respond to some of the
comments and suggestions made by the members of the
Council.

