I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address the Council in the presence of Her Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic, Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon. The invitation extended to us is once again another demonstration of the growing partnership and cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union in the area of peace and security in Africa. At the outset, allow me to express the African Union's solidarity with the Government and people of the Central African Republic in their efforts to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global pandemic. Since the outbreak of the virus in the Central African Republic in March of this year, the Government has taken a number of measures to contain the spread of the virus. We commend the Government's relentless efforts despite many challenges. I wish to also take this opportunity to salute the solidarity shown by some African countries by providing testing kits and other forms of assistance. The African Union, through the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, will continue to lead the way in providing a consistent response across the continent. Although the pandemic has delayed the implementation of some important provisions of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, the preparations for the elections have continued uninterrupted. On 5 June, the Constitutional Court of the Central African Republic issued a ruling that there will be no extension of the presidential mandate due to the coronavirus, ending a debate that had pitted the ruling party against the opposition. The decision of the Constitutional Court is a demonstration that the institutions of the Central African Republic are coming of age, and this is a development that should be welcomed. Meanwhile, I am pleased to note that, following the Court's decision, the Government as well as political stakeholders are now engaged in the preparations for the elections in accordance with the electoral calendar. Although the country, particularly the National Electoral Authority, will still require support for its electoral process, there is no doubt that it will be possible to hold the upcoming elections within the constitutional deadlines. In that regard, it is important for the Government to submit to the parliament an organic law that will ensure the renewal of the National Electoral Authority's term, which expires on 23 December 2020, so as to avoid a vacuum. In that same context, we welcome the promulgation by President Touadera on 11 June of the law establishing the pension plan granted to former Presidents, which is part of the recommendations of the Political Agreement. This will go a long way towards the promotion of national reconciliation. We further welcome the meeting held in January between the President of the Central African Republic, Faustin Archange Touadera, and the four former Presidents - Mr. Michel Djotodia, Ms. Catherine Samba-Panza, Mr. Francois Bozize Yangouvonda and Mr. Alexandre Ferdinand Nguendet. It is our hope that other important legislation regarding political reforms will be submitted to the parliament ahead of the elections. After three months of suspension due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Executive Monitoring Committee of the agreement was able to hold its eighth session, on 22 May, to take stock of the implementation of the Agreement. The general consensus is that significant progress has been made, in particular, with regard to the adoption and enactment of all the laws provided for in the agreement, preparations for the launch of the major disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, and the installation of special mixed security units camps in the north-eastern and south- eastern parts of the country. Allow me to highlight some important achievements, notably, first, the deployment of the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic and defence and security forces in several localities, including Birao and Ndele; secondly, the deployment of the first group of the African Union (AU) military observers in Bangui, which will later be deployed at the same time as special mixed security unit elements in the north-west; thirdly, the restoration of State authority and deployment of prefects and sub-prefects; fourthly, collaboration between the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic and peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in several provinces of the country to protect populations and restore order and State authority; fifthly, improved collaboration and permanent consultation among the Government, guarantors and facilitators in the search for solutions to inter-communal conflicts through facilitation and mediation; and sixthly, the facilitation of the delivery of humanitarian assistance and the launch of several quick-impact projects. As part of the continuous and concerted joint efforts of the AU, the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the United Nations and the European Union (EU) in support of the peace process, ECCAS Secretary-General Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi, United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations Jean- Pierre Lacroix, European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Mr. Josep Borrell and I held a virtual meeting with the President of the Central African Republic, Faustin Archange Touadera, on 8 June to take stock of the progress and challenges. The AU, ECCAS, the United Nations and the EU recommitted to redoubling their efforts to assist the CAR to consolidate peace. Despite progress on the political front, there has been an increase in security incidents involving some of the signatory armed groups to the peace agreement. Incidents were reported in Ndele, Bambouti and Obo, where armed groups clashed with each other, in some instances exacerbating existing intercommunal violence, particularly in the north-eastern and north-western parts of the country. The AU is also deeply concerned by the recent coordinated attacks perpetrated by armed men, on 9 June, in the prefectures of Nana-Mambere and Ouham-Pendee, in particular in Bouar, against the special mixed security unit training camp, and in Pougol, against the checkpoint of the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic and MINUSCA, localities of the north-west of the country, which caused several injuries, including to two peacekeepers and members of the special mixed security unit who were in the process of being deployed following their training in May. As mentioned on numerous occasions, the AU, as one of the two guarantors, with ECCAS, of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, is determined to continue its efforts to reach out to all the signatories who still profess their commitment to the agreement in order to understand what is behind the resurgence of violence. We shall leave no stone unturned. The crisis in the Central African Republic has impacted the region and we will continue to encourage the involvement of the neighbouring countries in implementing the agreement. We welcome the establishment of joint committees by the Central African Republic and some of its neighbours. It is more urgent than ever to take appropriate measures to guarantee not only the free movement of goods and people, but also the fight against all forms of trafficking, which could jeopardize peace and security in the region. The humanitarian situation in the country demands the attention of the international community. More than 697,000 internally displaced persons, in addition to 616,000 refugees from the Central African Republic in neighbouring countries, still require immediate assistance. In the time of COVID-19, their plight is even more precarious. In conclusion, one year on from the signing of the peace agreement, progress has been recorded in its implementation, elections are being prepared and there is no doubt that the Government has expanded State authority across the country. Despite security challenges, I believe that the majority of signatories to the agreement remain committed to the accord. The active partnership between the AU, United Nations, ECCAS and the EU on this matter has yielded tangible results. The AU, however, is under no illusions: the task ahead remains fraught with many difficulties. In the end, a peace process is always a marathon, not a sprint.
