Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Kalomoh; the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme, Mr. Mark Malloch
Brown; and the Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Carolyn McAskie, for their introductory
statements.

I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized the Arria-formula meeting held last
week with non-governmental organizations, which
provided us with a great deal of interesting
information.

My delegation is honoured and pleased that once
again the Foreign Minister of Chile was in the Chair,
presiding over our meeting. I also express my
delegation's satisfaction that you yourself, Sir, presided
over the work that led to this open debate on a subject
proposed, in a very timely manner, by the delegation of
Chile. This is certainly a question that merits - and
demands - close attention. National reconciliation
represents the culmination of the Security Council's
work when considering a conflict situation.

(spoke in English)

It has by now been widely accepted that the
United Nations has a major role to play not only in the
resolution and immediate aftermath of conflict
situations, but also in conceiving and conducting long-
term post-conflict initiatives, such as demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration and the restructuring of
the police, armed forces and the judicial system.
Beyond conflict resolution and stabilization lies the
long road towards development, democratization and
the strengthening of the rule of law. There is much that
the Security Council can do with a view to achieving
those objectives, particularly if it makes more
extensive use of the provision contained in Article 65
of the Charter and seeks the collaboration of the
Economic and Social Council - as it has done in the
cases of Guinea-Bissau and Burundi, with some
success.

We believe that reconciliation efforts are
compromised when the legacy of past violence is left
unaddressed. National reconciliation is the best way for
divided countries to confront threats to their stability
and to promote and build durable peace and viable
democratic institutions and practices. The role of the
United Nations in post-conflict national reconciliation
has not received nearly as much attention as it merits.
The reticence as regards a more focused United
Nations approach to this subject is perhaps due in part
to its utter complexity.

National reconciliation depends on many
diversified factors and is riddled with challenges. No
single model is applicable. What works in one case
does not necessarily work in another. In each
experience, the dynamic is different, but studies show
that successfully reconciled societies usually undergo
an extensive process of truth, justice, reparation and
the re-establishment of identities.

Closely related to the matter of justice, the search
for truth is central to the process. Information is not
only unveiled, but also publicly recognized, and
findings are widely disseminated. Truth commissions
provide a public platform for victims and create
common understanding. Ideally, their findings should
inform the progress towards justice and lead to
constructive recommendations on legal and
institutional reform.

Aside from institution-building aspects - which
often entail the training of judges and lawyers - an
adequate balance should be struck. When Sergio Vieira
de Mello addressed the Council in January 2002 as
Transitional Administrator for East Timor, his
assessment was that

"Long-term peace and stability will depend
on the degree to which we can overcome the
legacy of violence by fostering and
facilitating reconciliation and by the effective
prosecution of serious crimes. Those efforts
should be viewed as interdependent". (S/PV.4462, 
p- 4)

In his understanding, a truth commission seeks the
truth about human rights violations and facilitates
community reconciliation. But it should not act as a
substitute for the judicial process.

As a matter of fact, in situations of post-conflict
national reconciliation the legacy of past violence must
be addressed, and a victim-centred approach is
certainly required. In most situations, one can identify
very clearly who the victims were and who the
offenders were. If, on the one hand, offenders must be
prosecuted for their crimes, so, on the other, the
limitations of prosecutorial methods must also be borne
in mind.

As the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, stressed
last year during the debate on justice and the rule of
law, "there cannot be real peace without justice"
(S/PV.4833, p. 3). At the same time, one has to agree
with his statement that "If we always and everywhere
insist on uncompromising standards of justice, a
delicate peace may not survive" (ibid.). The challenge
is to facilitate the reintegration of offenders and at the
same time bring a sense of justice to the victims,
breaking the cycle of impunity and defending the rule
of law without provoking a destabilizing backlash, with
political stability remaining precarious.

Given this context, the concept of restorative
justice has been gaining legitimacy as a middle ground
between retributive justice and a blanket pardon.
Restorative justice would rely on traditional arbitrators
and on a high degree of public participation, flexible
procedures, and social pressure as a means of
enforcement and accountability. Ideally, greater
emphasis should be placed on the acceptance of
responsibility and on the making of amends than on the
severity of the punishment meted out.

Restorative justice addresses the need to preserve
public order and to maintain a just peace. It cannot be
regarded as a panacea, and it certainly does not detract
from the work of the International Criminal Court and
the fight against impunity, both of which are of the
utmost relevance. It certainly merits the attention of the
United Nations and could be made a part of future
peace negotiations.

Restorative justice is a helpful concept, as it
focuses on undoing harm. In this regard, the timing of
the reparations made to victims is crucial. The re-
establishment of identities and a commitment to a new
social relationship are also highly important elements.
Groups are brought once again into the framework of
political interaction, and the military is, in most cases,
depoliticized.
Reconciliation does imply the striking of a
delicate balance between antagonists, within the
context of justice and truth-telling. An emphasis on
building trust is indispensable for reconciliation in
ravaged societies. Otherwise, great resentment may be
created that could lead to recidivism, a phenomenon
that could make the reconciliation process seem like a
continuous tightrope walk.

Each new national reconciliation effort requires a
deep immersion in the specific grievances of the
afflicted community, through the establishment of lines
of dialogue with the key actors, as well as -
incrementally - among them. The United Nations
cannot impose a durable peace; only victims and
perpetrators can strive to reconcile with one another.
The United Nations can, however - by positioning
itself as a neutral facilitator while clearly leaving the
ultimate responsibility for reconciliation in the hands
of the aggrieved population - establish favourable
conditions as well as offer political advice and valuable
technical assistance in the areas of justice and truth-
seeking.

On a concluding note, our delegation would like
to stress that, although there is no single model for
post-conflict reconciliation, and any effort will always
be subject to pitfalls, an integrated approach to the
process must nonetheless be sought and, to the extent
possible, woven into the work and mandates of the
United Nations as it endeavours to help war-torn
societies get back on their feet and achieve durable
peace.

