The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mukongo
Ngay (Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a
seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/493*, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2005/436, which contains the text of a
letter dated 26 July 2005 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo addressed to the President of
the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1616 (2005).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m.

