Mr. Tshibanda N'Tungamulongo (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I have heard
your call for brevity, Sir, but request your indulgence,
given that this is a statement from the country that hosts
the largest peacekeeping mission in the world.

First and foremost, I would like to commend you,
Mr. President, for convening today's meeting of the
Security Council on the important and relevant topic of
"Peace operations - facing asymmetrical threats", and
to thank you for inviting my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to participate. I also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson; the Secretary-General
of the International Organization of La Francophonie,
Ms. Michaelle Jean; and the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, for being here today and for
their excellent briefings.

The maintenance ofinternational peace and security
is not only central to the mission of the United Nations,
it is also the prerequisite for its success in development
efforts and the advancement of humankind. Regrettably,
the United Nations finds itself working to maintain
peace and security in a world where security threats
are constantly changing and increasingly complex.
The environment that prevailed in 1945, the year of the
Organization's founding, and the implementation of
peacekeeping operations have undergone fundamental
changes. Over time, the challenges that it must face
have increased in number and become ever-more
diverse. The conflict situations that the Organization is
called upon to manage today are very different from the
ones that it faced at the end of the Second World War.

At that time, conflicts were mainly inter-State
conflicts, which gave rise to ceasefire agreements that
peacekeeping missions were called upon to enforce.
Today's conflicts are characterized by asymmetrical and
unconventional threats that involve non-State actors,
illicit trafficking in drugs and weapons, war crimes
and crimes against humanity, and are often expressed
in the form of terrorism, violent extremism and cross-
border crime, which do not hesitate to use civilians as
human shields, making the environment and working
conditions for peace operations increasingly difficult.
The adversaries that peace operations face today are
lawless men, women and organizations that carry out
merciless acts, with no fear of dying. Their actions pose
a genuine threat to the safety and security of United
Nations staff, as we have witnessed in Mali and in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where the asymmetrical war being waged by the Allied
Democratic Forces-National Army for the Liberation of
Uganda has led to losses among the military and armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In such conditions, the three main principles for
the deployment of peacekeeping operations - namely,
the consent of the conflicting parties, impartiality and
the non-use of force - are increasingly difficult to
maintain. Such principles remain relevant to conflicts
between States, which are subjects of international law
and equal in sovereignty, but are, when dealing with
asymmetric threats, at the very least, anachronistic or
outdated, as if one expected criminals to act in good
faith and be willing to agree to their own neutralization
or elimination. What is worse is that such conflicts
make any serious efforts by peacekeeping operations
to restore or maintain peace unlikely and ineffective.
Peacekeepers are often compelled to justify their
inability to protect civilians or be proactive in defending
missions, which is simply an admission of our own lack
of political will or of our inability to implement the
reforms necessary to remain relevant.

Given the ever-greater number of casualties among
peacekeepers and the civilians to be protected, we must
take urgent and bold steps to uphold the traditional
philosophy of peacekeeping operations. Such measures
are to be developed within the United Nations and at
the level of its Member States, including troop- and
police-contingent contributors. The General Assembly,
the Security Council and United Nations agencies have
a crucial role to play in that regard. The United Nations
must ensure that the peace operations deployed in
conflict areas have mandates with rules of engagement
and the human and material capabilities necessary to
operate effectively, perform their tasks efficiently and
achieve the desired results. To that end, they must be
prepared to consider, if necessary - and this happens
more often than in the past - peace operations and
missions based on Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, with a more robust, even offensive,
mandate and greater operational flexibility that, if
need be, can impose peace and safeguard it under
all circumstances.

The United nations must consider equipping
peacekeeping missions with appropriate logistics and
substantial financial resources, as well as with civilian
and military personnel adapted to each mission. As
is the case with all armies, military personnel must
be ready to make the ultimate sacrifice, if necessary,
to fulfil their mandate. Although referred to as
peacekeepers, United Nations peacekeeping forces
must, if necessary, behave like real soldiers and be
perceived as such, rather than as police officers in
military uniform, in order to ensure their credibility,
which is essential. Given that their role in maintaining
peace and international security is irreplaceable, the
United Nations must avoid situations in which civilians
are killed while peacekeeping missions responsible for
protecting them have troops stationed nearby.

With respect to the civilian population, it is difficult
to understand how it happens that they have been
repeatedly attacked and massacred by hostile forces
and that the soldiers and peacekeepers, who are there
to protect them, have been unable to do so, regardless
of the technical and legal reasons involved. In the case
of my country, last August, just as before, the civilian
population - in Beni and throughout the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, specifically in Goma after the
city fell into the hands of the rebels of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) a few years ago - attacked the
installations and facilities of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), expressing their
frustration, their inability to understand and their
disapproval regarding the inability of the protectors
to act effectively, given the modus operandi of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. A number
of other peacekeeping missions throughout the world
have experienced similar problems with the local
civilian population.

While we wait for the nature and composition of
peacekeeping missions to change in order to enable
them to carry out military operations aimed at fighting
terrorism and at dealing successfully with asymmetric
wars, there is a need to increase the clout of those
missions by establishing units capable of performing
their tasks and by providing them with the new
generation of force multipliers.

The experience of my country is full of lessons
that can be learned. Indeed, the Intervention Brigade,
created within the framework of MONUSCO pursuant
to resolution 2098 (2013), has made it possible to
significantly increase the deterrent capacity of
the United Nations forces and to inflict a heavy
defeat on the ex-M-23 forces. That has contributed
to strengthening security in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and has restored the
credibility of MONUSCO from the point of View of the
civilian population. The same applies to the authorized
use by the Security Council of new technologies, such
as drones or unarmed, unmanned aerial vehicles that
significantly contribute to the collection of information
about the adversary and often strengthen the prevention
and intervention capacities of the Force.

Contrary to the provisions of the resolutions that
authorized those two advances, which stipulated that
the establishment of the Force Intervention Brigade, as
well as the use of drones, was authorized but only on an
exceptional basis and did not constitute a precedent, we
should be realistic and bold enough to consider a change
in the paradigm that would make those tools available
whenever the situation on the ground requires them.
That would be subject, of course, to the agreement of
the country where the Blue Helmets are to be deployed
and of the troop-contributing countries concerned.

Regardless of what improvements can be made to
support peace operations, the increasing complexity
and increasingly high cost of such operations underline
the fact that prevention remains the best option. In that
context, the Organization should, inter alia, bolster its
cooperation with Governments, as well as with regional
and subregional organizations, which play an important
role not only in creating partnerships for conflict
prevention and mediation, but also in establishing crisis
responses that are fast and effective, thanks to their
financially inexpensive nature. Such responses will be
effective because they will be based on the knowledge
of the specificities of the local environment.

The United Nations should continue its support
to the efforts of Member States to establish strong
institutions and strengthen democracy and the rule of
law, so as to support States, not replace them. More
specifically, there is a need to assist in the appropriation
and internalization of a culture of peace and the
universal values of tolerance and respect for others,
rather than the imposition on others of an agenda that
stems from New York. We need to bolster cooperation
and strengthen trust with the host country.

Peacekeeping operations are often deployed at the
invitation of or with the consent of the Government, so
as to facilitate the necessary cooperation between the
national security and defence forces and the forces of
the United Nations. Such operations are charged with
restoring peace, while avoiding getting in the way of
national forces and avoiding having such missions be
deployed ad infinitum with no hope of resolution.

The missions must go about their business in
compliance with the laws and institutions of the host
country; they must be seen as fundamentally transient.
They must also take an approach that is firmly focused
on the crisis and the restoration and consolidation of
the host State in its regulatory functions and its abilities
to meet the legitimate aspirations of its people. They
should therefore primarily contribute to the restoration
of State authority and the security of persons and
property, particularly through concerted programmes
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as through security-sector reform.

There is a need to draw upon the private sector
and to mobilize civil society as positive forces in the
development of a public conscience and the search
for a better life together, rather than exploit civil
society for nefarious purposes or use civil society to
oppose public authority, whether it is democratically
legitimate or not. All three of the elements that I
have outlined are important in order to maintain a
constructive partnership.

There is a need to deal quickly with situations
requiring international solidarity, especially in harsh
humanitarian crises. That would help to alleviate the
feelings of frustration and injustice or simply the reflex
behaviours that emerge in the search for survival and
often lead to violence. The adoption in September
2015 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) was an important
step in the efforts of the international community not to
leave anyone behind and to ensure that all inhabitants
of the world live happily and in peace.

It is necessary to respect international
commitments to which States have subscribed in order
to end all support for negative forces, break the supply
chains of those forces and discourage the pillaging
of natural resources, which is often at the root of
today's conflicts. That is all the more important since,
although inter-State wars have disappeared, some
countries continue to practice them under the cover
of the internal rebellions that they support. In many
cases, the negative forces, whose actions we deplore,
base themselves in neighbouring countries from which
they buy their weapons, ammunition and other tools
necessary for their operations.

In order to avoid such situations, the countries
of the Great Lakes region of Africa signed the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region in 2013
in Addis Ababa. We should act in accordance with the
principle of subsidiarity through continued cooperation
with the regions so as to promote the prevention and
resolution of crises, while uncompromisingly enforcing
international law.

I condemn the attacks against peacekeepers
regardless of their motivation. We remain convinced
that providing the soldiers of the United Nations with
the necessary support and equipment will ensure that
they are safe and secure and that they will have the
necessary means to provide security to the civilian
population, which is one of the most significant threats
that we face.

The complexity of the conditions in which
peacekeeping missions operate today requires
enhanced partnerships between all stakeholders,
including regional and subregional organizations, the
entire United Nations family, financial institutions and
international and regional donors and multilateral and
bilateral partners, not to mention the troop-contributing
and police-contributing countries. Only that level of
cooperation will allow us to collectively address the
challenges that we face today and those that we will
face in the coming years.

To conclude, let me express the gratitude of my
country for the commitment of peacekeepers, police
officers and civilian staff, who perform their Vital
tasks, often under difficult conditions, working to
implement the demanding mandates that the Security
Council entrusts to them. We salute the memory of
the thousands of men and women who have sacrificed
their lives in the exercise of their functions to the
United Nations in order to maintain international peace
and security. I am convinced that the best tribute we
can pay them is to learn the lessons of the past in order
to improve peacekeeping operations and ensure that
they are relevant and effective. That is why today's
meeting is so important, and I hope it will not remain
a dead letter.
