Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I am
taking the floor in my capacity as Chairman of the
Group of Arab States for the current month.

Permit me at the outset, on behalf of the Arab
Group, to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
urgent Security Council meeting to consider the
repeated Israeli aggressions in the Gaza Strip, in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. The Arab Group requested this meeting
following Israel's serious escalation of its military
operations in the occupied Palestinian territory at the
beginning of this month.

The latest Israeli aggression has led to the deaths
of more than 50 civilians and the injury of hundreds in
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank in one week. It has
destroyed vital infrastructure, in grave violation of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights. In particular, it represents a grave violation of
the relevant provisions of the 1949 Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilians in
Time of War. It also contravenes relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The consequences of Israel's military operations
affect many areas of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
Gaza has become a vast prison in which the people
have been shorn of their basic needs and their freedom
of movement, leading to a further deterioration of their
living conditions.

The excessive and unbalanced use of armed force
and other illegal practices of the occupation forces,
along with the targeting of civilian women during a
peaceful demonstration in Beit Hanoun, are proof that
the military campaign has exceeded its declared
objective. It falls within the context of policies of
killing, suppression, intimidation and collective
punishment implemented by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people. In seeking to
defend its civilians, Israel has no reason to resort to
such illegal and excessive practices or to act in
violation of humanitarian law, thereby hindering the
peace process.

It is truly confounding that the international
community should remain silent in the face of the
occupying Power's blatant and disproportionate
aggression against defenceless Palestinians. That
silence can only encourage Israel to commit further
offences against the Palestinian people, culminating in
the grave crime committed yesterday against civilians
in the sight of the entire world, in which artillery shells
were fired on a residential neighbourhood, killing
nearly 20 people and injuring more than 40, most of
them women and children, in continuation of the
violations repeatedly committed by the occupying
Power in the occupied territories, which have killed
more than 100 Palestinian children since the beginning
of the year.

Israel's ongoing flagrant violations of and
disregard for international law and the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council erode
the credibility of the Organization and instil frustration
and a sense of hopelessness that do not serve the
purposes of peace and stability in the Middle East. The
Council must therefore assume its responsibilities for
the maintenance of international peace and security and
urgently stem the violence in the occupied territories.
We also call on the Secretary-General to prepare a
report, to be submitted to the Security Council, on
Israel's ongoing aggression in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We further call for an immediate ceasefire
in the occupied territories and the dispatch of an
international observer force. Moreover, we ask the
Security Council to take definitive and concrete action
to revive the stagnant Middle East peace process on all
tracks, in accordance with the agreements reached to
date and in the light of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Arab peace initiative, the road map and
other terms of reference. We also call for full
guarantees and incentives for all parties to implement
those agreements and for the removal of all obstacles
to efforts to reach a lasting and comprehensive peace.
Finally, we would ask the Council to give serious
consideration to the draft resolution we have submitted
in that regard.

I now wish to speak in my national capacity and
to make a statement on behalf of the delegation of
Qatar.

At a time when the Palestinian people are
suffering a grave deterioration in their humanitarian
situation resulting from the blockade imposed upon
them by the Israeli occupation authorities, which have
failed to observe the most basic human rights, the
Israeli Government has escalated its military
operations in the Palestinian territories since the
beginning of this month, particularly in the Gaza Strip,
and in a manner that exceeds all expectations.

It has transformed the Gaza Strip into a virtual
battlefield and exposed its defenceless inhabitants,
including women, children and the elderly, to grave
danger, culminating yesterday in a massacre of
innocent civilians. Nearly 21 people were killed and
more than 55 injured, most of them women, children
and the elderly, in Beit Hanoun, in violation of
international law and norms, including international
humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilians in Time of War.

The Council must address this acute crisis and
assume its responsibilities for the maintenance of
international peace and security and the protection of
civilians from murder, devastation and the violation of
their human rights. It is incumbent upon the Council to
accord this question the attention it merits in
comparison with others. We would never have
imagined that the Council would stand idly by before
such a serious escalation without lifting a finger to put
an end to the violence and promote the peace process.
It is paradoxical that the Council should address less
pressing questions with greater attention, while
ignoring a critical question that may have grave
international and regional repercussions and
implications.

The last century witnessed the outbreak of
numerous conflicts that the Council addressed in all
earnestness. However, in the Middle East, the volcano
of conflict has erupted and has yet to subside. Today,
the crisis in our region has been exacerbated more than
ever before and, while the blood of innocents continues
to be shed unabated, the temperature of the peace
process rises and falls with the political climate
prevailing in certain capitals. The pace of that peace
process has ranged between stalling and a complete
standstill, thus eroding popular confidence in the
process, which, in turn has led to widespread
frustration and despair. We must therefore pause and
reflect deeply on the reasons behind the current failure

and stagnation of the peace process, which perpetuate
the spiral of violence and counter-violence.

All acts of violence, provocation, instigation and
destruction warrant condemnation, no matter who
perpetrates them. The shedding of people's blood, be
they Arab, Israeli or other, is taboo. In such tragic
conditions, there is a manifest need to accelerate the
resumption of efforts to find a peaceful, comprehensive
and lasting settlement to the crisis in the Middle East
and, at its core, the question of Palestine, in accordance
with international terms of reference, relevant Security
Council resolutions and the road map. At the same
time, we must understand that it is impossible to fight
an idea with a bomb. Experience has proven that
armies and separation walls are no longer sufficient to
provide security for the citizens of our age, especially
in a region like the Middle East. We must, therefore,
seek effective means to achieve security, while
recognizing that the Middle East crisis cannot be
resolved by force, but rather through dialogue and
common sense.

In conclusion, I would like to raise the following
question before the Security Council. Why does the
Council address questions of lesser importance and
seriousness with great earnestness and resolve while
this grave question - the Arab-Israeli conflict, which
endangers the security of the entire region - does not
enjoy such attention, in particular when the Middle
East region as a whole is experiencing grave and
critical conditions that are known to everyone? I look
forward to receiving an answer to that question.

If there is an attempt to usurp the will of a
people, we do not accept that as the will of the
Council. We will work towards the adoption of the
draft resolution that we have circulated to members of
the Council as soon as possible. We look forward to the
Council taking a united and sincere approach to this
serious issue.

