Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): At the outset, I would like
to reiterate my congratulations to the friendly People's
Republic of China on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish you every
success in implementing your mandate, Sir. The choice
of today's open debate is commendable, as are the
efforts made in the preparation and circulation of the
concept note (S/2017/574, annex).

We would like to commend the Secretary-General
for his briefing, as well as the African Union (AU)
Commissioner for Peace and Security for his valuable
intervention and the very precise and central points he
shared with us today on this important subject.
Peace and Security in Africa, as well as its
economic, social and cultural development, are among
my country's priorities. My country places peace and
security in the African continent at the centre of its
international policy. This commitment is translated
through concrete actions, in particular in the area of
conflict resolution. His Excellency the President of the
Republic, Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, in his capacity as
Coordinator of the African Union for counter-terrorism
and violent extremism, presented to the latest Summit
a memorandum on the African counter-terrorism
strategy, which was introduced on his behalf by our
Prime Minister. The memorandum, which will serve
as a road map for the continental organization in the
context of the fight against terrorism, was unanimously
adopted by the Heads of State and Government of the
55 States members of the African Union.

Based on its long-standing experience in the field
of mediation, Algeria's contribution to peace in its
neighboring countries is also foreseen in the cases of
Mali, Libya and the Western Sahara, as well as in its
cooperation and coordination with the countries of the
Sahel and beyond.

As reaffirmed at the latest Summit of the African
Union, held earlier this year in Addis Ababa by the
Heads of State and Government of its member States,
finding lasting and durable African solutions to African
problems and conflicts is a core principle of the African
Union. In this regard, many bold initiatives and actions
are undertaken to uphold the continent's peace, security
and development. Agenda 2063, silencing the guns by
2020, countering terrorism and violent extremism, and
the completion of the decolonization process in the
continent, among other things, are but a few examples
of the many commitments decided together at the
level of the Heads of State and Government of the 55
African countries.

As we live in an interconnected world, it is obvious
that Africa's contribution to its own security and
prosperity is also a contribution to the larger world
peace and prosperity. To that end, cooperation with
the United Nations and with regional and subregional
partners of Africa is of paramount importance. In this
regard, we would like to commend the holding of the
first annual African Union-United Nations Conference,
on 19 April, as well as the conclusion ofthe Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, which states, inter
alia, that

"the United Nations and the African Union

have strongly endorsed closer cooperation and
coordination in peace and security",

and that both the Security Council and the African
Union have stated the need to transform the partnership
between the two organizations into one that is
predictable, systematic and strategic.

In reality, these latest developments in the relation
between the intergovernmental bodies, based on the
provisions of Article VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Constitutive Act of the African Union,
are but a step forward building on previous realizations
in this regard. It is worth recalling that the very first
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations is the one
adopted in 1963 on cooperation with the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) and that many peace processes
for conflict resolution in Africa conducted by the United
Nations were possible because of the contribution of the
African Union-OAU, as shown by many examples.

The AU Peace and Security Council, at its 689th
meeting held on 30 May, adopted a decision in which it
recalled its earlier decisions on the partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations in the area
of peace and security, including the financing of AU-
mandated or -authorized peace support operations
undertaken with the authorization of the Security
Council. In this decision, the Peace and Security
Council recalled also the communique that was
adopted at its 547th meeting, held in New York on
26 September 2015, which welcomed the modalities
proposed by the Chairperson of the Commission on
the follow-up steps on the African common position on
the review of United Nations peace operations for the
provision of United Nations assessed contributions to
African Union-mandated or -authorized peace support
operations, and agreed that the operationalization of the
proposed arrangements for the financing ofAU-led peace
support operations undertaken with the authorization
of the Security Council should be predicated on the
following: first, African ownership, as a key factor to
the success of peace efforts on the continent; second,
reaffirmation of the primary role of the Security Council
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and of the role of regional arrangements as elaborated
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations;
third, acknowledgment that support by the United
Nations to regional organizations in matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security is
an integral part of collective security as provided for
in the Charter of the United Nations; fourth, enhanced
strategic partnership with the United Nations, including
the development of a framework outlining the steps
necessary to activate authorization by the Security
Council of AU-led missions to be supported by United
Nations assessed contributions; fifth, strengthening
the AU's capacity to plan and manage peace support
operations; sixth, the enhancement of AU financial
oversight mechanisms; and seventh, the strengthening
of the AU's human rights due-diligence capabilities,
including preventing and combating sexual exploitation
and abuses in AU-led peace support operations. My
delegation believes that those core points constitute a
strong basis for a partnership relation between the two
organizations.

In conclusion, we would also like to suggest the
following. First, any selective approach in areas of
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and the AU for any question that is related to
Africa should be abandoned. Secondly, this suggestion
applies also to the annual meeting of the AU Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council on the
decision-making related to the agenda of consultations.
Thirdly, a continuous process of association of the
African Union to consultations on any document or
action on African issues to be taken by the Security
Council or by other United Nations organs should be
established. Fourthly, cooperation should be enhanced
in the field of training, technology transfers, science
and innovation, especially as the African continent has
the greatest demographic potential.

Finally, Africa deserves a place in the permanent
category of Security Council membership, given the
current geopolitical realities in terms of its numerical
strength, growing economic power, demographic
dynamics and growing role in multilateral forums.

