The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the Council at a moment of
critical importance for the Sudanese people and for the
subregion. In less than two months, the people of
Southern Sudan will exercise their right to vote on the
future of the South, as provided for in the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) of 2005 and
as supported by this Council and the international
community.

The registration process for the referendum has
begun throughout Southern Sudan, as well as in 165
locations in the North and eight foreign countries. I
commend the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission for this achievement. With the
commencement of this process, the referendum is on
track.
To ensure that the referendum is conducted in an
orderly fashion and that the Sudanese people
peacefully accept the outcome, it is imperative that the
process be credible and transparent, and that it reflect
the aspirations of the population.

I remain concerned by delays in the preparations,
partly resulting from considerable national funding
shortfalls. All remaining obstacles should be removed
so that the Referendum Commission can finance its
operations; appoint, train and deploy the necessary
personnel; and take key decisions without delay.

The international community, including the
United Nations family, non-governmental
organizations and donors, stands ready to provide
further assistance. The United Nations Mission in the
Sudan continues to give technical and logistical
support to the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission and is deploying additional staff to assist
the process. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) will contribute
aviation assets, and the United Nations Development
Programme and the International Organization for
Migration are assisting in the procurement of materials
and out-of-country voting.

I have also established a Panel, chaired by former
President of Tanzania Benjamin Mkapa, to monitor the
referendums for Southern Sudan and the Abyei area.
The Panel is in the country to monitor the first week of
the registration process. I call on the Sudanese parties
to make the most of its presence.

In addition to this direct support to the process,
the humanitarian community has developed a
contingency plan to provide timely assistance in the
event of referendum-related violence. Approximately
$63 million are needed to pre-position humanitarian
assistance near potential hotspots. We will also need to
ensure access to the contested border areas. The
Council's support in these efforts would be welcome.

Notwithstanding the international community's
good will and support, the referendums are Sudanese
processes. The commitment of the international
community cannot supplant the willingness of the
parties to meet their responsibilities. The Government
of the Sudan, the Government of Southern Sudan and
the referendum Commissions must rise to this
challenge.

The CPA parties have reiterated their
responsibility on several occasions, not only for the
organization and conduct of the referendums, but also

for the preservation of security and the creation of an
environment conducive to the exercise of civil and
political rights. In this regard, the protection of
Southern Sudanese who live in the North, and of
northerners who live in the South, is of major concern.
So, too, is the possibility of a return to the suffering
and loss of life seen during the long war between the
North and the South.

I welcome the recent statement by ministers of
the Governments of the Sudan and Southern Sudan that
a return to war is not an option. Yet, we have also
heard hostile public statements and accusations of
ceasefire violations, which risk heightening anxiety
and provoking isolated security incidents that can
escalate into a wider conflict. The potential for an
unintentional conflict is especially high in Abyei,
where the Misseriya will soon begin their annual
southward migration with emotions running high and
where little progress has been made in finding a
solution to the political impasse.

We are working with both parties on options for
possible augmentation of United Nations troops to
increase referendum and post-referendum security as
well as to increase our capacity to verify and monitor
possible ceasefire violations and to protect civilians
throughout the mission area. However, the presence of
United Nations troops will not be enough to prevent a
return to war should wide-spread hostilities erupt. Only
a demonstrated commitment by the parties to refrain
from inflammatory statements, uphold the CPA
ceasefire mechanisms and reassure the population of
their willingness to work together will succeed in
maintaining peace.

To that end, negotiations on post-referendum
arrangements are vital in order to address the
apprehensions of the Sudanese population. The need is
particularly acute in Abyei, where confusion and fear
about post-referendum citizenship, grazing rights,
access to water points and oil revenue sharing are
contributing to a political and security minefield.

I am encouraged that the CPA parties are
discussing these and other issues through negotiations
facilitated by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for Sudan. I urge them to break
the deadlock on Abyei, move towards holding a
credible referendum in Southern Sudan and design a
peaceful and prosperous future for Northern and
Southern Sudan in which the protection and security of
minority populations is assured, irrespective of the
outcome of the referendum.

This brings me to the situation in Darfur, where
there remains an urgent need to reach a comprehensive
and inclusive settlement. The Joint Chief Mediator,
with the support of the Government of Qatar and other
partners, has made progress. He is consulting with the
parties on possible compromises on outstanding issues,
the most important of which is the administrative status
of Darfur.

The Doha settlement has been designed so that

other movements - particularly the Justice and
Equality Movement (J EM) and Sudan Liberation Army
(SLA)-Abdul Wahid - can join the process.

Mr. Bassole continues to consult with them with a view
to engaging them in the negotiations. I welcome steps
taken by JEM. to rejoin the process and their recent
high-level presence in Doha.

Unfortunately, renewed clashes are taking place
on the ground between the Sudan armed forces and the
JEM, and hostilities are continuing between the Sudan
armed forces and SLA-Abdul Wahid in Jebel Marra.

I am deeply concerned at the impact of those
hostilities on innocent civilians, which is completely
unacceptable, and stress again the urgent need for full
access to eastern Jebel Marra, where the humanitarian
situation is reportedly dire. I urge members of the
Council to join me in demanding that all restrictions
placed by the parties on the movement of UNAMID
and the humanitarian community be lifted. The
disturbing implication of that fighting is that the parties
have not yet decided to give up the military path.

I therefore make four specific requests of the
Council.

First, encourage the Government and the
movements to show flexibility as the Joint Chief
Mediator searches with them for compromises. For any
agreement to gain traction inside Darfur, it must
address the roots of the conflict and end the
marginalization of the region. That will require
significant concessions in the areas of power and
wealth sharing, and genuine efforts to address
questions of national and international justice and of
truth and reconciliation.
Second, encourage movements outside of the
process to engage and demonstrate, through concrete
measures, their commitment to the peace process. It is

particularly important to urge the Government and
JEM. to renew their cessation-of-hostilities agreement
and negotiate cease-fire protocols.

Third, support the outcome of the Doha process
and the work that will follow to generate a popular
consensus on the terms of peace.

Fourth, encourage the Government of the Sudan
to undertake concrete actions to address the demands
of the people of Darfur for security, particularly in
relation to criminality and impunity, respect for their
political and civil rights, and economic support to
rebuild their lives and return to their homes should
they wish to do so. To the same end, I call upon the
Sudan to act in accordance with the Council's decision
as outlined in resolution 1593 (2005).

The coming months are likely to be difficult for
the people of the Sudan and the international
community engaged there. The referendum has the
potential to change the future of the country and send
shockwaves throughout the region. The international
community and the CPA parties, having emphasized
the importance of making unity attractive during the
past five years, must now respect the right of the
population of Southern Sudan to decide.

As we move forward, we must recall that the
referendum, as momentous as it may appear, is one
element of an agreement that ended a bitter war. That
same agreement also paved the way for deepening
democratization and development inside the Sudan, as
well as improved regional stability. The Sudanese
parties must recognize that the vision of a new Sudan,
articulated in the CPA, remains as valid today as it was
half a decade ago, regardless of the outcome of the
referendum.

By renewing the trust achieved in 2005, the
parties can develop productive models of association
and cooperation. Doing so will also have a seminal and
positive impact for the final resolution of the conflict
in Darfur.

The role of the Council remains essential. I urge
you to help build bridges between the north and south
and, in the same spirit, to ensure that the fundamental
imbalances fuelling conflict elsewhere in the Sudan are
addressed so that Darfur can be brought into a stable,
prosperous and equitable future for the Sudan.
I look forward to continuing to work closely with
the Security Council as the referendums draw near and
as we seek to help the Sudan meet those critical tests.

