Mr. J enie (Indonesia): At the outset, on behalf of
my delegation, I would like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I also wish to thank you for
your warm words of welcome to my delegation as a
member of the Council. I would also like to join others
is expressing gratitude to the delegation of Qatar for its
commendable stewardship of the Council during its
presidency last month.

My delegation would also like to welcome Mr.
Ban Ki-moon, the new Secretary-General, with whom
we look forward to working closely in enhancing the
role of the United Nations in the promotion of peace.
We wish to reaffirm our full support and cooperation to
him.

As we journey into a new year, we are carrying
with us both contentment and dissatisfaction. We take
comfort in witnessing the cessation of some conflicts
and the transformation of conflict-affected countries
into ones that are steadily rebuilding and
reconstructing. The role and contribution of the United
Nations and the international community in that
graduation are exceptional, and the Security Council
has been determined and decisive in that regard.

The experience in all those conflicts reaffirms the
critical importance of peacekeeping operations in the
fulfilment of the Council's primary responsibility in
saving humankind from the scourge of war. We believe
that the continuing importance of peacekeeping
missions should be duly recognized. We also see a need
to continue to ensure strict observance of the
fundamental principles of peacekeeping.

Peacekeeping alone, however, is not sufficient if
our goal is to achieve sustainable peace. In my
delegation's view, post-conflict peacebuilding is vital
in helping war-torn societies make the transition to
durable peace. In that regard, the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission is of paramount
importance. We look forward to its further constructive
contribution to peace consolidation efforts.

The end of conflict in certain countries in Africa
and other regions does not close the chapter on the
book of war on that continent. On the contrary, we
have witnessed the emergence of new complexities in
current conflicts. For example, the presence of cross-
border flows of combatants and civilians has impeded
existing peace efforts and exacerbated humanitarian
conditions in those regions.

In addressing conflicts, my delegation reaffirms
the need for respect for the principles of the sovereign
equality, national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of all States, as well as the
principles pertaining to refraining from the threat or
use of force. The principles of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, inclusive dialogue, constructive
collaboration and preventive diplomacy should be kept
as a priority in addressing threats to international peace
and security. Therefore, in the View of my delegation,
sanctions should be used as a last resort - with a
clear, transparent and measurable timetable - and
should provide an escape route to allow for reinstating
peaceful settlement procedures.

In the Middle East, peace remains far from a
reality. The situation there will remain grim and
protracted if the Israel-Palestine conflict is not resolved
in a just and peaceful way. My delegation holds the
view that the Israel-Palestine conflict is at the core of
all problems in the region, and therefore believes that
the Council should give high priority to resolving the
conflict. Settling the Israel-Palestine conflict in a way
acceptable to all parties will have a profound impact on
the prospects for peace in the region.

Reports of the recent decision of the Israeli
Government to approve the building of a new
settlement in the occupied West Bank, which is in
contradiction to its commitment under the Road Map,
and the continuing incursions and raids by the Israeli
Defense Force into several West Bank cities and towns

in the last few days are of deep concern to my
delegation. We think that those manoeuvres are indeed
against the spirit of the agreement between the Israeli
Prime Minister and the President of the Palestinian
Authority. The Security Council should respond to that
development, as is consistent with its mandate and
responsibility.

As a victim of terrorist attacks, and bearing in
mind the enduring presence of the terrorist threat, my
delegation is convinced that the Council should remain
vigilant and act in accordance with the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. Our cause and practice in combating
terrorism should be based on respect for human rights
and human dignity. Indonesia holds the view that the
problem of terrorism is best addressed through a
holistic approach.

My delegation also sees the urgent need for a
dialogue to address the proliferation of nuclear
weapons in Asia. Although the threat of nuclear
weapons has subsided in other regions, a new nuclear
theatre may be developing throughout West and East
Asia. It is therefore important that we find a diplomatic
solution to the nuclear issues of North Korea and Iran.
We also attach great significance to the speedy
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, a region characterized by instability and
tension.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, as the cornerstone of disarmament, should be
strengthened. There should be a balanced undertaking
among the three pillars of the Treaty. We believe that,
in the end, the absolute guarantee for eliminating the
fear caused by the possible use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons is the total elimination of those
weapons.

Democracy is a universal value, and history
proves that it serves as a pivotal foundation for the
creation of peaceful societies based on human dignity.
In the United Nations forum, we are of the View that
there are organs warranted primarily to address
democracy and other related issues, including human
rights. Their work is notable.

Considering the level of complexity and the
magnitude of the challenges that humankind is dealing
with in the present day, partnership is the key word that
guides us in responding to those challenges. My
delegation concurs with Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon on the significance of collective wisdom and
collective efforts. We cannot go it alone. The Council
cannot stand on its own in fulfilling its responsibility.
Conceptually, peace may require a master architect, but
in execution it needs the labour of many. While it is
obvious that the Council has the primary responsibility
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
we need to recognize the contribution of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council to
enhancing the role of the United Nations in the
promotion of peace.

In the spirit of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, robust partnership with regional organizations
should be strengthened. In spite of known limitations,
the value of those evolving partnerships is clearly
demonstrated in various regions where the Security
Council has enlisted the support of regional
organizations to help resolve some disputes.

In order to address future challenges, the Security
Council reform process should be sustained. Aspects of
the Council's membership, as well as its working
methods, are in need of substantive revision. Both are
equally important. We view the comprehensive reform
of the Security Council as an integral feature of the
overall reform process of the United Nations.

In conclusion, we support the draft presidential
statement prepared by your delegation, Sir, and look
forward to its adoption. I also wish to reiterate the
commitment of my delegation to the successful work
of the Council under your presidency.

