The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

On behalf of the United States, let me first thank
Special Representative Kai Eide for his briefing today
and for his excellent leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) during a
critical time. I also wish to thank Foreign Minister
Spanta of Afghanistan for his presence here today and
to extend, through him, our appreciation and respect
for the people of Afghanistan.
The United States continues to strongly support
the efforts of UNAMA to achieve the goals of
resolution 1868 (2009) as it works in concert with the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community. UNAMA's work remains unfinished, but
important strides have been made in the past three
months.

The ongoing Afghan electoral process has not
been easy, but we applaud the courage of Afghan
voters and the dedication of officials who have been
polling, tallying and adjudicating results. The United
States will continue to encourage all parties to respect
the Afghan institutions that conducted these elections.

While serious allegations of fraud have been
made and are being investigated, Afghan citizens are
seeking to resolve their concerns through the formal
adjudication process, not through violence. The
international community must support the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission as they complete the difficult work of
investigating and adjudicating incidents of fraud, in
accordance with their responsibilities under Afghan
law.

When the new Afghan Government is
inaugurated, we must all quickly begin to work with it
to help build up its capacity to meet the needs of the
Afghan people.

Even as we approach the conclusion of this
electoral season, however, we must also begin
preparations for the 2010 parliamentary election. As
the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/475) rightly
notes, that work should start immediately.

UNAMA not only plays a critical role in Afghan
elections; it is also indispensable as the coordinator of
international assistance to Afghanistan. We will work
closely with the Afghan Government and UNAMA to
ensure that aid is properly aligned with Afghan
priorities. We have already seen good progress with
regard to agricultural programmes, where the United
States plans to double assistance next year, in keeping
with Afghan priorities. We also renew our commitment
to work with UNAMA to reduce inefficiencies and
ensure the appropriate and effective delivery of aid,
and we urge other donors to join us.

The United States is also pleased to see that
UNAMA is making progress in expanding its presence
throughout Afghanistan. As the Secretary-General
notes, UNAMA is on track to reach a total of
17 provincial offices by the end of the year. This
expanded provincial presence, called for in resolution
1868 (2009), will allow UNAMA to better monitor and
coordinate aid programmes on the ground.

My Government urges the United Nations to
approve the 2010 UNAMA budget increase, which will
allow for further expansion of provincial offices, and
we urge all of our fellow Member States to support
UNAMA's outreach to the provinces by providing the
necessary personnel and resources.

The United States commends UNAMA for its
development of the benchmarks and indicators of
progress outlined in the Secretary-General's report.
Those benchmarks identify key areas where UNAMA,
the international community and the Government of
Afghanistan must focus their efforts. They helpfully
identify metrics for concretely measuring success.

Let me turn to one final topic on which it is
important to be clear. United States and International
Security Assistance Force troops continue to make
great efforts to avoid civilian casualties, as exemplified
by General McChrystal's approach of having military
operations prioritize the protection of the civilian
population. This effort puts the Afghan people at the
centre of the Mission. It also reflects the reality that the
large majority of civilian deaths in Afghanistan are
caused by ruthless acts of terrorism by insurgent
groups that operate without regard for Afghan lives.
The United States regrets all loss of innocent life
during military operations and goes to great lengths to
avoid civilian casualties. When they do occur, we
provide humanitarian assistance to affected
communities and conduct thorough joint investigations
with the Afghan Government to determine the facts.

For all the progress Afghanistan has made, we
must work together to do even more. The United States
continues to believe that UNAMA is an essential
element of our common efforts to support the Afghan
people in their struggle to rebuild their country and
defeat a determined foe. We will continue to support
UNAMA's critical mission for the benefit of
Afghanistan and for the peace and security of the
region.

For the record, I wish to register my objection to
some of the comments made by the representative of
Libya, which I believe are unhelpful to today's
discussion.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Special Representative Eide for
further comments.

