Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I would like to thank
the President for convening this important meeting.
May I also thank the Secretary-General for his report,
and Special Representative Kouchner for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Kosovo,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

My delegation notes with appreciation the
progress made by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
including its timely completion of phase one of the
civil registration process, the establishment of the
judicial system and the rule of law and the overhaul of
the security and management of the penal system, as
well as the continuing political dialogue between
UNMIK and the local population through town hall
meetings in villages and municipalities across the
province.

Although intimidation and violence against
minority ethnic communities are increasing, we take
solace in the return of the Serb National Council of
Gracanica to both the Joint Interim Administration and
the Kosovo Transitional Council. Similarly, we
appreciate the representation of the Kosovo Turkish
community in the Kosovo Transitional Council. In this
context, we support the Special Representative and
encourage him to continue sharing the values and
culture of democratic institutions with the people of
Kosovo in a manner that will encourage them to live
and work together in harmony.

On the security situation, my delegation is
concerned by the rise in politically motivated violence,
particularly violence directed against UNMIK and
KFOR personnel, as well as violence against the
minority ethnic communities in the province. Once
again we are encouraged through a series of initiatives
undertaken by the Special Representative to address
this problem. These include the establishment of a
special police force and, in cooperation with KFOR,
the identification of specific steps to improve physical
security for minority ethnic communities.

In conclusion, we commend the Special
Representative, Mr. Kouchner, and the UNMIK
personnel for their dedication and their good work in
Kosovo on behalf of the international community.
Having said that, I wish to reiterate that my delegation
would like to see the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), and that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia must be respected by all.

