Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Ambassador
Ramirez Carrefio, Permanent Representative of
Venezuela, for his briefing on the activities of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea.

We commend the activities of the Committee.
The debate organized recently (see S/PV.7620) by the
Venezuelan presidency on the working methods of
the Security Council's subsidiary bodies, particularly
the sanctions committees, was a tangible contribution
to refining and making the work of the sanctions
committees effective. We still hope that the Venezuelan
initiative will have a positive outcome through the
adoption of a President's note on the issue.

During the Uruguayan presidency, the Security
Council debated in depth the situation in Somalia,
developments in the country, challenges and prospects.
As we have done before, we reiterate our concern about
the capacity, or incapacity, of Somalian authorities to
control the territories liberated from the Al-Shabaab
terrorists becoming a huge challenge to ensuring the
participation of thousands of Somalis in the electoral
process ahead, while remaining a source of instability
with the resurgence of intercommunal conflicts.
We take note with concern of the findings of
the Monitoring Group regarding the illegal trade in
Somali natural resources and its potential to fuel the
conflict. We are of the view that, in this regard, the
Security Council should adopt an unequivocal stance
by strongly condemning it and taking further measures
for its disruption, considering that the exploitation,
management and sale of natural resources are the
prerogative of State authorities.

The suggestion of the Monitoring Group regarding
the ban on charcoal is a constructive one and should
be supported and implemented through cooperation
among Somali authorities, States Members of the United
Nations and the African Union Mission in Somalia,
ensuring that it is not violated through corruption and
falsified documentation.

Regarding Eritrea, we are pleased to note once
again that there is no evidence that the Government of
Eritrea has been supporting the Al-Shabaab terrorist
group. The Security Council should take note of that
development and take decisions accordingly.

With regard to border and regional issues, Eritrea
and Ethiopia should cease all support for armed and
rebel groups that affect the internal stability of both
countries. Djibouti and Eritrea should engage in good
faith, under the mediation of Qatar, to address the issue
of missing Djiboutian prisoners. The Government
of Eritrea should strengthen its cooperation with the
Monitoring Group to address the issue. The situation of
instability in Yemen and its proximity to Eritrea pose a
threat to the country's security. We have doubts about
information on Eritrea's decision to allow the United
Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia to use its territories
in the fight in Yemen. It is our hope that Eritrea is not
importing that conflict to its borders.

To conclude, we encourage the strengthening of
relations between Somali and Eritrean authorities with
the Monitoring Group, whose work we fully support,
stressing that the Monitoring Group should strictly
observe its mandate and not extend it of its own
initiative.

