Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all I would like to welcome the President and to thank
him for his presence and for chairing the meeting
today. I also thank Mr. De Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and a very old
friend, for his briefing to the Council. I take the
opportunity to welcome his courageous and effective
action with his entire team and his commitment to
implement the mandate given to him by the Security
Council. I thank him for - as he stated - contributing
to giving hope to the population of Iraq. At every step
of the way he has been a worthy successor of Sergio
Vieira de Mello and I thank Mr. De Mistura for
mentioning his name today. We think of him, as we

think of all of those who lost their lives with him in
Baghdad. Finally and on a more personal note, I can
only say how much I and the Council wish him great
success in his next mission in the city he loves. The
international community still needs him, and the
Council still needs him. For all that he has done, I give
him my personal thanks.

The briefing of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General was very complete. We support its
analyses and share its conclusions. I will raise only
three points. Today, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) plays an essential role in
several areas: first in the area of elections, it has acted
effectively in supporting the Independent High
Electoral Commission to ensure the smooth operation
of elections, which is the best sign of democratic life in
Iraq. After the successful holding of the governorate
council elections on 31 January last, we support the
actions of the mission to organize the parliamentary
and regional elections in Kurdistan on 25 July and the
elections for the Council of Representatives planned
for January 2010. Under its mandate and the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General, the
Mission must also continue to provide its expertise to
the Iraqi Government so as to make progress on the
question of disputed internal borders, especially in the
Kirkuk area. We welcome the analytical reports given
to Iraqi federal authorities and to the regional
Kurdistan Government in order to promote an
agreement among the political actors within Iraq on
this critical issue. It is a difficult problem, but it must
be resolved. We call on all Iraqis involved to display
courage in working toward a solution acceptable to all.

My second point, Mr. President, is to emphasize
that in the last few months in Iraq we have seen
substantial progress in establishing a safe, stable,
democratic, unified and prosperous country, where
human rights and the rule of law are increasingly
respected. France congratulates the Government of Iraq
on its efforts in this area, efforts that the Permanent
Representative of Iraq has just confirmed. We thank the
Permanent Representative for his contribution, which
emphasizes his readiness to work toward the stability
and prosperity of his country. Regardless, from now
on, as was emphasized by the Special Representative,
we must take advantage of this momentum in order to
achieve new progress in improving both the living
conditions of the people of Iraq and the national
reconciliation process. Besides the question of Kirkuk,
this will require the completion of the constitutional
review process, as well as tangible improvement in
everyday life.

My third and final point, Mr. President, beyond
the primary responsibility of the Government of Iraq
and the important role played by the Mission, is that
we believe that neighbouring States must participate
fully in this effort. So it is in this spirit that we support
the action of the Mission to strengthen a regional
dialogue. We would hope especially that the regional
dialogue conducted by Iraq with its neighbours will
allow it to tackle essential issues such as border control
and the conditions for voluntary, safe and dignified
return for refugees, for which the progress alluded to
just now by the Special Representative is an
encouraging first sign. It is in the interest of States in
the region to get involved in making Iraq permanently
stable. That is why we wish to welcome the Minister
today to the Security Council. The fact that he is
chairing this debate and the agreement that he has
managed to reach the presidential statement of the
Council is a sign of the positive and constructive role
that can be played by a country as important as Turkey.
I will conclude by emphasizing how important it is that
the current positive cycle be able to allow Iraq to fully
recover its sovereignty. Here we would note resolution
1859 (2008), in which we asked the Secretary-General
to prepare a report in consultation with Iraq on the
action necessary to allow them international status
equal to what they had before resolution 661 (1990).
We await this report and are ready to act on that basis
and in the framework of Iraq's international
obligations, in particular resolutions 773 (1992) and
833 (1993) on the question of the borders with Kuwait,
together with all States concerned. And, as was
indicated by President Sarkozy in Baghdad last
February, Iraq can count on the friendship of France to
work with it on Iraq's full reintegration into the
international community.

