Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2375 (2017). We thank the United
States for leading the process with an appropriate
sense of urgency and for conducting negotiations in a
spirit of transparency - that is appreciated given the
constraints imposed by the grave situation provoked by
North Korea.

The resolution comes at a unique moment of threat
to international peace and security with very serious
challenges to regional stability. Just one week ago,
the Security Council met (see S/PV.8039) to condemn
the sixth nuclear test carried out by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea regime, following a series
of increasingly reckless missile launches. We reaffirm
our strong condemnation of those irresponsible acts.

All such actions taken together reveal a cycle of
unprecedented, deliberate and escalatory provocations
by North Korea, directed against the international
community as a whole and aimed at undermining the
foundations of the global non-proliferation regime,
as well as the authority of the Council. We reiterate
our deepest concern about the advancement of the
North Korean nuclear and missile programme, which
constitutes an unacceptable threat of a global nature.

Today we stand united once again by taking action
to protect our collective security and ensure that the
North Korean regime's threats do not go unanswered.
The resolution adopted today is a balanced text
that provides for a strong, comprehensive package
of restrictive measures, while taking into account
humanitarian concerns and the need to achieve the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula through a
negotiated process. Those measures are a reflection of
the gravity of the current situation and they constitute a
proportional and appropriate response.

However, the resolution is not only about stronger
sanctions. It also signals the political path through
which, if it so chooses, North Korea can revert to
international legality and a different pattern of relations
with the international community, in order to resolve
the situation peacefully.

We fully share the call of the resolution on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to immediately
cease all nuclear and missile-related activities and to
make credible progress on its obligation to denuclearize
and open the way to a peaceful solution through
meaningful negotiations.

We also fully share the concern for the humanitarian
situation in the country and the need to ensure that
these new sanctions do not have an adverse impact.
We must not forget that the people of North Korea are,
first and foremost, victims of the regime's self-isolating
ambitions. The international community must therefore
continue to provide assistance for those in need.

Finally, as Chair ofthe Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), we will
continue to maintain a sharp focus on the full and

effective implementation of the sanctions regime by the
whole membership of the United Nations.
