Mr. Doss (spoke in French): Since the
presentation to the Council of the third progress report
(S/2004/962) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), dated 9
December 2004, the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire has
not made any significant progress, and continues to
suffer from the reverberations of the events of
November 2004. As a result, the road map drawn up
through the mediation of the African Union, under the
leadership of President Mbeki, has gone largely
unimplemented. The Government of National
Reconciliation continues to lack ministers from the
Forces nouvelles, and the military dialogue among the
parties has been interrupted, thereby delaying the
disarmament process. As the current report
(S/2005/ 186) of the Secretary-General underscores, the
security situation is volatile and the human rights
situation continues to be a source of great concern,
while the economic situation is daily worsening.

In February 2005, the Forces nouvelles proceeded
to rearrange the areas under their control by creating
five new spatial entities, which were entrusted to new
warlords. At the same time, the Secretary-General of
the Forces nouvelles, Mr. Guillaume Soro, announced
the creation of a police and customs school and the
effective opening of a deposit bank in Bouake. Even
though that operation does not indicate an immediate
will to secede, it nevertheless reveals that the Forces
nouvelles believe that this will be a long-term crisis.

The difficulties encountered in the
implementation of the peace agreements call into
question the feasibility of the presidential election
planned for October 2005. That election - which all
parties to the peace process want to be fair, transparent,
free and open - is at the heart of all political
calculations. Although time is quickly ticking away,
electoral tasks such as the resumption of identification
efforts and the updating of electoral lists have yet to
begin, and the Independent Electoral Commission is
still being strenuously contested. There is increasing
uncertainty about whether the general elections can be
held in 2005 according to the agreed timetable. It is
feared that failure to respect the timetable could lead to
a greater crisis.

As a result of the lack of trust among the parties
and suspicions that the Constitutional Council and the
Electoral Commission are not impartial, in a letter
addressed to the Secretary-General dated 18 February
2005, the G-7 opposition parties requested that the
United Nations organize the upcoming elections in
order to ensure their credibility.

In that context, characterized by the mutual
mistrust of the parties, the temptation to resort to war
as a solution to conflict is a constant danger. The
UNOCI forces, supported by the Licorne force, remain
vigilant, especially in the zone of confidence, where
the situation has become very tense following the
incident in Logouale on 28 February 2005. The
impartial forces have strengthened their deployment in
order to prevent incursions and to confiscate individual
arms. Unfortunately, we have seen that such violations
have not been punished by the existing authorities.
Moreover, the militias activities, which have increased
considerably during the period under review, constitute
a growing danger for security in the country.

The absence of judicial authority in the zone of
confidence is of concern to the impartial forces, which
do not have the mandate of supporting the judicial
system. We have therefore proposed to the national
authorities that exceptional measures be taken in order
to deal with that gap, including through the nomination
of temporary administrators. We have also proposed
that the joint brigade composed of impartial forces,
national forces and members of the Forces nouvelles be
reactivated in order to patrol and combat rising crime
in the zone. The Forces nouvelles have not yet
accepted that proposal because they consider that the
central power seeks to establish itself in the zone of
confidence through that mechanism.

The lack of trust is heightened by the lack of
direct dialogue between the armed forces, despite the
efforts to relaunch that dialogue made by the impartial
forces and the South African mediatory effort. In
January, with the support of the Prime Minister, the
parties agreed on the principle of balanced
representation on the National Commission for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration and
carried out an inspection of the cantonment sites in the
two parts of the country. However, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and the
overall security environment are threatened and remain
precarious because of the militia activities sometimes
staged by political actors. We must also stress that the
Forces nouvelles continue to make progress at the
political level a condition for their participation in the
disarmament process.

In the framework of securing the territory,
UNOCI has strengthened its operational cooperation
with the United Nations Mission in Liberia in order to
prevent the cross-border movement of arms and
fighters. As well, the impartial forces must also deal
with the increasing number of crimes, in particular in
Abidjan, and with the abuses committed by certain
elements among the security forces against the civilian
population. In order to fight that scourge, the UNOCI
civilian police, following the request of the Prime
Minister, has organized, with the police prefectures of
Abidjan, joint patrols to contribute to the security of
those working-class neighbourhoods. That initiative
has been very much welcomed by the residents of those
neighbourhoods, where incidents of abuse have been
notably reduced.

Resolution 1584 (2005) of 1 February, entrusted
UNOCI and the Licorne force with monitoring the
arms embargo. In order to implement the resolution,
the impartial forces have undertaken unannounced
checks of certain sites and intend to increase their
number. Thus, they inspected sites within the Abidjan
airport and the Bouake airbase on 21 March without
encountering any difficulties.

Under resolution 1584 (2005), the parties must,
within the 45 days following the adoption of the
resolution, provide UNOCI with a complete list of their
military equipment. That measure has not been carried
out in the set time, and we have formally reminded the
parties concerned of their obligations in that respect.

The humanitarian situation remains very
precarious especially in the west and north of the
country. In order to help the most vulnerable sectors of
the population, the United Nations has launched a
consolidated appeal for $39 million. To date, the
appeal has not received the desired response from
donors. Only 5 per cent of the amount requested has
been received. The humanitarian crisis in Cote d'Ivoire
is not as visible as those existing in other African
countries. Nevertheless, it is just as real, and the future
of 3.5 million people is seriously threatened by the
crisis. We therefore hope that donors will take that into
account.

Political uncertainty and the volatility of the
military situation, together with impunity and the
collapse of the judicial system in both the north and the
south of the country, have led to serious violations of
human rights. The setting of many incidents of abuse
since the beginning of the conflict, the west of the
country is going through a situation of great insecurity,
with grave consequences such as the displacement of
the civilian population. UNOCI's human rights section
documents the serious violations, and, on several
occasions, UNOCI has brought to the attention of the
national authorities their responsibility to bring the
perpetrators of those crimes to justice. The Council has
also received the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry into allegations of serious
violations of human rights committed in C6te d'Ivoire,
and we hope that it will give the report all the
necessary attention as soon as possible.

It has been noted that the broadcasting by public
and private media of hateful and xenophobic messages
has decreased somewhat since the last report of the
Secretary-General. However, that progress remains
precarious. The adoption of a new law on restricting
the press through the implementation of decrees could
be used to control the public media and influence the
private press on occasions such as that of November
2004. UNOCI continues to submit reports on the
media's compliance with the provisions of resolution
1572 (2004).

In order to introduce in the media environment of
Cote d'Ivoire a neutral message and promote a culture
of peace, UNOCI-FM. has progressively extended its
broadcasts from Abidjan towards the centre and the
north of the country thanks to transmitters located in
Bouake and Daloa. But the development of that radio
could be limited by the refusal of the National
Commission of Audiovisual Communication to grant it
frequencies in the interior of the country and because
Ivoirian Radio and Television has threatened to
suspend the frequencies already granted.

(spoke in English)

As the Secretary-General has underlined in his
report, the ultimate responsibility for resolving the
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire lies with the Ivorian political
actors. However, in the absence of a functioning
internal political process, external mediation and
pressure must help move the country forward towards a
peaceful resolution of the crisis. President Mbeki has
consulted extensively with the key Ivorian actors and
will hold talks with them again in early April. His
representatives will report to the Security Council later
this afternoon and will indicate the progress of the
mediation at this time. The Council, however, may
wish to consider the use of all provisions of resolution
1572 (2004) to support progress in the next key steps
of this process. I wish to assure the Council also that
UNOCI will continue to work closely with the
mediator and his team, as well as with the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union, in a sustained effort to advance the peace
process.

The key issues that must be resolved in order to
ensure the long-term stability of Cote d'Ivoire are well
known: eligibility of candidates for the presidency;
disarmament of all armed groups, including the militia;
and the organization of fair, free and open presidential
and legislative elections. For that to happen, difficult
but unavoidable compromises will have to be made by
all the protagonists so that the legitimacy of State
institutions can be fully exercised. Those issues can be
resolved only in a secure environment that inspires the
confidence of all parties.

There is a peace to keep in Cote d'Ivoire,
however fragile it may appear. The presence of the
impartial forces is vital to prevent a complete
breakdown in security, which would bring the political
process to a halt and create more suffering for the
people of Cote d'Ivoire. All the members of the Linas-
Marcoussis Monitoring Committee are of one mind on
this point.

The present strength of UNOCI is, however, a
cause for serious concern. We will not be able to
respond effectively or adequately should two or more
major incidents occur at the same time. The
responsibilities deriving from resolution 1584 (2005)
have also created additional demands on the Mission's
limited resources. While we have made it clear to the
forces in place that UNOCI will implement its mandate
using the agreed rules of engagement, we must be sure
that we have the means of our mandate so as to
discourage any adventurism. In this regard, we hope
that the Council will consider favourably the
reinforcement requested in the third report of the
Secretary-General, as well as the extension of
UNOCI's mandate.

I cannot conclude my remarks without speaking
briefly to an issue that has greatly exercised the
Council of late. I refer to the issue of sexual
exploitation and abuse. During the recent visit of the
Deputy Secretary-General, we were able to brief her on
the very energetic measures UNOCI has been taking to
tackle this problem. We have put in place a number of
specific measures aimed at preventing abuse and
exploitation, including expanded training and
awareness programmes, vehicle curfews and the
designation of off-limit areas. All staff - military and
civilian - have been forcefully reminded of their
responsibilities in this respect and of the penalties they
may incur for non-compliance.

Despite the many difficulties that the Mission has
faced since its inception one year ago, I believe that we
have earned the confidence of the international
community. This is due in large part, I would like to
recognize, to the unwavering commitment of the
UNOCI staff and team, as well as to other United
Nations colleagues working in the country. We hope
that, with the Council's support and guidance, we shall
build on that record of service to assist cote d'Ivoire
and its people to advance towards a better and more
secure future.

