Mr. Markram: I thank you for the opportunity
to address the Council again today, Mr. President.
The High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, is away on official travel.

It has been less than a week since I last briefed
the Council (see S/PV.8221) on the issue of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. In the intervening
period, new and deeply disturbing allegations of the
use of chemical weapons have come to light. Over the
past weekend, there have been reports on the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Douma, in the Syrian Arab
Republic. According to reports that came in yesterday,
it is alleged that at least 49 people were killed and
hundreds more injured in a chemical-weapon attack.
More than 500 other individual cases reportedly
presented with symptoms consistent with such an
attack. The Office for Disarmament Affairs has been
in touch with the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on the matter. The OPCW,
which implements the Chemical Weapons Convention,
to which Syria is a State party, is gathering information
about the incident from all available sources, through
its Fact-finding Mission in Syria. After completing its
investigation, the Fact-finding Mission will report its
findings on the alleged attack to the States parties to
the Convention.

Sadly, there is little to say today that has not already
been said. The use ofchemical weapons is unjustifiable.
Those responsible must be held to account. That those
views have been stated on many previous occasions
does not lessen the seriousness with which the
Secretary-General regards such allegations. Nor does
it lessen the truth behind them, which is that what we
are seeing in Syria cannot go unchallenged by anyone
who values the decades of effort that have been put in to
bring about the disarmament and non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. As the body charged with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Council must unite in the face of this continuing
threat and fulfil its responsibilities. To do otherwise, or
simply to do nothing, is to accept, tacitly or otherwise,
that such a challenge is insurmountable. The use of
chemical weapons cannot become the status quo, nor
can we continue to fail the victims of such weapons.

Just over one year ago, in responding to the attack
on Khan Shaykhun, the Secretary-General called for
those responsible to be held accountable, stating that
there can be no impunity for such horrific acts. Just
over one week ago, speaking on behalf of the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, I noted that
unity in the Security Council on a dedicated mechanism
for accountability would provide the best foundation
for success in that regard. I reiterate that belief here, as
well as the readiness of the Secretary-General and the
Office for Disarmament Affairs to assist.

