Ms. Bellamy: As we speak, leaders from every
corner of the world are gathering in this House to
reaffirm their obligations to promote the rights of every
boy and every girl and commit themselves to creating a
world fit for children. It is an occasion at which we
seek a global consensus to mobilize resources and
political will to promote the survival and health of
every child, to assure the right of basic quality
education, assistance in combating HIV/AIDS and
protection from harm and exploitation.

I commend the Council for its role in
strengthening the protection of children in conflict
situations. Indeed, I would report that the draft
outcome document has drawn on the Council's
exemplary work in this area. Let me also echo the
comments of my colleague Olara Otunnu in thanking
you, Sir, for presiding over this meeting and calling
this meeting, building on the work of the French
presidency from last September.

I would also like to pay my tribute to my fellow
speakers, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Olara
Otunnu, for his tireless advocacy and Madame Graca
Machel for her wonderful, exemplary leadership in
placing this vital issue on the international agenda.

Let me also acknowledge the critical work and
effort of numerous international and national non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), some of which
are present in the audience today. We at the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) welcome the
Council's engagement with NGOs. It is only through
strong partnership that UNICEF is able to advance
policies and programmes and strategies to strengthen
the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict.

We recently supported, with other United Nations
agencies, the Afghan Interim Administration in
conducting the largest-ever back-to-school programme
for boys and girls in Afghanistan. We will continue to
invest in education, in particular education for girls, as
a means of ensuring the long-term well-being and
sustainable protection of the rights of war-affected
children. Education also protects children from
recruitment as soldiers and helps them reintegrate
themselves into their communities after
demobilization.

In this connection we will continue our efforts to
support the demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers in countries such as Angola, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Colombia and, as
was mentioned before, the Sudan.

One of the biggest challenges in conflict
situations continues to be the difficulty of ensuring
children's full and unhindered access to essential
services. In an effort to promote access to children in
conflict situations, the International Football
Association (FIFA) and UNICEF will urge all parties to
conflicts to observe days of immunization during the
2002 World Cup. These days of immunization will
build on the experience of the long-supported and
highly successful "days of tranquillity". Further, we
hope that football - indeed sports generally - will
help these children make a start in reclaiming their
childhood.

Children, especially girls, are extremely
vulnerable to abuse, sexual violence and rape
perpetrated during armed conflicts. The allegations of
sexual abuse and exploitation against refugee and
internally displaced children by humanitarian workers
in West Africa are of great concern to us. UNICEF
remains unwaveringly committed to ensuring the
highest standards of conduct for our staff, to improving
our accountability to the beneficiaries of humanitarian
assistance and to ensuring that humanitarian assistance
is provided in a manner that protects children and
prevents sexual exploitation and abuse.

In giving Wilmot, Eliza and Jose an opportunity
to contribute to its meeting today, the Security Council
has again set a high standard for leadership. The
experiences of these young people remind us of the
daunting challenges that still lie ahead.

In conclusion, it is my pleasure to introduce the
young people that the Security Council has so kindly
invited to address it today. Wilmot Wungko is 16 years
old and is from Liberia, where he works actively with
radio programmes and child-rights networking. Eliza
Kantardzic is 17 years old, and she is from Bosnia. She
works as a volunteer with refugee children. Jose Cabral
is 18 years old. He comes from East Timor. He works
through a local NGO and the Catholic Church to assist
children living on the street. All three of them are
delegates to the almost 400-pers0n Children's Forum
that is now taking place. I know that they are keen to
share their thoughts with the Security Council.
