Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation is pleased that this open debate on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and other
victims of armed conflict is taking place. It will allow us to
take another look at some of the cardinal principles that we
believe must guide the actions of the Security Council and
our Organization.

In May last year, during the first debate on this issue,
my delegation advocated a new concept of conflict
resolution. We maintained that conflict management and
resolution by this Council must be based on a new concept
of security, centred on the human being, and rejected the
prevailing concept of peace and security seen from an
exclusively military standpoint. We maintained that Security
Council actions should necessarily be extended so as to
promote and ensure respect for human rights and provide
better living conditions for victims of armed conflicts. Our
experience over the past year has strengthened my
delegation's position on this matter.

Security and peace are not matters for States alone. In
the final analysis, States are fictitious creatures with no
more reality than that given to them by the people who live
in them. Security, peace and order are worth nothing if the
people who make up those States exist in the most abject
living conditions and their fundamental rights are flouted.
The true objective of international peace and security is the
happiness of human beings, who should be allowed fully to
develop all their capacities in freedom and justice every day
of their lives.

The first step to attaining this lofty ideal is to protect
innocent civilians from the impact of armed conflict,
preventing them from becoming direct targets of military
action and providing them with at least the most basic
living conditions during crisis situations. In this context
respect for international humanitarian law, humanitarian
assistance to refugees and displaced persons and
protection for those providing such assistance becomes
particularly relevant.

First, we believe it essential that the parties to a
conflict respect international humanitarian law, both
customary and treaty law, in particular the norms of the
1949 Geneva Conventions and the 1977 additional
Protocols thereto. Furthermore, we believe that all parties
must respect the principles and norms of human rights
under all circumstances. In this connection, we are
pleased to note that this Council has begun calling on
parties explicitly to comply with those norms and
principles. We also believe that all parties must respect
the international law on refugees and, in accordance with
those norms, must permit access for humanitarian
assistance to all persons in need.

Secondly, we agree with the Secretary-General that
there must be an increase in international solidarity in
response to the humanitarian needs of refugees and
displaced persons. Costa Rica, which took in refugees
during the crisis in Central America, is fully aware of the
economic, social and political burden involved in
receiving such populations in need, and we can testify to
the indispensable role of international cooperation to
lighten the burden.

Thirdly, we believe that additional measures must be
taken to facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance
and to ensure the safety of those providing it. In our
view, a range of measures is needed, ranging from
ratification of international conventions guaranteeing the
protection of those providing humanitarian assistance and
the recently adopted statute of the International Criminal
Court to the adoption of concrete mechanisms and other
tools for ensuring the physical safety and integrity of
assistance providers and of their bases of operation and
their means of communications and transport. We
recognize that humanitarian personnel have the right to
self-defence in the event of unjustified attack, but we
believe in avoiding the use of force to the extent possible,
with a view to preserving the conditions that are
indispensable for impartiality and neutrality. In every
case, we condemn the taking of these heroic humanitarian
personnel as hostages and their murder as an act of
reprisal.

Fourthly, we believe that the situation of refugee and
displaced-persons camps must be given greater attention.

 

It is unacceptable that some camps should be used as bases
for combatant groups or that they should become the site of
battles among factions. We believe that all parties must
respect the neutrality of refugee and displaced-persons
camps; under no circumstances can these be regarded as
legitimate targets for attack. Moreover, all parties must give
humanitarian organizations access to refugee and displaced-
persons camps, not only to provide assistance but also to
assess the living conditions of the inhabitants. The valuable
work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in this area has been
universally recognized, and we take this opportunity to
reiterate to Mrs. Ogata Costa Rica's full support for her
work and for her unquestioned leadership.

Fifthly, there should be no impunity for those who
attack the security and safety of humanitarian personnel.
The belligerent parties must take all measures necessary to
prevent attacks on such personnel and in the event that
these occur to punish those responsible with a View to
avoiding further attacks. Here we reaffirm the relevance of
the provisions of the statute of the International Criminal
Court declaring attacks on humanitarian personnel to be war
crimes. We regret that the Security Council as a whole was
unable to include in the statement to be read out by its
President later today explicit reference to this important
progressive development in international law, owing to the
reluctance of some members.

Belligerent States and other parties bear the primary
responsibility to guarantee full respect for international
humanitarian law and to permit the distribution of
humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons
who need it, as well as to guarantee the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel. But this does not exonerate the
international community, or the Security Council in
particular, from the obligation to ensure respect for these
basic norms and to promote better living conditions and
improved security for the victims of armed conflicts. Only
when we have done this will the sun of justice shine upon
us from on high, enlightening those who dwell in darkness
and in the shadow of death, and guiding us along the path
of peace.

