Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Like other members, I wish, Sir, to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We believe that you will carry out your duties
with success, as you have done over the past few days.
I wish also to congratulate Ambassador Ouane on his
outstanding contribution in September.

The Chinese delegation thanks you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to consider
the recent bloody events in Jerusalem and other places.
Over the past five days, Jerusalem and other occupied
Arab territories have been the scene of sustained
violence. It is appalling that Israeli military police have
used helicopters, tanks and rockets against Palestinian
civilians, causing many casualties and deaths among
civilians, including, in particular, children. China
expresses its strong condemnation and indignation in
that regard, and wishes to convey its condolences to the
families of the victims.

The conflicts that have raged over the past few
days must be completely stopped, or more innocent
civilians, women and children in particular, will
continue to suffer death or injury.

The Security Council bears primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
It is duty-bound to protect civilians in Palestine. The
Council must send the strongest possible signal that
these bloody incidents, in which innocent civilians
have been the victims of violence, must be brought to
an end.

Palestine and Israel are now engaged in
negotiations on such sensitive issues as the final status
of Jerusalem. The entire peace process is at a critical
stage, yet an Israeli opposition leader made a sudden
visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif and made a controversial
statement. That was a most irresponsible, provocative
act that the Council ought to condemn.

It is China's strong hope that, at this critical
juncture, the parties concerned will exercise the utmost
restraint and halt all statements and actions detrimental
to the peace process, and that they will create the
conditions necessary for resuming and accelerating the
peace negotiations. We also expect the upcoming Paris
and Cairo meetings to yield positive results enabling
the arduous peace negotiations to continue and making
it possible, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, to achieve a settlement of the
Palestinian issue at an early date.

