Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): As
this is my first statement in a public meeting under
your presidency, Mr. President, allow me to extend, on
behalf of Cote d'Ivoire, my warm congratulations and
best wishes to you and your country. I would also like
to commend Equatorial Guinea for its excellent work
during its presidency in February.

My delegation thanks Mr. Miroslav Lajcak,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), whose briefing
informs us of the vision and priorities of Slovakia,
which holds the chairmanship for 2019. I would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate him on his
assumption of that position and wish him every success
in his new functions.

Since its accession to the OSCE chairmanship in
January, Slovakia has clearly stated the main focus of
all its actions, namely, prevention, mediation, conflict
mitigation, strengthening security and promoting
effective multilateralism.

With regard to multilateralism in particular,
Slovakia is committed to supporting the development
of strategic partnerships between the OSCE and
international organizations. The relevance of that
strategic choice is easily understood in the current
context, which is marked by a tendency to question
multilateral cooperation frameworks, although they
have demonstrated their full effectiveness in seeking
sustainable solutions to global challenges.

The persistence of transnational security threats
and current economic and social development
challenges require combined efforts at the regional and
subregional levels. That is why C6te d'Ivoire welcomes
the OSCE as a model of virtuous cooperation - an
expression of the common vision of the 57 member
States to take ownership of their collective security. We
also note the quality of the OSCE's cooperation with
the United Nations, which is fully in line with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

C6te d'Ivoire appreciates the OSCE's holistic
approach to addressing current security challenges,
which integrates political-military, economic,
environmental and human dimensions. C6te d'Ivoire
welcomes the fact that its scope of action encompasses
the issues of arms control, the strengthening of
confidence and security measures, human rights, the
protection of national minorities, the promotion of
democracy and the fight against terrorism.

In view of the leading role of regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention and
management, based on the principle of subsidiarity,
Cote d'Ivoire urges the OSCE to fully play its rightful
role in strengthening peace and security in Europe in
accordance with its founding principles. In that regard,
my country encourages the Slovak chairmanship of the
OSCE to work tirelessly to restore peace and stability
in Ukraine and neighbouring areas by encouraging the
various stakeholders to overcome their differences, with
a view to the effective implementation of the Minsk
agreements. Given such a perspective, appropriate
measures must be urgently taken to overcome the
environment of mistrust that has taken root among
those concerned, which will enable maintaining the
gains made thanks to the efforts of the OSCE and
the international community, thereby fostering the
restoration of peace and stability in the region.

It is also important that the OSCE pursue its support
for existing mechanisms to resolve the conflicts in
Nagorno Karabakh and Abkhazia and South Ossetia
to advance peace talks on Transnistria and Georgia,
as well as to assist in the stabilization of Kosovo. In
that regard, my country welcomes the good offices of
Mr. Lajcak, in particular his 15 January visit to Kyiv,
the goal of which was to urge the parties to de-escalate
and allow the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination
to play its role in supporting OSCE monitors and in
monitoring the ceasefire in Donbas.

Concerning its scope of activities, which extend
beyond European borders, the OSCE enjoys experience
that it could share with other regional and subregional
organizations. Threats to peace and security, the fight
against terrorism, climate change and the management
of migration flows are, inter alia, areas of cooperation
that the OSCE should explore with other regional and
subregional organizations. My country believes that,
while security in the geographical areas under the
OSCE's purview and security in neighbouring regions
are closely linked, the security dynamics in sub-Saharan
Africa have no less of an impact on peace and security
in Europe. Accordingly, while we fully welcome the
constructive cooperation between the OSCE and its
Mediterranean and Asian partners, Cete d'Ivoire calls
for broadening such cooperation to include African
regional and subregional organizations, which entails
seeking lasting solutions, in a concerted spirit of
solidarity, to the current evolving challenges involved
in achieving peace, security and development.

In conclusion, my delegation once again wishes
Slovakia every success in its chairmanship ofthe OSCE
in the implementation of its priorities, including the
promotion of multilateralism, to which Cote d'Ivoire
remains strongly committed.

