Mr. Trujillo Garcia (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I commend and congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the presidency of the Security Council. I am grateful
for the convening of today's meeting to consider the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2019/780). I
would like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of Mission, for his briefing and his ongoing work
in Colombia.

I would also like to express our gratitude to the
members of the Security Council for their commitment
to Colombia and the implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. The proof of that is the
adoption of resolution 2487 (2019), thanks to which the
Council unanimously decided to extend for another year
the mandate of the Verification Mission in Colombia at
the request of President Ivan Duque Marquez, who is
carrying out the "Peace with legality" policy for which
the majority of the Colombian people voted in order to
implement the Final Agreement along with forward-
looking reforms so as to achieve that implementation
by consensus and through institutional mechanisms.

I would like to start with the Secretary-General's
recognition in his report of the Government's
commitment to the implementation of the "Peace with
legality" policy and the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
The report presents a balanced view of the important
progress made and the multiple challenges we face
in the implementation process. The Government is
fulfilling its commitments - and this is not just
something for us to claim on the international stage
but it has been clearly demonstrated by the results and
progress contained in the report. The transformation
that Colombia requires in order to achieve "Peace with
legality" is a long-term project.

With regard to reintegration, the report highlights a
positive evolution, recognizing the achievements of the
Government of President Ivan Duque Marquez over the
first 14 months of his Administration. Work has been
conducted in a coordinated manner to transform the
territorial areas, whose legal status ended on 15 August.
Achieving their transformation and reintegration within
the territorial framework is an ambitious process.
It is important to keep in mind that, while the report
draws attention to the need for rapid progress, that
process was not specifically determined in the Final
Agreement; nonetheless, although it presents a series of
complexities, the Government is deeply committed to
moving forward in that regard.

It is also worth highlighting the economic
implications of the former territorial areas. Over
the past year, $7.92 million has been invested in the
administration and supply of those areas. In addition,
the national development plan authorizes the extension
of the monthly subsidy for ex-combatants, subject to
their compliance with the reintegration process.

I mention those measures because they go beyond
what was agreed and demonstrate that the "Peace
with legality" policy recognizes that the only way to
achieve stabilization in the areas afflicted by violence
is by generating real opportunities that allow for the
sustainable economic and social reintegration of ex-
combatants. Therefore, the implementation of the Final
Agreement is one of the cross-cutting components of
our national development plan, as well as one of the
objectives of the "Peace with legality" policy.

Efforts in terms of reintegration are evidenced by
constant progress in the approval of both collective
and individual productive projects aimed at achieving
effective socioeconomic reintegration. Compared
to the levels previously reported by the Secretary-
General (see S/2019/530), the number of approved
collective productive projects has increased from 24
to 35, thereby increasing the number of beneficiaries
from 1,566 to 2,204. In the same way, the number of
individual projects rose from 216 to 559, benefiting
nearly 700 people.

I would like to mention two specific issues that
exemplify the complexities we face, which can be
understood only by going beyond what is set out in the
report. On the one hand, there is the issue of access
to land by ex-combatants. The report mentions that
greater efforts are required in that area. It is important
to clarify that, although that point was not determined
in the Final Agreement, the Government has identified
a series of alternative options for access to land that,
within the framework of reintegration, will enable the
advancement of productive projects in the territorial
and agricultural spheres.

On the other hand, the report states that better
results are needed in terms of the provision of quality
health-care services, especially for ex-combatants
living outside the former territorial areas, and also
affirms that little progress has been made in terms of
psychosocial support, sexual and reproductive health
and maternal health. That analysis requires greater
depth given that 98 per cent of ex-combatants are
already registered to date in the Colombian health care
system and that significant progress has been made in
providing health coverage in rural areas.
The Government believes it important that the
Council should not lose sight of the fact that the
implementation process will not be achieved overnight
but will require at least 15 years - as acknowledged
in the Final Agreement itself. Bringing the rule of
law, physical and legal security and the services of
each public institution to all regions of the country is
a commitment that goes beyond the implementation of
the agreement.

With regard to the second pillar of verification,
namely the mandate of the Mission in Colombia, and
security measures for ex-combatants and communities,
I must begin by recognizing the scale of the challenge
to guarantee the protection of the lives of some of the
ex-combatants and social leaders.

On various occasions, both here before the Council
and on the Council's visit to Colombia, the Government
has highlighted the measures taken to reduce any
type of threat, homicide or other crime. The report
mentions the significant progress made by the Special
Investigation Unit of the Attorney General's Office, the
strengthening of security and prosecution measures,
the decisions taken to reduce electoral violence, the
meetings of the National Commission on Security
Guarantees convened by President Duque and the
adoption of the Action Plan for the Protection of Social
and Community Leaders, Human Rights Defenders
and Journalists.

That is one of the main sources of concern for the
Government - we cannot and will not deny it. My
country rejects the murders of former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) combatants, social leaders and human
rights defenders. In that regard, the President of the
Republic has himself ordered the adoption of more than
20 measures to strengthen security for ex-combatants
and 15 specific measures to ensure the security of the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC)
political party candidates.

The relevant authorities are working diligently to
investigate and prosecute those responsible for those
crimes to ensure that they do not go unpunished. The
Government has identified that, among the risk factors
affecting the population in general, and social leaders
in particular, is intensified competition for dominance
and control of illicit economic activities, such as
drug trafficking and illegal mining. Many efforts are
being undertaken to tackle that security issue, and the
Government stands ready to do more.
Just over a month ago, Colombia and the
international community received the unfortunate news
that a narco-terrorist group had been established by
individuals known as Ivan Marquez and J esus Santrich,
as well as other former FARC-EP leaders, who are a
clear minority. I am grateful for the remarks of Council
members on the matter. I would like to highlight the
FARC political party's early condemnation of those
events - indeed, just yesterday they decided to expel
those individuals from the party. I would also like to
reiterate the subsequent rejection of those individuals
by Colombian society.

The actions of those former FARC-EP leaders
constitute the most flagrant violation of the
commitments of the Final Agreement. However, that
incident made it possible to demonstrate that 90 per
cent of the ex-combatants are complying with their
obligations; moreover, 76 per cent of them claim to
feel optimistic and motivated regarding their future as
law-abiding members of society. The Government will
remain committed to that vast majority, as we consider
that to be a sign of confidence in their reintegration
and therefore in the reconciliation that the Colombian
people long for.

For those who do not comply, we will be bringing
down the full weight of the law upon them. That is why
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, through its Chamber
for Acknowledgment of Truth and Responsibility,
expelled those individuals several days ago, stripping
them of the benefits of transitional justice.

We cannot overlook the fact that the agreement
includes a series of commitments made by both parties
and that the Verification Mission should also follow up
on FARC non-compliance. It is urgent that the party
provide information on the location of the minefields
and missing persons, hand over the entirety of its
assets for victim reparations and allow the effective
reintegration of recruited children and adolescents,
among other things. Building peace with legality is a
collective effort that involves rights and obligations,
without exception.

I wish to conclude by highlighting two fundamental
issues on which the Government is making progress: the
Government's joint work plan with the components of
the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition and the proposal to increase its
budget by 15 per cent, and the implementation of the
development plans with a territorial focus. We have
formalized the 16 plans. We allocated over $130 million
of tax resources to the regions. We have formalized
300,000 hectares and included more than 450,000
hectares in the National Land Agency. In line with the
philosophy of building peace with legality, we will do
all we can for regions affected by violence and people
who walk the path of legality. Those two issues are
critical to ensuring comprehensive reparations for the
victims and the stabilization of the areas most affected
by violence, as tools to achieve an effective peace
with legality.
The Government of Colombia will continue to work
as diligently as possible in

"building a culture oflegality in which we recognize
our differences and choose coexistence, and the
rule of law is forged as the indissoluble marriage of
security andjustice" (A/74/PV.5),

as President Ivan Duque Marquez said during the most
recent general debate in the General Assembly.

Colombia will not stop at building peace. That
process is irreversible and requires the commitment and
support of all gathered here as witnesses of the valuable
path we have embarked upon, as well as support for
President Ivan Duque's ongoing call to build agreements
and consensus to advance in the implementation of the
policy of peace with legality.

