Mr. Holmes: I shall just to respond briefly to
some of the points raised.

First, I am very grateful for the support that has
been expressed around the table this afternoon for
humanitarian efforts and for the heroism and courage
of humanitarian workers, in both Darfur and Chad. I
was also very grateful for support expressed in many
quarters for what I was saying about issues such as
access, the importance of the protection of civilians
and efforts in that area, including the problems of
gender-based violence, the importance of maintaining
the civilian and humanitarian nature of refugee and
IDP camps, the importance of speeding up
administrative procedures and reducing administrative
obstacles to humanitarian work, including
implementation of the moratorium on restrictions,
which has just been extended, and the responsibility of
Governments to facilitate humanitarian work and
protect humanitarian workers, including not least, for
example, stopping the phenomenon of banditry, which
is common to both Darfur and eastern Chad. I also
noted the primordial importance given by virtually all
speakers to the need for a ceasefire that is respected by
all sides and urgent efforts to produce a political
settlement. I hope that the Governments concerned and
the rebel movements also will listen to these messages
coming from the Council.

Let me also take this opportunity to echo and
agree with what was said by many people around the
table about the importance of relations between Chad
and the Sudan and the improvement that we have seen
in recent weeks. I was able to discuss this in both
capitals, and I did note that there was a certain cautious
readiness on both sides to make a fresh start on the
basis of the Dakar Agreement, which has started with
the exchange of ambassadors and which was noted by
many speakers. I hope it will be followed shortly by
the deployment of the agreed border contingents on
both sides of the long border between the two
countries. As people have said, that is absolutely
fundamental if there is to be any chance of a peaceful
settlement in Darfur and stabilization of the region.

The representative of France raised the issue of
the protection of the civilian and humanitarian nature
of the camps but made the point that that does not
excuse attacks against the camps. He referred to the
particular case of the very tragic incident in August of
this year in Kalma camp in south Darfur, when 33 IDPs
were killed and many more injured. I simply wanted to
echo that point. That issue was very fresh in the minds
of the people in Kalma camp whom I met. I was also
able to discuss it with the authorities in south Darfur
and in Khartoum and to remind them that there was
still a need for a proper investigation of that incident.

On the question of returns of IDPs in eastern
Chad, the representative of France suggested that
sometimes the United Nations might have been too
slow in responding to that phenomenon and
accompanying those who were returning. I wanted to
assure him that we do recognize the importance of
providing assistance to those who are returning and
making sure that some basic services are in place. In
the place I visited - which was also visited recently
by Minister Kouchner - I think we are beginning to
do that, both on the part of United Nations agencies

and non-governmental organizations. The only note of
caution I would raise is that we need to be careful that
we actually maintain the full processes of consultation
and voluntariness on the part of the IDPs themselves
and do not get ourselves into a position where we
appear to be putting undue pressure on people to return
before they genuinely think it is safe to do so.

The representative of the Russian Federation
reminded us that humanitarian assistance is there to
support Governments and needs to respect their
sovereignty fully. I simply want to assure him that we
fully recognize that ourselves. We also recognize, as
many people around the table commented this
afternoon, that the fundamental responsibility for the
safety and security of their own citizens and also of
humanitarian workers rests with the Governments
concerned.

The representative of Costa Rica asked about the
prospects for the people in the camps and the plans for
their future. I think the representative of Italy made a
similar comment about how we can encourage and
facilitate returns. I think the first thing to say is that,
obviously, we are fully in favour of people in camps,
whether they are refugees or IDPs, returning to their
places of origin as soon as they possibly can. As I said
in my own remarks, life in camps is dehumanizing,
demoralizing and damaging to any prospects of
normality in the future, and becomes more so the
longer it goes on. Therefore, we encourage returns as
soon as possible. But the basic conditions for those
returns have to be in place, the most basic condition
being security. That is the issue that is raised constantly
with me. Whenever I go into a camp and talk to people,
they say "Of course we want to go home, but we can't
go home until we feel safe when we do."

There is also the question of the provision of
basic services like health and education and other parts
of infrastructure when people return home, but the
basic requirement is security. I think what that means is
that it is difficult to imagine wholesale return of people
from camps in either Chad or Darfur until there is a
proper peaceful settlement. In the meantime, if there
are people who wish to go home, and if there are areas
that have become safe and are seen as safe by the
inhabitants of the camps themselves, that is entirely
welcome, and we will certainly help those concerned to
return. We have no hesitation about that; we think it is
a positive development.
I think another important part of this, which I did
refer to briefly in my remarks, is the possibility of
locally led reconciliation efforts between different
communities, which have very often gone through very
traumatic times in the past few years, whether in Chad
or Darfur. If such reconciliation efforts can be
maintained and pursued, if communities can reach
agreement between themselves about living together
peacefully in the future, that facilitates the question of
return as soon as possible.

A related question was raised by the
representative of Italy with regard to land and property
rights. There is no doubt in my mind that, in the
context of discussions about a settlement in Darfur,
those issues are fundamental, as they are in many other
circumstances. We need to make sure we have done all
the homework necessary to try to resolve those issues
so that when people do start to return home in large
numbers, any conflict between them and other people
who may have occupied their land or been using their
land for grazing in the meantime can be resolved
peacefully and that there are proper dispute-resolution
mechanisms in place. These issues are absolutely
fundamental in this context, and we need to have them
fully in mind.

The representative of Costa Rica also mentioned
the protection of civilians and the need to continue the
debate on that. I entirely welcome the possibility of
continuing that discussion - what it means, how
important it is and how we can do things about those
areas - within the context of the debate on the
protection of civilians, which we will be having, I
think, in January. I look forward to that very much.

Finally, the last point raised by the representative
of Italy was a question about the environment, which I
08-63132

did touch on briefly. I was shocked at some of the
things I saw and heard while I was in Darfur this time,
but also in eastern Chad. For example, in south Darfur,
the site of Kalma camp used to be a forest. There are
now virtually no trees visible in any direction around
the camp, apart from those that are useless. In fact, the
camp is littered with the trunks of trees that have been
felled and are being used for various purposes. The
environmental damage being done there, and in areas
around other camps in south Darfur, is very
considerable. Environmental experts I met raised the
point that if we do not do something about this now, by
the time the conflict is resolved the damage may have
become irreversible.

I think this is a very important point we need to
bear in mind: the damage to timber because of
urbanization and the need for firewood and the damage
to water resources caused by concentrations of IDPs in
certain places. And not least, we have to bear in mind
the large-scale presence of the international
community. Peacekeeping forces and humanitarians
also contribute to this. More buildings are needed and
more water and timber are consumed, so we have a
particular responsibility to start to tackle these
environmental issues now, rather than waiting until the
end of the conflict, at which stage it will be much more
difficult to resolve them.

Thank you very much, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to respond to those points.

