Mr. Naanda (Namibia): I wish to express my
sincere congratulations to the United Kingdom on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. I also wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate, which my delegation hopes will highlight
the importance of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, in support of conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding activities and forging greater regional
and national ownership.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Republic
of Zimbabwe on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community and with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

While it remains the primary responsibility of the
Security Council to maintain international peace and
security in accordance with the Chapter I ofthe Charter
of the United Nations, conflicts continue to have a
negative impact on social, economic and political
development, particularly in Africa. There is therefore
an urgent need to create an environment conducive
to peace and development. We believe that such an
environment can be created through the promotion
of the rule of law, which is essential for peace, the
prevention of armed conflicts and the enhancement of
cooperation among States.

It is worth noting that Chapter VIII of the Charter
encourages cooperation with regional bodies in efforts
to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts. Furthermore,
it is important to note and to recognize that regional
and subregional organizations are closer to erupting
situations and are not only familiar with the issues,
but also understand the dynamics of the conflict in
any given region. Neighbouring countries also often
bear the burden and consequences of conflicts in their
surroundings. It is for that reason that my delegation
supports the principle of complementarity between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations in preventing conflict and thereby
maintaining peace and security.

In that context, Namibia commends the cooperation
agreement between the United Nations Security Council
and the African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council,
which is aimed at enhancing and strengthening closer
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations
in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. That
kind of cooperation will enhance Africa's institutional
capacity for conflict prevention and resolution and
ensure sustainable peace on the continent.

International peace and security is critical for the
promotion of the rule of law. The Security Council is at the
heart of that endeavour. As a member of the committee
of 10, we would like to underline the fact that, in order

to become more effective, the comprehensive reform of
the Security Council to make it more democratic and
transparent and enable it to better serve humankind has
become more relevant. We note that, faced with some of
the current international conflicts, the choice of action
or inaction by the Security Council is based only on
self-serving political considerations, which may hinder
the effective implementation of its mandate. Calls for
the reform of the Council in order to create harmony
can never be overstated.

There is no doubt that the successful prevention of
conflicts depends on the skilful identification of early
warning signs and preventive diplomacy, mediation,
reconciliation and confidence-building measures.

Protecting humankind from the scourge of war is
the principle foundation of the United Nations. Namibia
believes that this noble goal can be achieved only when
all Member States refrain from the use or threat of the
use of force in any manner inconsistent with the purpose
and principles of justice and international law. The right
to self-determination, non-interference in the domestic
affairs of other States, respect for human rights and
respect for equal rights for all without distinction on
the basis of race, language, religion or cultural or social
character are obligations under the Charter that should
guide State conduct at the international level.

In conclusion, while this debate is devoted to
conflict prevention, it should be highlighted that the
international community, working in concert and
motivated by the common objective of achieving
international peace, should identify the root causes of
conflicts in the world with the aim of finding lasting
solutions. Namibia welcomes forums like this, where
we can collectively take stock and exchange views on
the state of conflict prevention in the world.

