Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
comprehensive briefing, especially her comments on
her visit to the Sudan. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his most recent report (S/2019/44) on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

Poland welcomes the improved security situation
in Darfur. At the same time, we are aware that the
progress that has been made is volatile and reversible,
because the root causes of conflict have not yet been
fully addressed. We remain concerned about the reports
of continued clashes between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid
in Jebel Marra and their consequences for the civilian
population. We are also sorry to have to note that the
human rights situation in Darfur remains problematic.
We strongly condemn sexual and gender-based violence
and the targeting of the civilian population, especially
those most vulnerable - women, children, people with
disabilities and internally displaced persons - including
by Government security personnel. In our view, the
Government of the Sudan should spare no effort to hold
the perpetrators accountable and should do its utmost
to fight impunity, provide security and ensure the rule
of law in Darfur. In that context, we also see a need for
enhancing the capacity of State institutions and law-
enforcement agencies, and we urge the Government to
continue cooperating with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

We reiterate our position that the only possible
solution to the conflict in Darfur is a political one.
In that context, we welcomed the signing in Berlin in
December of a pre-negotiation agreement, although we
regret that the current internal situation in the Sudan
has resulted in the loss of that recent momentum in the
peace process.

With regard to the UNAMID drawdown, we
welcome the fact that the Mission's reconfiguration is
proceeding in accordance with the plan. We believe that
the Council should closely monitor the impact on the
ground of UNAMID's downsizing so as to ensure that
the gains that have been achieved in Darfur will not
be compromised. The Government of the Sudan should
be held to account for ensuring progress towards the
achievement of the exit benchmarks and indicators. The
drawdown should be compensated for by an increased
presence of the United Nations country team and,
particularly important, by ensuring that the country
team has sufficient and adequate resources to carry out
its work in Darfur.

We believe firmly that during the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding there should be
a particular emphasis on improving socioeconomic
conditions in Darfur in the areas of the provision
of health services and jobs, education, trade, basic
economic infrastructure and agriculture, and on
effectively establishing the rule of law throughout
Darfur. Cooperation between the Government of the
Sudan, the local authorities in Darfur, UNAMID and
the United Nations country team is crucial in that
regard. We believe that the international community
should join those efforts and support the recovery and
development of Darfur in order to avoid a relapse into
conflict. In that context, we hope to see the new Darfur
development strategy finalized as soon as possible,
which could streamline international assistance.

In conclusion, I would like to express our gratitude
to all UNAMID personnel and the United Nations
country team for their continued dedication and
contribution to promoting peace, security, stability and
reconciliation in Darfur.

