Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): The Netherlands
warmly welcomes the initiative of the Slovenian presidency
to devote an open debate to the role of the Security Council
in the prevention of armed conflicts. We regard conflict
prevention as the core of the duties the Security Council is
called upon to carry out on behalf of the United Nations
membership. It lies, naturally and manifestly, at the heart of
the Netherlands' integrated approach to the Council's
agenda. The following remarks are complementary to those
which will be made later on by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union, with whose
statement the Netherlands fully associates itself.

It is self-evident that preventing an armed conflict is
preferable to dealing with it after it has broken out. The
cost of an armed conflict in humanitarian, societal and
economic terms will always exceed the outlay for even the
most intricate preventive action. So why is it that so many
opportunities are being missed in the field of conflict
prevention?

Conflict prevention by the Security Council rests on
three pillars: early warning, early attention and early action.
The Council has to be warned about an impending crisis
early enough for it to be able to act; it has to give sufficient
and timely attention to the case, and then it has to act
effectively to prevent the conflict from erupting. The
problem nowadays is not a lack of early warning of
impending crises, but rather the follow-up to it, a point
which was also made by the Secretary-General in his report
on conflict, durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa.

Of fundamental importance, therefore, is the attitude
of the 15 Member States on the Security Council. It is they
who make or break the relevance of the Council to the
maintenance of international peace and security. In this
regard, the Charter has assigned a special responsibility to
the permanent five, but it also singles out the non-
permanent ten in that it expects them to have been elected
with due regard to their contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Yet, positions are sometimes taken which stand in the
way of effective Security Council action. All Council
members subscribe to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. These are contained in Chapter
I of the Charter and include the venerable Article 2,
paragraph 7, which stipulates that nothing shall authorize
the United Nations to intervene in matters which are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State.
The current session of the General Assembly has
witnessed an impassioned debate on the enduring validity
of that provision.

Without wishing to stoke up a similar debate in this
Council, we cannot help pointing out that everything the
Charter has to say with regard to the prevention of armed
conflict in Chapters VI and VII and in Article 99 appears
to have been drafted with conflicts between States in
mind, while the overwhelming majority of present-day
conflicts on the Council's agenda are of an internal,
domestic nature. Against that background, a rigid
interpretation of Article 2, paragraph 7, would preclude
adaptation to this reality and, in effect, make all the
Charter's provisions on the prevention of armed conflict
ineffectual. Rarely have we come across more convincing
evidence that Article 2, paragraph 7, cannot possibly be
the alpha and omega of the Charter today.

One of the most telling indicators of impending
conflict is the occurrence of rampant human rights
violations. Such abuses reflect a breakdown of the rule of
law and can be a prelude to violent domestic conflict with
consequences for international peace and security. For
that reason, the Security Council should treat the reports
of the Human Rights Commission and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights as potential early
warning documents. In the context of conflict prevention,
the Council cannot avoid addressing the internal situation
of States wherever negative developments are apt to
degenerate into large-scale atrocities and massive
dislocation of civilians. This cannot be rejected on
grounds of domestic jurisdiction. As the Secretary-
General has made clear, ethnic cleansers and mass
murderers are not protected by the United Nations
Charter.

In discussing the role of the Security Council in
conflict prevention, one cannot escape the hotly debated
issue of the veto. As the Netherlands Foreign Minister
said in his intervention at the opening of the General
Assembly, no matter when or how the debate on the veto
will end, those who can wield it should exercise
maximum restraint, in particular in situations of
humanitarian emergency. If a permanent Council member
uses or threatens to use its veto, it is duty-bound to
explain to the world why it is blocking action by the

 

Council. The right of veto is an extraordinary privilege
accorded to only five members of the United Nations. It
goes without saying that it should never be exercised for
reasons which are extraneous to the issue of international
peace and security that is before the Council.

The instruments the Council can employ in preventing
armed conflict are partly to be found in Chapters VI and
VII of the United Nations Charter. Council members should
not feel restricted to those alone. After all, peacekeeping
operations are not mentioned in the Charter, and they have
become a major tool in the Council's hands. In view of the
nature of current crises, often involving non-State actors
and sometimes failed States, the Council has to be
pragmatic and unorthodox as regards its tools and its
interlocutors, as it was in September when it dispatched a
mission to Indonesia and East Timor.
When discussing the Security Council's role in conflict
prevention, it is important not to lose sight of the Secretary-
General's role in that field. These roles should be mutually
supportive; the Council and the Secretary-General are
partners, not competitors. Their joint endeavours in
September to encourage the Indonesian Government to
accept the deployment of a multinational force in East
Timor were a notable example of effective cooperation
between the Security Council and the Secretary-General.

Article 99 had already been mentioned in passing
when I drew the Council's attention to the precarious
relationship between conflict prevention and domestic
jurisdiction. My delegation strongly encourages the
Secretary-General to make liberal use of his authority under
that Article, including when the matter he wishes to bring
to the Council's attention has not yet revealed its cross-
border potential.

The current debate is about the role of the Security
Council in conflict prevention. However, given the nature
of the security challenges that face us, it is evident that the
Council cannot operate alone. Ideally, its political measures
should be integrated with structural measures addressing the
root causes of an approaching crisis, such as building
democratic institutions, strengthening the rule of law and
promoting development.

Both nationally and internationally, the preventive
impact of an effective legal system for the prosecution of
human rights violations is obvious. It is in the first place at
the national level that such a system should be in place and,
if necessary, strengthened. For situations in which States
themselves are unable or unwilling to prosecute and punish
perpetrators of the most heinous crimes, the International
Criminal Court has been created. The Court will also act
as a powerful deterrent to potential perpetrators. The
Netherlands therefore urges States to sign and ratify the
Statute of the Court so that it can start functioning as
soon as possible.

