Mr. Derbez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to extend Mexico's best wishes to the
delegation of Guinea upon assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and to thank Mr. Fischer and the
delegation of Germany for their successful leadership
of our work during the previous month.

Mexico attends with optimism this meeting in
which the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of a large
number of members of the Security Council are
meeting once again to listen to the inspectors of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and to have a dialogue
among us. Despite the apparent divergence of positions
among member States with respect to the best way to
proceed in achieving the definitive disarmament of
Iraq, multilateral diplomacy is still in force. We are
still seated at this table in the attempt to find a common
course of action.

The Security Council is undoubtedly the ideal
forum in which to explore all the options and to agree
on which option is the most appropriate for the
international community. The search for a consensus
that expresses the collective will of States is what
brings us together and what we hope to achieve.
Mexico hopes that the differences that today prevent us
from reaching agreement on acting together on the
question of Iraq will be discussed and resolved right
here, in this the home par excellence of the community
of nations. We believe that in advancing towards
agreement we shall be able to revitalize the credibility,
reliability and the authority of the Security Council and
the validity and the spirit of the Charter of San
Francisco, and allow us to give greater strength to the
United Nations. Let us not waste this opportunity.

We have taken note of the situation of the
inspections of UNMOVIC and IAEA in Iraq. Once
again, we express our full appreciation for the efforts
made by the inspectors both on the ground and in the
presentation of their reports to the Security Council.

Mexico wants to express its concern with respect
to the situation in Iraq and with respect to the lack of
active, immediate and effective cooperation by the
regime that governs that country. There has been a
clear consensus among us all on the objective to be
achieved. However, the latest developments and
declarations on the question of Iraq make it clear that
there are different visions on carrying out the tasks of
disarmament in that country. We are greatly distressed
by the fact that various relationships and common
values, constructed with much effort over several
decades, are now being eroded.

We face very complex decisions affecting the
future of the world. That is why we are worried by the
distance between positions among the members of the
Council, which leads to recriminations and
disagreements that until a few months ago we believed
had been overcome. If that polarization increases, it
may in future gravely affect the way in which we
approach a question as important as that of
disarmament. This is a defining moment. For that
reason, Mexico wishes to stress the importance of not
becoming discouraged in seeking the broadest possible
consensus among the members of the Security Council.
The strength of the collective security system of the
United Nations is founded on the Council's unity.

The Charter of the United is the instrument that
must give form and legitimacy to all our
understandings and to all our collective actions.
Mexico shares with the rest of the members of the
Council the conviction that it is both necessary and
possible to reconcile the differences. In the last few
days, with our colleagues, Mexico has actively
explored different manners of reaching agreement.
With other colleagues, we have approached the Council
members most directly involved in the question of Iraq
in order to facilitate an understanding and to avoid
taking up inflexible positions. International public
opinion demands us to act in a united and prudent
manner.

Although it is not necessary to have uniformity
within international organisms, as is fitting in a plural
and diverse world, it should at least be necessary to
promote to the greatest extent possible agreement on
the way to deal with the most worrisome issues in the
world in order to ensure effective and lasting
international security.

Mexico is alarmed by the damage that the issue of
Iraq has caused in the international political arena, by
the uncertainty that it creates in financial markets and
by how the issue is affecting the framework of stability
for productive investment, which is the basis for
economic growth and the development of peoples.
Peace among nations is intimately linked to that
development.

Throughout the history of its foreign policy,
Mexico has always made the greatest effort to propose
initiatives that strengthen multilateral forums and
mutual understanding among peoples in observance of
international law. That is the most effective way to
ensure that we resolve conflicts in an effective and
lasting manner.

Mexico wishes to broaden the range of formulas
for achieving an effective disarmament of Iraq and to
open this space to more options and ideas that will
preserve the diplomatic option in dealing with an issue
such as disarmament. Using means that preserve and
revitalize the values of peace, Mexico advocates the
adoption of more effective means of pressure in order
to enforce the cooperation that we all demand of Iraq.
That active cooperation is essential for determining
with absolute certainty the location of Iraqi weapons of
mass destruction and, if they exist, for ensuring their
destruction.

It is regrettable that Iraq reacts so quickly to
political pressure and the real threat of the use of force,
but does not react in such a manner to the reiterated
demands of the international community. It is even
more regrettable that this cooperation is still limited
and is conceded in small amounts. From what we have
heard, Iraqi cooperation has been unwilling in respect
to the demands of the international community. That is
why Mexico considers that the international
community can be even firmer, through peaceful
means. Mexico reiterates its request that the Iraqi
Government radically change its attitude and carry out
immediately clear and unequivocal actions to
demonstrate that it has chosen the path of disarmament
and, consequently, the peaceful resolution of this crisis.

Our foreign policy is the result of principles and
convictions acquired over a long and rich historical
experience. We have very true and valid reasons to
defend multilateralism, to work so that the decisions
adopted to disarm Iraq are not unilateral but
unequivocally fall within international law. Our
collective interests lie in the maintenance of peace.
That is how we understand our responsibility as
members of the Security Council of the United
Nations. Mexico is convinced that we have to explore
all options and take advantage of all opportunities to
resolve this issue in a peaceful manner.

That is why Mexico insists on the importance of
working towards a consensus position with respect to
the future actions to be taken by the Security Council
with respect to Iraq. Mexico urges members to work
with greater creativity on this difficult issue. We must
act with the conviction that creativity will lead to the
strengthening of the Council and will consolidate its
validity as an effective forum in which humanity can
fully place its trust.

