Mr. Simfio (Mozambique): First of all, I wish to
congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I have been advised of your excellent qualities of
leadership as well as your diplomatic skills. I therefore have
no doubt that you will successfully guide our deliberations.
You can rest assured of my delegation's readiness to
cooperate with you in the discharge of your duties. I would
request you to convey to the Government of Argentina the
Mozambican Government's appreciation for the positive
role your country has played in the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ), and especially for
the military hospital deployed by Argentina in our
country.

I should also like to commend the manner in which
your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Manzi Bakuramutsa
of Rwanda, presided over the deliberations of the Council
last month.

I wish to seize this opportunity to welcome the new
members of the Council - Botswana, Germany,
Honduras, Indonesia and Italy. My delegation looks
forward to cooperating closely with them during the
period of their mandate. I should not fail to put on record
my Government's appreciation for the excellent role
played by the outgoing members of the Council - Brazil,
Djibouti, New Zealand, Pakistan and Spain - during the
last two years as members of the Security Council. Their
participation, together with that of other members of the
Council, and their close relationship with us during the
last two years have contributed to enhancing the role of
this body in addressing major issues concerning
international peace and security. Indeed, it was during that
period that the Council dealt with matters pertaining to
the establishment of lasting peace and tranquillity in my
country, in the framework of the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ). In that period,
members of the Council contributed collectively and
individually to the success of the noble cause of peace in
Mozambique. May I, at this stage, commend all Security
Council members and their respective Governments for
the valuable contribution they have rendered to my
country ever since the signing of the General Peace
Agreement in Rome on 4 October 1992.

On behalf of my Government and on my own
behalf, I should equally like to commend the Secretary-
General for the personal role he has played in the
consolidation of peace in my country, as well as in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In our
assessment, despite the numerous challenges facing
today's world, the Secretary-General has been able to
make the United Nations an organization respected by all
of us and regarded as an instrument of hope for the
peoples of the world. In the case of Mozambique, the
Secretary-General's permanent follow-up and leadership
of ONUMOZ activities has played a crucial role in the
implementation of the General Peace Agreement. His visit
to Mozambique in October last year bears testimony to
his personal commitment towards our peace process.
Similarly, I wish to commend the Special Representative

 

of the Secretary-General, Mr. Aldo Ajello, and the
personnel of ONUMOZ for their efforts to implement the
mandate entrusted to them. I recall with deep sadness that
some of those young men have lost their lives in the
discharge of their duties. Once again, on behalf of the
people and the Government of Mozambique and on my
own behalf, I wish to pay tribute to them and reiterate our
heartfelt condolences to their respective Governments and
families.

Today's meeting is the last of a series of Security
Council meetings on Mozambique during the past two
years. We are honoured to participate in today's
deliberations, especially because we are assembled not to
express our concerns over outstanding issues but, rather, to
say that at last our collective mission has been successfully
accomplished, despite all the hurdles we encountered in the
process.

We are therefore happy to congratulate ourselves on
the completion of a major, delicate but successful United
Nations peace-keeping operation. It is now time for a final
assessment of the whole process, so as to draw lessons that
will certainly help the United Nations address similar
operations in future and to collectively exchange views on
the United Nations Operation in Mozambique and on how
best we can enhance the role of the United Nations in
peace-keeping operations.

In a few days, in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 957 (1994) of 14 November 1994, the United
Nations Operation in Mozambique will have completed all
its activities and withdrawn from Mozambique.

As the Council is aware, in fulfilment of the
provisions of the General Peace Agreement for
Mozambique, the first multi-party general elections were
held from 27 to 29 October 1994. These elections have
been regarded by the international community and by this
body as an example of the political maturity of the
Mozambican people. We take great pride in the distinction
thus conferred on our people. It gives us renewed energy
and the confidence to overcome future challenges. My
Government recognizes the significant role played by the
Security Council in the success of these first general
elections in my country and regards them as the real
foundation for the establishment of a multi-party democratic
society in Mozambique.

At the completion of this process, a new Assembly of
the Republic, consisting of 250 deputies from the three
political parties that obtained the most votes, was
inaugurated on 8 December. Subsequently - on the
following day - President Chissano was sworn in as the
first President elected by universal suffrage.

These very important steps marked the beginning of
a new era in the history of Mozambique. This is an era in
which political pluralism, national reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence between Mozambicans will have to
be ensured in order to enable lasting peace to be attained
in our country. Indeed, it is within the framework of
multi-party democracy that a presidential forum,
composed of a variety of distinguished political figures,
will be created to enhance the national reconciliation
process and the consolidation of democracy. We are
entering an era in which violence and the use or threat of
the use of force will be replaced by political dialogue and
tolerance; an era in which the right to agree or disagree
with one another must be respected by each and every
person.

In other words, this is an era in which respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms will constitute
the cornerstone of our society. In his inaugural address,
President Chissano committed himself to doing all in his
power to attain these objectives, so that the peace we
celebrate today may endure for ever. He further
emphasized, inter alia, that

"As I begin my mandate as President of the
Republic, I declare my solemn commitment that I
shall always be the President of all Mozambicans. I
shall guarantee to all Mozambicans equal rights and
freedoms, enshrined in the Constitution and in law.
I shall respect the will of the majority and shall pay
due attention to the rights of minorities in order that
the enjoyment of freedom and rights shall never
again be restricted or threatened by intolerance,
discrimination or acts of aggression".

In summary, we have entered an era in which
Mozambicans will learn to live together in harmony and
will concentrate their efforts on healing the wounds
resulting from so many years of conflict and destruction.

As we begin this new phase in our democratic
process, we look forward to addressing the challenges
ahead of us. Currently, the Government is engaged in the
preparation of the budget, whose approval by the
Assembly of the Republic is scheduled to take place in
March. To this end, President Chissano, in his annual
address to the diplomatic community accredited in
Mozambique, launched an appeal to the donor community

 

for its continued involvement in the process of national
reconstruction. He further stressed his conviction that the
implementation of the Economic and Social Rehabilitation
Programme launched by the Government in 1987, having
shown encouraging trends and significant progress during
the last year, can register even better results now that our
country is enjoying a climate of peace, provided it is
supported by the international community. We sincerely
hope that the forthcoming Consultative Group meeting,
scheduled for March in Paris, will be in line with the
expectations of our people by responding positively to the
country's needs.

My Government attaches great importance to the
promotion of the wider involvement of both the national
and the foreign private sectors in the implementation of
undertakings that can generate employment and contribute
to the solution of the economic and social problems facing
us today. In this connection, the Government has recently
carried out a thorough review of the legislation on foreign
investment, so as to simplify the legal proceedings in order
to provide substantial incentives for foreign investment. In
addition, my Government will continue to require
international assistance in addressing vital issues pertaining
to the reintegration of demobilized soldiers, returnees and
displaced persons, as well as in taking actions aimed at
eradicating poverty. These initiatives must be
complemented by other actions aimed at promoting rural
development and restoring primary health-care services in
both urban and rural areas.

The ongoing de-mining programme will play an
important role in the fulfilment of the Government's
priorities in the years to come. If we are to consolidate the
normalization of life in rural areas, increase food production
and facilitate the movement of people and goods throughout
the country, it is essential that the issue of land mines be
addressed with high resolve. In this connection, I wish to
take this opportunity to express our gratitude to all those
who have assisted and continue to assist my Government in
carrying out this very important initiative. I had a very
positive talk on this issue this morning with Mr. Peter
Hansen, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs.

Those are, in summary, some of my Government's
priorities. However, in order to maintain and further
strengthen a truly democratic society, Whose foundations
have been established as a result of our recently held
general elections, it is essential to ensure the adequate
functioning of democratic institutions.

Accordingly, my Government regards it as of great
importance to strengthen national institutions responsible
for the maintenance of peace, tranquility and public order
in our country as well as to ensure that the road on which
we have just embarked is not blocked owing to lack of
means. I have in mind the issue of the formation of the
Mozambican Defence Force (FADM) - an issue which
is yet to be fully addressed - and the strengthening of
the role of the national police in ensuring, and its capacity
to ensure, public safety. Moreover, we are determined to
strengthen the judicial system so as to consolidate a real
state of law.

The consolidation of the judicial system has been
recognized as one of the most important elements in
ensuring and guaranteeing the existence of true
democracy in a country like ours - and I believe, in all
developing countries - and in ensuring a system of
checks and balances as well as transparency and
accountability in the management of national affairs.
Furthermore, there is general consensus that if we are to
ensure true democracy in Mozambique, then we must
create and consolidate a permanent electoral body which
can guarantee the adequate supervision and monitoring of
future elections. This should be an institution that is
respected for its professionalism and transparency, and
that thereby enjoys the necessary support of all political
parties inside the country.

Those are some of the main areas where we believe
the support of the Security Council is crucial. In this
connection, my Government very greatly appreciates the
assurances given by the Secretary-General in his recent
letter to my predecessor - now Prime Minister - His
Excellency Mr. Pascoal Manuel Mocumbi, in which the
Secretary-General indicated that despite the withdrawal of
the United Nations Operation in Mozambique
(ONUMOZ), the United Nations will continue to assist
Mozambique in strengthening the national reconstruction
process and its new democratic institutions, as well as in
its economic and social integration. We in Mozambique
look forward to actively participating in and contributing
to the materialization of these assurances.

I should like to seize this opportunity, as I speak
today on the subject of economic and social integration,
to draw the Council's attention to the growing concern
over a possible threat to our fragile peace that might
result from the consequences of a new and renewed
drought in Mozambique and in the southern African
region as whole.

 

My Government appreciates most sincerely the roles
which the Security Council and the international community
as a whole have played in helping us mitigate the
devastating consequences of man-made and natural
calamities which have ravaged our region. Nevertheless, I
do believe it is my duty to encourage the Council to keep
this issue under permanent review. As a matter of fact,
human lives have already been lost in Mozambique as a
result of the drought that is afflicting an ever-greater
number of areas of my country.

For those reasons, my Government believes that the
holding of the first multi-party general elections and the
withdrawal of the United Nations Operation in Mozambique
should not be regarded as ends in themselves. They are
only the culmination of an important phase of the whole
peace process and the beginning of a new and more
challenging one. In our opinion, the need for the
international community to continue to assist the people and
the Government of Mozambique in consolidating peace and
stability is more acute than ever before.

The presence of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique offers me an excellent opportunity to refer
briefly to the overall issue of peace-keeping operations. Our
vision - and, I am certain, that of many others among us
today - is that peace-keeping forces will be successful
only if they enjoy the support of the parties involved. On
the other hand, they must strictly adhere to fundamental
principles outlined by the General Assembly and respect
their respective terms of reference as approved by the
Security Council and in line with the agreement reached by
the parties. In particular, as my predecessor argued in his
statement to the General Assembly at its forty-ninth
session:

"Where there is a Government, even with weak
institutions, peace-keeping missions should work in
close cooperation with the local authorities and
respect and strengthen those institutions, rather than
try to weaken or undermine them." (Ofiicial Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings, 15th meeting, p. 37)

Those observations remain valid today. I believe it is
important to underline them because, as the Secretary-
General indicated in his "Agenda for Peace", the State is
and must remain the foundation-stone of the work of the
United Nations.

In the case of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique, we congratulate ourselves on its excellent and
smooth communication with the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative during the whole process. The
existence of adequate communication is vital for the
success of peace-keeping operations, for it helps to solve
problems and crises as they arise. Above all,
communication helps to restore confidence between the
United Nations and the parties whenever necessary. To
this end, may I recall the Secretary-General's visits to
Mozambique at a time when the whole peace process
seemed to be deadlocked, and of the Security Council's
Mission at a time when it appeared unclear to the
international community whether elections would be held
as scheduled. Thanks to communication, we were able to
resolve all difficulties and to bring the peace process to
the successful conclusion we all celebrate today.
The consolidation of peace in Mozambique
constitutes a significant contribution to peace in the
southern African region, where we witnessed in 1994
significant developments in many of its countries. The
holding of multi-party general elections in a number of
countries of the region has been the central element of the
ongoing democratic transformation we are experiencing.

The recent signing of the Lusaka Protocol between
the Government of the Republic of Angola and UNITA
constitutes a significant contribution to efforts for peace
in our region. We sincerely wish to encourage both
parties to take maximum advantage of the momentum
created in Lusaka and to work together for a better future
in their country. May I take this opportunity to underline
the importance we attach to the early deployment of the
third United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III). Our recent experience in this regard has
shown that the sooner such a verification mechanism is
established and deployed, the better for the success of the
peace process. I would therefore urge the Council to look
into this matter more diligently and expeditiously.

These developments lead us to believe in lasting
peace and security in Mozambique and in southern Africa
as a whole. My Government wishes to encourage all
members of the Council to work towards this objective.

