Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I, too, wish to thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing to the Council
today on the 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

South Africa continues to support the resolution
of the issues involved with Iran's nuclear programme
through peaceful means and dialogue between the
parties concerned, including between the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Islamic
Republic of Iran. South Africa does not believe that
sanctions are an end in themselves and therefore
wishes to emphasize that they should be aimed at
encouraging progress towards a peaceful resolution of
the concerns about Iran's nuclear activities.

In that regard, South Africa notes from the latest
report of the Director General of the IAEA that the
Agency continues to be able to verify the
non-diversion of nuclear material declared by Iran, but
also that it remains unable to provide credible
assurances about the absence of undeclared nuclear
material and activities in Iran.

The IAEA remains the sole competent technical
authority to verify the nature of the nuclear programme
of the Islamic Republic of Iran. We are therefore
pleased to note the recent negotiations between Iran
and the Agency, and look forward to their resumption
culminating in a structured approach to address all
outstanding issues consistent with the Agency's
verification practices.

South Africa once again encourages all parties
concerned to avoid any actions that could derail
progress towards finding a sustainable solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue. To that end, we trust that the
Security Council will work in good faith to encourage
constructive dialogue between the parties concerned.
We call upon Iran to comply with the relevant
decisions of the IAEA and with its obligation and other
relevant Security Council resolutions.

We wish to reiterate that South Africa believes
that we should not tire in seeking, in a cooperative
manner, a long-term solution that restores international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme, while respecting Iran's right to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy, consistent with the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

