Let me brief the Security Council today on the Constitutional Committee, the situation on the ground and the search for a wider process towards a political solution that implements resolution 2254 (2015). As Council members know, the fourth session of the small body of the Syrian Constitutional Committee convened in Geneva from 30 November to 4 December. Given the major challenges related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Switzerland, it took the dedication of Swiss authorities, United Nations staff and the Committee members themselves to hold the session safely, and I thank all for playing their part. During the session, Committee members continued their dialogue on the agenda, which was in line with the mandate, terms of reference and core rules of procedure and focused on national foundations and principles. They discussed a wide range of topics and, towards the end of the week, the Government and opposition nominee positions were also reflected in overview presentations in writing. The delegation nominated by the Syrian Government presented eight principles related to combating terrorism and condemning terrorist ideologies and support for terrorists; condemning unilateral coercive measures and the occupation of Syrian territory; rejecting separatism and separatist projects; supporting the Syrian Arab Army; promoting national identity; protecting cultural diversity; encouraging and guaranteeing refugee returns; and addressing humanitarian issues. They were presented as national foundations and principles and, as the delegation emphasized, were not explicitly linked to a future constitutional text. The delegation nominated by the Syrian Negotiations Commission presented 23 points on a range of principles, including Syria's sovereignty; territorial integrity; international relations and commitment to international law; national identity; cultural diversity; democracy; political pluralism; the rule of law; the separation of powers; corruption; terrorism; citizenship; refugee returns; rights and freedoms; and social and economic principles. Those 23 points were framed by the delegation as grounded in the 12 Living Intra-Syrian Essential Principles, which were affirmed in Sochiand inthe Committee's mandate, and were presented by the delegation as points for development to form part of the basic principles within a new constitution. Some civil society members of the middle third presented points on conditions for safe, voluntary and dignified refugee returns and related issues, such as the restitution of housing, land and property; restorative justice; and relevant independent and impartial constitutional mechanisms. Meanwhile, other members made interventions on a range of themes, such as the need to address terrorism, sanctions, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The impact of conflict on the lives of Syrian women and the importance of their role in political life and of ensuring equality between men and women were raised on many occasions during the session by members of all three delegations. There were many stark differences among the positions and narratives presented within the Committee, and there were a few tense moments. I was not surprised by that, but it is positive that some positions were put forward concretely, and I was somewhat encouraged that members listened to each other's narratives with attentiveness and even respect, with fewer interruptions and points of order than before and some genuine attempts to engage with each other's positions. My team and I listened carefully to all that was said and, in our opinion, it is possible to see potential common ground in the discussions - a potential that can be explored. Consistent with the package agreed between the co-Chairs, they and the Committee members agreed that the fifth session of the small body will convene in Geneva from 25 to 29 January 2021, COVID-19 conditions permitting. Without any preconditions and as agreed, in line with the mandate, terms of reference and core rules of procedure, the agenda will focus on constitutional principles or basic principles of the Constitution. I will engage both co-Chairs before the next session on how to ensure that the Committee moves, as its mandate states, from "preparing" a constitutional reform to "drafting" one. As the co-Chairs affirmed during the session, the Committee is mandated and empowered to do that by the agreement of the Syrian Government and the Syrian Negotiations Commission. The Constitutional Committee, however, does need to improve its working methods. I would like to see the co-Chairs find a consensus on working methods that can promote the good functioning of the Committee and organize and structure its work, enabling it to consider specific constitutional items and draft provisions. In addition to a clear method for the fifth session, I believe that we also would need a workplan beyond that so that the Committee works expeditiously and continuously to produce results and continued progress, without foreign interference or externally imposed timelines. I will continue to involve and consult Syrian women, and I met virtually with the Women's Advisory Board twice during the session of the Constitutional Committee. I continue to be impressed by their commitment to supporting the political process and arriving at inclusive proposals and solutions in the interest of all Syrians, both men and women. I am encouraged by their recent engagement with women's groups in different areas of Syria and the region to test some of their ideas on the constitution and to listen to the priorities and concerns of Syrian women. This past month, I also continued to engage civil society through the Civil Society Support Room. Just yesterday, I resumed consultations with a diverse group of people who are experts in their respective fields. I did so using dedicated online virtual tools, allowing us to connect with a wide range of Syrian civil society actors from different parts of Syria and the diaspora. I heard their strong concerns about what many feel is a lack of tangible political progress, including within the Constitutional Committee. They described the suffering in many parts of Syria, the economic meltdown and the impact of sanctions and growing criminality. They demanded progress on the detainee file and protection guarantees for refugees and their land and properties, and they called for greater civic space and protection for civil society. We will continue that dialogue. I will meet with them again tomorrow and continue to convey the voices and messages of civil society to the parties. Those messages remind us that a credible constitutional process is important. They also remind us that there is a range of issues beyond the constitution that are of urgent concern to ordinary Syrians, as identified in resolution 2254 (2015), and need to be addressed. Violent conflict and terrorism continue to be a stark reality for Syrians. Thanks to existing arrangements, including those involving Russia, Turkey and the United States, a fragile calm continues and there are ongoing efforts to address listed terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. But that continues to fall well short of the nationwide ceasefire envisioned in resolution 2254 (2015). Shelling, air strikes and improvised explosive device attacks continue to kill and injure civilians. The dangers of renewed conflict are ever-present in the north-west, the south-west and even in the north-east, where there were troubling signs of tensions this month. Much more can and should be done to address terrorist groups in a manner that is consistent with international humanitarian law and ensures the protection of civilians. With five international armies operating in Syria, the country remains a tinderbox for a major international incident, with potential implications across the region. Much more can be done to safeguard international peace and security, while also looking at practical and concrete ways to safeguard and restore Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity in the context of the resolution 2254 (2015) process. To achieve that, key players will need to be ready to come to the table together. The humanitarian situation of millions of Syrians remains precarious and even catastrophic for some. As we have just heard from Emergency Relief Coordinator Mark Lowcock and as he told the Council, much more must be done to ensure the necessary access and resources to meet their needs, with food insecurity a particular concern. Indeed, Syrian civilians continue to suffer profound economic hardship, particularly with fresh currency depreciation and shortages of bread, fuel and medicine in the middle of what is set to be a hard winter, with the COVID-19 pandemic continuing to spread. I continue to believe that more can and should be done to address those conditions, including by ensuring that any sanctions avoid aggravating the plight of Syrian civilians. There has still been no meaningful action on detainees, abductees and missing persons, especially of late. Frankly, I am disappointed at where this file stands. It is not moving. Yet when we look at other examples in the region - take Yemen, for instance - it must be possible to unblock it. There is a need for meaningful action at scale, including access to prisons and detention facilities; the release of women, children, the sick and the elderly; and information on the missing. That is a humanitarian imperative and is also essential for building confidence and infusing the entire political process with much-needed hope. The millions of Syrians who are refugees or internally displaced persons (IDPs) are not returning to their homes at any meaningful scale. I believe that much more can be done to address the range of conditions that should be in place for refugees and IDPs to return in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner. Ultimately, following the adoption of a new Constitution and the creation of a safe, calm and neutral environment, resolution 2254 (2015) calls for free and fair elections, administered under United Nations supervision, to the highest standards of transparency and accountability and with the participation of all eligible Syrians, including the diaspora. Let us be honest: after nearly a decade of conflict, the political process has not delivered for the Syrian people and they continue to suffer deeply, both inside and outside Syria. Only a political solution can end the suffering and prevent renewed conflict and instability, while protecting Syria's civilians and the region from further grave danger. As we look back on 2020, we have two elements to build on - a relative calm with no shift in front lines since March 2020 and a Constitutional Committee. As we look to 2021, we need a deeper and broader process - a nationwide ceasefire, substantive constitutional drafting and a wider effort to address the full range of issues, with actions to build confidence and movement, step for step. That will require a new form of international cooperation on Syria, with key players at the table and key issues on the table. Given the deep divides in Syria, in the region and internationally, forging a consensus on exactly how to bring about mutual and reciprocal steps and a truly constructive Syria diplomacy is proving very difficult. But I am convinced it is possible and that there are common interests that make it so. I will continue to take stock - as | have started to do in recent weeks - by engaging the Syrian parties and key international stakeholders and seeking to identify new and additional ways to move the process forwards. Obviously, we cannot do that alone. We need the strong and united support of the Council in charting such a path towards the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). I count on the support of the Council.
