Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for your invitation to participate
in this important meeting on protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
timely report on this item.

There can be no doubt that recent attention to the
prevention of deadly conflict is justified. The greatest
protection that can be offered to civilians, of course, is to
avoid war and prevent violence. Yet no one sitting in this
Chamber today needs to be reminded that dozens of violent
conflicts persist. It is therefore fitting that the Security
Council should continue to focus its attention on the

provision of assistance for those suffering the ravages of
war.
We must recognize at the outset that humanitarian
assistance is designed to do no more than respond to the
needs of the victims of war. Four years after the genocide
in Rwanda, the principal lesson drawn from the
international community's response to that nightmare
continues to ring true: humanitarian action is no substitute
for political action. Effective humanitarian action depends
upon corresponding action from political entities, and in
particular from the Security Council, to bring diplomatic
and, where necessary, military pressure to bear both to
protect civilians and to resolve the conflict in question.

Ensuring that the most vulnerable are afforded basic
protection is one of the most difficult challenges we face.
Because of this requirement for protection, military
personnel increasingly are being called upon to respond
to humanitarian crises. Canada has learned a number of
lessons from integrated military-civilian peace support
operations: a thorough understanding of the capabilities
and roles of political, military, humanitarian and human
rights partners is an important factor in any response to
a complex emergency; any confusion among political,
military and humanitarian mandates merely serves to
impugn the impartiality of humanitarian organizations; an
intervention force must have clear and realistic military
objectives and must be equipped with the means
necessary to achieve them; and efforts to disarm
belligerent parties and to separate refugees from
combatants are dangerous, and are bound to fail if an
intervention force is not structured or equipped for such
a mission.

(spoke in English)

Canada continues to support United Nations efforts
to improve the United Nations system's ability to respond
quickly to complex emergencies. The faster the United
Nations can respond to a crisis, the greater the likelihood
that the dramatic and disruptive consequences of such a
crisis, including massive population flight, can be
contained or avoided. The need for an improved rapid-
deployment capacity in the United Nations is manifest,
and we urge that action be taken to establish this vital
capability in the United Nations as soon as possible.

To further increase the capacity for effective
response, it may be both timely and prudent to re-
examine just how the various organs of the United
Nations involved in peace support missions actually plan

 

and conduct these operations. Canada believes it is essential
to strengthen the working relationships among the
Departments of Political Affairs and Peacekeeping
Operations and the humanitarian agencies. Each must be
fully integrated in the consultative and planning processes
for complex emergencies. We must also expand and
integrate the roles played by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and other United Nations agencies
responsible for protecting human rights. We welcome the
establishment of the working group of the Executive
Committee on Peace and Security and the Executive
Committee on Humanitarian Affairs to better define the
relationship between special representatives of the
Secretary-General and humanitarian coordinators, as well as
those of the human rights and other components of United
Nations missions.

The support that political organizations can extend to
their humanitarian counterparts should not be narrowly
conceived. As the Secretary-General indicates in his report,
the Security Council should give consideration to
developing a range of options to maintain law and order
and to create a secure environment for civilians endangered
by conflict, and for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in conflict situations. Allow me to enumerate a few of the
approaches that Canada believes to be the most promising.

The Secretary-General's report emphasizes the
importance of international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law in helping to protect individuals and to build
durable peace. All States must respect basic humanitarian
principles and comply with their international legal
obligations. Disseminating the principles and provisions,
and monitoring implementation and compliance, are
essential steps in promoting their effectiveness. Take, for
example, the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction, which received its crucial
fortieth ratification only two weeks ago. Our efforts must
now turn towards ensuring universal ratification, towards
monitoring compliance and towards disseminating the
principles of the Convention.

Like the establishment of international tribunals to
adjudicate violations of international humanitarian law in
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, the recent agreement
in Rome to establish the International Criminal Court is a
major step towards eliminating a culture of impunity and
improving protection for victims of conflict. By
demonstrating our intent to hold individuals accountable for
the atrocities they commit, the Court will help to deter
some of the most serious violations of international
humanitarian law and will give new meaning and global
reach to the protection of refugees and other victims of
conflicts.

Among those who need protection during conflict,
none are more vulnerable than children. The targeting of
children in warfare, both as fighters and as victims, is
intolerable. The ground-breaking efforts of Graca Machel
and the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Olara
Otunnu, merit special and ongoing support. Canada also
applauds the increased attention the Security Council has
focused on the practice of recruiting child combatants and
the attention it has brought to the issue of the
demobilization of child combatants.

As the report of the Secretary General on the
protection of humanitarian assistance highlights, the
routine physical danger encountered by humanitarian
workers is a subject that demands immediate attention and
vigorous action. Attacks on personnel who volunteer to
work in highly insecure and unstable environments in
order to bring succour to those in desperate need have
increased dramatically. In an ominous development,
civilian deaths now exceed those of the military among
those who represent the United Nations in the field.
Canada is profoundly concerned at the numerous attacks
perpetrated against United Nations personnel and the staff
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
and other humanitarian organizations. The growing
number of casualties among humanitarian workers
demands that we give urgent attention to improving
security measures for humanitarian personnel, including,
of course, local employees. If we are to continue to ask
workers to operate in such dangerous environments, we
owe it to them to ensure that practical measures, as
outlined by the Secretary-General, are taken to provide
for their protection.

At the same time, we must not fail to place the
responsibility for the safety of humanitarian workers
where it belongs first and foremost - with the parties to
the conflict. State and non-State entities alike must be
held accountable for the protection of United Nations and
other aid workers operating in territory under their
control.

As the report before us indicates, as a result of the
right of civilians to international protection and assistance,
humanitarian access cannot be arbitrarily denied. Where
humanitarian personnel have come under attack, no effort
should be spared to ensure that those responsible are

 

brought swiftly to justice. While the illegality of such
attacks has never been in doubt, further clarification that
they constitute a war crime under article 8 of the Statute of
the International Criminal Court is welcome indeed.

Reversing the widespread availability of small arms is
a further measure to be pursued in support of humanitarian
assistance. The challenges arising from the proliferation and
widespread abuse of small arms and light weapons are
complex; but the impact on the security of the most
vulnerable - as well as United Nations and humanitarian
personnel - is clear, direct and devastating. Canada is
therefore pursuing a three-pronged approach to this
challenge, dealing with the illicit trade, the licit trade and
the peace-building challenges of small arms proliferation.

The challenges before the international community in
the face of ongoing humanitarian tragedies are indeed
grave. There can be no doubt of the urgent need for
sustained political engagement - not least from the
Security Council - for effective responses to be
implemented. Be assured that in this endeavour the Council
will have Canada's unwavering support.

