Mr. Guterres: I thank you very much, Madam, for
this opportunity to address the Council again. There
are now nearly 1.8 million Syrian refugees known to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in the region. Two-thirds of them
have fled Syria since the beginning of this year - an
average of over 6,000 people a day. We have not seen a
refugee outflow escalate at such a frightening rate since
the Rwandan genocide almost 20 years ago.

This crisis has been ongoing for much longer than
anyone had feared, with unbearable humanitarian
consequences. The people of Syria continue to suffer
tremendously, and their suffering is now further
aggravated by the hot summer temperatures and
particularly distressing during this holy month of
Ramadan.

Syria's neighbours have allowed huge numbers of
refugees to find safety on their soil, saving hundreds
of thousands of lives. But their generosity comes at
an increasingly heavy price. While Syria continues to
drain itself of its people, the prospects for a political
solution and an end to the fighting remain poor, and the
warning signs of destabilization in some neighbouring
countries are troubling. The continuing influx could
send them over the edge if the international community
does not act more resolutely to help.
In Lebanon, there is now not a single village or
town that has not been affected by the presence of more
than 600,000 registered Syrian refugees. The country's
borders remain open, and thousands of people cross
every day. But the conflict in Syria is steadily creeping
into Lebanon, with the number of security incidents
increasing in Tripoli, the South, and parts of the Bekaa
Valley. The country's political system is paralysed and
will likely remain so until the Syrian crisis is over.

Elsewhere in the region, access to safety is becoming
more difficult for people trying to flee. Sectarian
clashes have intensified in Iraq, and the country has
shut its borders, slowing arrivals to a trickle. I have
been in close contact with the Iraqi authorities and
hope to be able to overcome this situation in the near
future. Let us not forget that Iraq also currently hosts
over 160,000 Syrian refugees.

InEgypt,whereUNHCRhasregisteredsome 90,000
Syrian refugees, the situation has also deteriorated
recently. A number of flights from Syria were turned
back last week, following a decision to impose visa
requirements and security clearance for Syrians, which
are difficult to obtain prior to travel. While I fully
understand the challenges Egypt is currently facing,
I do hope that the country will continue to extend its
traditional hospitality to Syrian refugees, as it has done
since the beginning of the conflict.

In Turkey and Jordan, which together host nearly
1 million Syrian refugees, the authorities are now
carefully managing the borders with Syria, mainly
due to national security concerns. The borders are not
closed; refugees continue to cross, but many can do so
only in a gradual manner. There is no question that it
is imperative for both countries to ensure their own
security in an increasingly tense regional environment.
However, I hope that the right balance will be found
between measures to prevent dangerous infiltrations
and the need to ensure that refugees seeking
safety - especially families, elderly people, and
women with children - are not stranded in precarious
conditions or exposed to the risk of getting caught in
the fighting.

Beyond the region, I am also concerned about
significant gaps in the protection of Syrians in several
European countries that are under much less pressure
than Syria's immediate neighbours.

The assertion that the Syria conflict could ignite
the whole region is not an empty warning. Measures
must be taken now to mitigate the enormous risks
of spill-over and to support the stability of Syria's
neighbours so as to keep the situation from escalating
into a political, security and humanitarian crisis that
would move far beyond the international capacity to
respond.

The impact of the refugee crisis on the
neighbouring countries is crushing, and the recent
restrictions on access sound an alarm bell that must not
be ignored. It is time to recognize that we cannot go
on treating the impact of the Syrian crisis as a simple
humanitarian emergency. As the conflict drags on
and on, a longer-term approach is needed, focusing on
development assistance, especially for those countries
and communities that are most seriously affected
by the refugee crisis. While Lebanon and Jordan are
bearing the heaviest burden, we also should not forget
the significant impact that the influx has had on the
Kurdish region of Iraq, or the enormous efforts made
by Turkey in assisting over 400,000 refugees with
hundreds of millions of dollars of its own resources.

I therefore appeal to all development

actors - international financial institutions,
United Nations agencies, and national and regional
development agencies - to cooperate with the

concerned Governments in formulating and supporting
community development programmes that will assist
these States in coping with the impact of the crisis in
Syria. Some concrete steps have already been taken
by the World Bank, the European Union Commission
and several donor countries, but what is needed now
is a well-coordinated and comprehensive plan of
action to help ease the pressure on the most affected
host countries and allow them to continue sheltering
refugees. UNHCR, with its extensive presence on the
ground, is fully prepared to support such an effort.

I reiterate my call on all States, in the region and
further afield, to keep borders open and receive all
Syrians who seek protection. But massive international
solidarity with the neighbouring countries is central
to making this appeal successful. Resettlement and
humanitarian admission opportunities can complement
this as useful, even if limited measures of burden-
sharing.

What I am asking for today is essential to mitigate the
risk of an explosion that could engulf the entire Middle
East. But only a political solution for Syria, and an end
to the fighting, can fully end this risk. I still have not
lost hope that the Syrian parties themselves, all others
who are directly or indirectly involved in the conflict,
and the international community as a whole - which
the Council is mandated to represent - will be able
to come together and put an end to the bloodshed. We
have seen too many conflicts fester for too long and
then spread like wildfire. We cannot afford to have that
happen with Syria.

