Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I too would like to take
this opportunity to convey my congratulations to you,
Madam, and the Republic of Korea, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation wishes to thank you for convening this timely
open debate to commemorate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and for the
useful concept note (S/2014/313, annex) to guide us
in our deliberations today. I also wish to express my
delegation's appreciation to Deputy-Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for his statement.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) was in
many ways a milestone for the Security Council. Ten
years ago, the Council committed itself to combating
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery. By invoking
Chapter VII powers, the resolution sent a strong political
message that there was an urgent need to address this
matter and reaffirmed, at the same time, that there were
legal obligations for States to uphold.

My delegation recalls that the sponsors of
the draft resolution took the initiative to conduct
informal consultations with the broader membership,
in the course of finalizing the text. As Chair of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at the time, Malaysia
also conveyed the views and concerns of NAM. member
countries, underlining our collective support for
international non-proliferation efforts. Ten years on,
we have moved forward and it is indeed time to take
stock of the current state of play and to forge a common
understanding of the way forward.

Malaysia is strategically located in one of the most
important and busiest international shipping routes.
Our reliance on international trade necessitates a robust
and clearly defined approach to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). In 2010, we enacted the
Strategic Trade Act in line with our commitments to
ensuring that Malaysia is a safe and secure trading
partner, while at the same time shouldering our
responsibilities to combat the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. The legislation was also intended
to protect Malaysian exporters from being exploited by
proliferators and those who profit from such activities
without, compromising legitimate trade in strategic
items.

In the control and monitoring of exports, the
importation of in-transit and trans-shipped goods and
the brokering of strategic items, the Strategic Trade
Act specifically addresses major concerns related
to global trade. They include re-exports, munitions
trans-shipments and trans-shipments of dual-use
controlled items to an end user situated in or acting
on behalf of destinations of proliferation concern. In
order to ensure effective implementation across the
board, outreach programmes seek to help the business
community as it deals with Government enforcement
agencies. That has resulted in increased awareness of
the obligations under the act, as well as high levels of
compliance from the private sector.

We realize that non-proliferation is a global
concern that requires a global response. Therefore,
Malaysia has also undertaken initiatives at the regional
and subregional levels to complement and strengthen
existing national efforts. In the past year alone,
Malaysia hosted outreach events and capacity-building
workshops, with a focus on related topics ranging from
establishing a bio-risk culture and the implementation
of the Biological Weapons Convention to facilitating
secure trade in the Asian-Pacific region.

I wish to note as well that Malaysia has officially
offered assistance to other Member States through the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We will consider such requests in the areas of
legal and regulatory infrastructure, implementation
and resources for fulfilling the provisions of the
resolution. In that regard, my delegation wishes to
suggest that Council members work with assistance
providers within the larger membership to enhance the
matchmaking mechanism under the resolution in order
to ensure that such assistance is more effective.

Malaysia is a participant in the Nuclear Security
Summit, and more recently the Proliferation Security
Initiative. We recognize that each approach has its
benefits and drawbacks. We have also observed that
international non-proliferation efforts do not exist in
a vacuum. Indeed, one of the objectives of resolution
1540 (2004) is to bridge the gaps between the various
measures. As such, my delegation is of the view that the
1540 Committee can play a useful role in coordinating
its work with other multilateral non-proliferation
initiatives. That is particularly important given the
resource needs of developing States for full and proper
implementation.

In conclusion, let me once again underline Malaysia's
strong commitment to ensuring that weapons of mass
destruction do not fall into the hands of non-State
actors. We will continue to undertake efforts at the
national, regional and international levels towards that
end. In that regard, we reiterate our support for the work
of the Security Council on non-proliferation. We hope
that the Council will continue to take into consideration
the views of countries in the global supply chain as well
as those of other developing countries on this important
matter.

