Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, I join others
in congratulating you, Madam President, on assuming
the Council presidency for December, and thanking
you for holding today's meeting in the sunlight.

I should like first to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Robert Mardini and Archbishop Bashar Matti Warda,
for their insightful briefings.

As many speakers before me have underlined, Iraq
is today at a crossroads, and it is deeply troubling to note
that protests that began with peaceful demonstrations
have now led to the killing of more than 400 people
and thousands more being injured as a result of violent
clashes between protestors and security forces. I wish
to repeat in this context what we have said many
times: the right to peaceful protest as enshrined in the
Iraqi Constitution must be guaranteed. We therefore
call on all sides to exercise restraint and to refrain
from violence.

As a friend of Iraq, Germany is deeply saddened
to see that so many lives have been lost. We deplore
the excessive use of force by security forces
against protesters. The principles of necessity and
proportionality must be respected, and all incidents in
which the actions of security forces have resulted in
death or injury should be promptly and transparently
investigated. We are also deeply concerned by reports
indicating unlawful arrests, killings and kidnappings,
and we want to emphasize that any attempts to threaten
and prevent people from exercising their fundamental
rights to peaceful assembly and to freedom ofexpression
are inexcusable.

The same holds true for reports of the targeting and
abduction of medical personnel in the context of the
protests. If such acts have indeed occurred, then they
are clear violations of international humanitarian law
and numerous resolutions of the Security Council.

The last item on a long list of concerns that we see
and express as a friend is that we note with concern
reports about calls for the temporary closure of several
television and radio stations. Together with repeated
attacks on journalists by unidentified perpetrators, this
represents a worrying deterioration in the freedom of
the press in Iraq in the context of the ongoing protests.
In our view, a free press forms the basis of an open,
public debate and exchange of views, which is also a
precondition for lasting stability and development.

Turning to the most recent events, I wish to say that
we respectPrime MinisterAdilAbdAl-Mahdi's decision
to offer his resignation as a step towards overcoming
the current crisis. As a new Government is formed, it
is vital that key reforms are swiftly implemented in
order for State institutions to regain public trust and
to address a climate of anger and disillusionment. This
new Government must, while following constitutional
processes, be formed rapidly. Time is ofthe essence, as
we have heard today time and again.

We must not forget the hundreds of thousands of
peacefully protesting Iraqis who continue to raise
serious and legitimate demands: the end of corruption,
the stimulation of economic growth and employment,
the provision of reliable public services, prudent and
impartial governance, credible elections, and a broader
reform of the political system, including amendments
to the electoral law and the Constitution. Germany
welcomes in particular the initial steps taken in the fight
against corruption. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General said in her briefing, anti-corruption
measures will be key, and we urge all relevant parties
to continue their efforts. The fight against corruption
is crucial to building viable and responsive State
institutions and to reviving public trust.
Germany stands ready to support Iraq in its work
to address necessary reforms. We are already engaged
in key sectors to enhance infrastructure, for example in
the area of electricity supply, and to tackle issues like
youth unemployment and administrative reform. Since
2014, we have contributed €2.2 billion to assist the
country in its development. Stabilization, recovery and
reconstruction can only succeed if all actors, including
the Government of Iraq, intensify their efforts and
expand their financial support.

We welcome the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq to engage
with a wide range of Iraqi stakeholders to discuss the
different aspects of the reforms needed and the draft
of a road map proposing concrete steps as a start for
reforms based on these discussions. We join the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in her call for
immediate action, and we call on all Iraqi parties to
engage in constructive dialogue.

Most of the protesters are young people demanding
a better future and the overcoming of unemployment,
the unequal provision of basic services and corruption.
We urge State authorities not only to allow them to
express their grievances in a peaceful way but to seize
this opportunity to engage with the next generation in
order to create a brighter future for the country.

Before concluding, I wish to refer briefly to three
other important questions.

First is the issue of relations between Baghdad
and Erbil, as mentioned by many other speakers. We
strongly encourage both sides to continue their intensive
dialogue in order to further improve relations between
the Federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, and to find sustainable solutions for
outstanding unresolved issues, especially with regard
to oil-revenue sharing and security arrangements.

Secondly, I wish to refer very briefly to our
discussion last Tuesday on accountability (see S/PV.8675). We would like to reiterate our full support
for the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Special Adviser
Karim Asad Ahmad Khan and his team. Accountability
is a prerequisite for reconciliation and for the return of
the remaining almost 1.5 million internally displaced
persons in Iraq.

Thirdly, and finally, we welcome the efforts by
Iraq, Kuwait, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the Tripartite Commission and hope that
further progress will be achieved on the important file
of missing Kuwaiti nationals and property.

