The Secretary-General: I should like to thank
Ambassador Baso Sangqu, President of the Security
Council, for having organized this important meeting.

Today's open debate comes at a time of
breathtaking political change driven by people's calls
for accountability, transparency and the rule of law.
Women and men everywhere want their rights to be
respected. They are risking their lives in peaceful
protest to demand the opportunities, dignity and secure
future that every individual deserves.
There is no silencing this cry for justice.
Repression only raises the volume. Our task is to usher
in an era of respect for the law in every field, from
peace and security to trade and development; from the
high seas to local communities. Never has the United
Nations rule of law sector faced such great challenges
or such historic opportunities. This Security Council
meeting is part of a broader international push to rise
to this moment.

Earlier this week, the United Nations gathered
officials, ambassadors and distinguished thinkers on
the rule of law for a two-day meeting dealing with
justice, human rights, peacekeeping and related issues.
In September, we will convene a high-level meeting on
the rule of law - the first event of its kind and the first
time since 2005 that these issues will be discussed by
top leaders.

The United Nations work to promote the rule of
law extends to more than 150 countries. Our efforts to
combat transnational crime, build confidence and
capacity in State institutions, and battle discrimination
against women are all part of this effort. United
Nations programmes have already helped tens of
thousands of vulnerable individuals to obtain justice.
We are supporting legal aid. We are training public
defenders. We are raising awareness, since it is often
those who most need the rule of law who also know
least about their rights. We are working on strategies to
counter the growing threats posed by piracy, drug
trafficking and organized crime.

For societies traumatized by years of fighting and
gross violations of human rights, nothing is more
critical than establishing the rule of law. When the
guns fall silent, the United Nations is often the first
organization on the ground, helping fractured countries
to start building peace and strengthening key
institutions. Our goal is to quickly demonstrate the
value of the rule of law. That builds public confidence
in political settlements.

Our approach has three basic components: first,
promote accountability and reinforce norms through
transitional justice; secondly, build justice and security
institutions to promote trust; and thirdly, focus on
justice for women and girls to foster gender equality.
The Security Council has helped bring these priorities
to the top of the international agenda, but the Council
can do more.
12-2096]

I encourage the Council to include the promotion
of transitional justice measures more broadly in the
mandates of peacekeeping and political missions. I also
encourage the Council to reject any endorsement of
amnesty for genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity or gross violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. I urge members to
bring justice closer to the Victims. That means giving
them the opportunity to speak out to truth commissions
and to participate in judicial proceedings. It also calls
for supporting remedies and reparations, and it requires
strengthening national prosecutions for serious
international crimes.

The primary obligation for accountability rests
with domestic justice systems. It will require the
development of security institutions that are
accountable to laws and to the people. It will take more
funding for women's access to justice, and it will
demand greater attention to the economic and social
roots of gender inequality.

We have made progress in helping vulnerable
groups, but we need to do more to include their
perspectives when we design rule of law activities and
when we carry them out. We must also support
innovative initiatives such as the deployment of
civilian justice and corrections experts on missions.
And we should use the United Nations Rule of Law
Indicators, designed to monitor criminal justice
institutions, during and after conflicts. But when
national justice systems fall short, the international
community must be able to respond with international
prosecutions, particularly before the International
Criminal Court.

The United Nations was established in the name
of the world's peoples. As their demands for justice
rise, we must respond. We have to create a world where
the rule of law, social justice, accountability and a
culture of prevention are the foundations of sustainable
development and durable peace. It will take
commitment from the international community and the
Security Council to see that justice is done where
justice is due.

