Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I thank Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, Head of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2003/944) on progress made in the
implementation of the Mission's mandate.

The Mexican Constitution lists principles that the
Mexican State must observe and promote in its foreign
relations. The first principle is the self-determination of
peoples. That is why it has been particularly satisfying
to have accompanied, from the Security Council, the
people of Timor-Leste over the past two years on their
path towards building a free, sovereign and
independent State. The diplomatic relations established
between the Governments of Mexico and Timor-Leste
reaffirm the ties of friendship and cooperation between
both peoples.

Now that the end of UNMISET's mandate is
approaching and - as the Secretary-General's report
has made evident - we must reaffirm the international
community's commitment and continue to provide
technical assistance in various spheres, my country
reaffirms its readiness to cooperate in all United
Nations forums and specialized agencies with the
representatives of Timor-Leste.

While there are still tasks ahead of us, Timor-
Leste is already a success story, because it is a
reflection of what can be achieved in a short time when
one has the international community's resolute support
and when the people's will is respected. Mexico
recognizes and applauds the "open presidency"
programme, adopted by President Xanana Gusmao, as
well as the "open governance" initiative. Being in
contact with the people and taking their needs into
account are fundamental elements in ensuring a good
Government.

Just as important is the development of good-
neighbourly relations. That is why my country
welcomes the continuing and deepening contacts and
relations between Indonesia and Timor-Leste, as well
as the progress achieved in establishing maritime
borders with Australia. The only possible path for
countries sharing borders is that of respect and
cooperation. That redounds to the benefit of both, even
when they are States of different sizes.

UNMISET's mandate is nearing its end and will
leave behind proof of the progress it has made. It was
of fundamental importance that the international
community maintained its firm and sustained
commitment and provided the Mission with enough
flexibility so that it could adapt itself to needs and
developments on the ground. Those are important
lessons of which we must take note for the future.

There must be an effective exit strategy in
keeping with the situation on the ground to support
ongoing programmes, with the participation of various
bodies of the United Nations system and international
financial institutions. To that end, it is essential that the
Security Council coordinate with other bodies of the
Organization, as well as with specialized agencies, in
order to cooperate with the Government of Timor-
Leste, bearing in mind their respective mandates and
competencies.

The report of the Secretary-General recounts,
inter alia, setbacks in the area of the administration of
justice, particularly in the processing of those accused
of serious crimes, which is a source of special concern.
Therefore, we support the appeal made by the
Secretary-General in his report that the accused be
made available to the judiciary. It is essential to fight
impunity. Likewise, we must redouble our efforts to
have more trained judges and to facilitate resort to the
courts for the population.

Similarly, we must continue the process of
recruiting and training Timor-Leste's military and
police troops, as well as initiatives to build confidence
among the civilian population. The training of troops
must include human rights training, which holds
particular meaning for my country.

The gradual drawdown of UNMISET troops must
continue, bearing in mind the development of national
capacities as well as the situation on the ground. It is
encouraging news that, in the current period, events
such as those that occurred at the end of 2002 and at
the beginning of this year were not repeated. Proper
coordination between United Nations forces and the
Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia to ensure
external security and border monitoring is paramount.
That is why we appeal for continued strengthening of
ties of cooperation in that sphere.

Likewise, an effective strategy must be developed
to face the fundamental challenge of reintegrating the
26,000 Timorese refugees. It is necessary that the
Council support the Government's efforts to encourage
and support reconciliation meetings on the borders and
to promote national reconciliation, supported by the
work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration.

During the transition process, the United Nations
system must reinforce its presence in order to give
Timor-Leste the assistance and training that will to
enable it to develop its potential and improve its socio-
economic indices. The same commitment is expected
from the international financial institutions. The
permanent fund to be established in cooperation with
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank
should benefit the people of that country.

I take this opportunity to express my deep respect
to Ambassador Sharma and the entire staff of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor for
their commitment and dedication to Timor-Leste. We
also recall and thank the staff members who
participated in the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) and in the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor. We join
others in expressing special thoughts for
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, who played an essential
role as administrator of the transition, and for those
who have lost their lives in Timor-Leste, particularly
the members of UNAMET who died in the horrific
events of 1999. It was their sacrifice that prompted my
country to submit the draft resolution that was adopted
as resolution 1502 (2003) in order to give the Security
Council a tool to help prevent and deal with such
violence.

The impartiality and neutrality of humanitarian
personnel should not be confused with indifference.
The staff entrusted with humanitarian activities in
Timor-Leste and elsewhere do not stand alone.

