Mr. Mladenov: As we meet today to discuss the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, the risks of escalation and violence in the
region continue to increase, despite the emergence of
newfound agreement among a number of countries
of the need to stand united against terrorism and
radicalism. As societies continue to fracture along
ethnic or religious lines and non-State actors continue
to control large swathes of territory, recent events in
Jerusalem resonate across the Middle East. For nearly
a century, despite myriad peace efforts, one conflict
has evaded solution. Some say it is irresolvable. Others
challenge the basic premise of international consensus
on how it can be resolved. The Palestinian-Israeli
conflict is not only about land and peace; it is about two
peoples who both have legitimate national aspirations
for statehood and recognition - two nations whose
histories are intertwined and whose future is forever
intricately linked.

Fortunately until now, Israelis and Palestinians
have not succumbed to the torrent of violent upheaval
that has engulfed the region in recent years. But half a
century of occupation has produced tens of thousands
of casualties and left deep psychological scars on
both sides. Developments over the past 11 days at the
holy sites of the Old City in Jerusalem, however, have
demonstrated the grave risk of dangerous escalation that
exists, a risk of turning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
into a religious one and dragging both sides into the
vortex of violence along with the rest of the region.

On 14 July, two Israeli policemen were killed by
three assailants at the Lion's Gate entrance to the Holy
Esplanade. The attackers fled inside the compound
before being shot by police. According to the Israeli
authorities, the assailants had initiated the attack from
within the compound. In the immediate aftermath, the
Palestinian President condemned the attack, while the
Israeli Prime Minister committed to upholding and
respecting the status quo at the holy sites in the Old
City of Jerusalem. Citing security concerns, the Israeli
authorities closed the compound to all - including,
for the first time since 1969, to Muslims for Friday
prayers - and restricted entrance to the Old City in
order to secure the area of the attack, search for further
threats and conduct an investigation.

Two days later, on Sunday, 16 July, the compound
was reopened, first for Muslim worshippers and later
for visitors, with metal detectors placed outside its
entrances. The Islamic Waqf immediately rejected
that move as a change in the status quo and called on
worshippers not to enter the compound through the
metal detectors, but to pray outside the entrance and
in the streets of Jerusalem. Palestinian factions also
immediately rejected the security measures. Hamas
and Islamic Jihad issued a joint statement warning that
that was a red line that would lead to an escalation, and
Fatah called for "a day of rage".

Starting on 16 July, prayers and peaceful protests
were conducted at the Lion's Gate, followed by clashes
with the Israeli police. Tensions rose by Friday, 21 July,
as the Waqf announced the closure of all Jerusalem
mosques for Friday prayers. In response, Israel
announced a restriction of entry into the Old City
for all Muslim men under the age of 50. Clashes that
evening and the next turned fatal, with four Palestinian
protesters killed and hundreds injured. Later on Friday,
three Israelis were killed in a brutal terror attack at
their home in the West Bank settlement of Halamish by
a l9-year-old Palestinian assailant who in his last will
made a clear connection between his act and the events
in East Jerusalem. Overall, in clashes since 14 July, at
least four Palestinians were killed and more than 300

have been injured.

I ask Member States today to unequivocally
condemn the violence of the past few days. Our
thoughts and prayers must go out to all the victims and
their families.

On 21 July, President Abbas announced that the
Palestinian Authority was freezing all contact with
Israel, including high-level security coordination.

Let us make no mistake: while events in Jerusalem
may be taking place over a couple of hundred square
metres in the Old City, they affect hundreds of millions
of people around the world. Therefore, I welcome
last night's decision by the Israeli security Cabinet to
remove the metal detectors, while ensuring the security
of visitors and worshippers to the holy sites. I hope that
the Cabinet decision will lead to a calming ofthe current
tensions and will enable a return of worshippers to the
Holy Esplanade. It is expected that President Abbas
will convene the Palestinian leadership later tonight to
discuss those developments.

As we have seen over the past 11 days, it is vital
that the status quo established since 1967 be preserved.
Recognizing the special and historic role of the
Hashemite Kingdom, I encourage Israel to continue its
intensive contacts with Jordan. All parties must refrain
from provocative actions, show restraint and bring a
conclusive end to this crisis in the next few days. In
those efforts, constant discussion with the Islamic
religious authorities in Jerusalem and the Palestinian
leadership can greatly contribute to maintaining calm in
East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied West Bank.

As this crisis has unfolded, I want to reflect
briefly on the views we hear from residents in East
Jerusalem - people who have been caught in the midst
of these events over the past few weeks. They often tell
us that for many years they have felt that their religious
and ethnic identity is under threat; that their very
livelihoods in their own city are at risk while living
under occupation; and that their children often live in
fear of security operations and house demolitions. They
want to pray in peace and live in security and freedom.
Many of them feel alone. They talk of the special status
that resolution 181 (1947) had bestowed on Jerusalem,
yet they see the reality around them. That is why
often they come to us, the United Nations, appealing
for protection. It is critical that any decision made at
the highest political and religious levels, if it is to be
sustainable, take into consideration the fears and hopes
of the people on the ground.

Jerusalem remains a final-status issue that needs to
be decided and negotiated between the two sides.

As the occupying Power, Israel has a responsibility
to uphold its obligations under international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, and
must show maximum restraint in order to avoid further
loss of life and an escalation of the situation.

At the same time, Palestinian leaders have a
responsibility to avoid provocative statements that
further aggravate an already tense environment. In that
respect, I am particularly concerned about statements
made over the past weeks by some factions that have
sought to fan the flames of violence. Such provocations
are dangerous, and I call on all to condemn them.

This crisis has diverted us from the real tasks ahead,
namely, how to restore a political process in order to find
a solution that meets the legitimate national aspirations
of both Israelis and Palestinians - a solution that is
based on United Nations resolutions and is achieved
through negotiations; a solution whose ultimate goal is
two States living side by side in peace and security.
Unfortunately, these latest incidents have taken
place against a backdrop of other developments in
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In July alone, plans
were advanced for more than 2,300 housing units in
East Jerusalem, which is 30 per cent more than were
advanced during all of 2016. That includes plans
for approximately 1,600 units expanding a ring of
settlements in north of East Jerusalem, as well as plans
in Sheikh Jarrah, which may involve the demolition
of Palestinian houses. I must once again emphasize
that settlement activity in occupied territory is illegal
under international law and undermines the chances
for the establishment of a viable, contiguous and
sovereign Palestine.

On a more positive note, some constructive
steps have been taken that are in line with the
recommendations of the report of the Middle East
Quartet (S/2016/595, annex).

On 10 July, an interim power-purchasing agreement
was signed, energizing the first Palestinian-owned
and operated substation in Jenin. That will increase
electricity supply in the northern West Bank and help
the Palestinian Authority take control of the energy
sector. Both sides should now move to negotiate a
comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian power-purchasing
agreement that would be a landmark achievement
towards Palestine's energy independence.

On 13 July, with United States facilitation,
the Palestinian Authority and Israeli Government
reached an agreement allowing for an increase in
water supply for Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza. Under its terms, the Palestinian Authority will
purchase some 32 million cubic meters of water from
Israel - 22 million cubic meters for the West Bank
and 10 million for Gaza. The water will come from a
desalination plant to be constructed in Aqaba, Jordan.
The implementation of such agreements is instrumental
in rebuilding trust between Palestinians and Israelis.
They are, however, all put at risk by the freezing of
contacts between the Palestinian Authority and Israel.
Without a resolution to the current crisis, these hard-
won gains will swiftly evaporate.

Inow turn to the situation in Gaza with a heavy heart.
Some 2 million people there have been taken hostage
in the political standoff between Fatah and Hamas.
The humanitarian impact of the punishing measures
taken against Gaza is appalling. In some parts of Gaza,
people have experienced electricity cuts of 36 hours.
No electricity means no drinking water. Hospitals are
struggling to survive. An environmental crisis is in the
making. Whatever the political differences between the
Palestinian factions, it is not the people of Gaza who
should be paying the price.

I want to assure the Security Council that the
United Nations will not give up on Gaza and its
people. Despite the odds, we will continue our intense
mediation efforts to resolve the standoff. I take this
opportunity to thank Egypt for stepping in at a moment
of need and facilitating the entry of badly needed fuel
to increase electricity supply. Egyptian fuel, along with
the nearly 900,000 liters of fuel per month provided
by the United Nations for the most essential services,
provide a temporary lifeline to the residents of Gaza.
In this environment, the continued functioning of the
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism is more critical than
ever to the people of Gaza. Recently, too, the State of
Qatar has signed contracts for eight more residential
buildings as part of its commitment to reconstruction.

Today, Gaza and the West Bank are further apart
than ever. Palestinian leaders must make some hard
choices about the future of their people. They can
work to overcome their ideological divisions or they
can continue along the path that will guarantee Gaza's
complete collapse. They can work to unite Palestinians
in pursuit of the goal of statehood or they can oversee
the demise of the Palestinian national project. They can
resolve the current crisis in Gaza or preside over the
radicalization of their population and see it fall into the
hands of extremists with ever more destructive agendas.

I know that this is not the future that President
Abbas or the majority of Palestinians want for their
country. I know that they want to build a State in which
human rights are respected; a State that is achieved on
the basis of negotiations, not violence; one that lives in
peace and security with the State ofIsrael. For 10 years,
however, the population in Gaza has lived in a state of
chronic vulnerability. At what point will people say
"enough is enough"? At what point will we say "enough
is enough"?

Since violently seizing control of Gaza, Hamas has
tightened its grip on power and suppressed dissent. The
fact that no presidential or legislative elections have
been held in Palestine since 2006 has also created a
democratic deficit that undermines the legitimacy of
institutions. Two different legal systems have emerged
and diverging laws have been enacted in Gaza and the
West Bank.

I once again call on all Palestinian leaders to
address the destructive consequences of the split. I
encourage them to reach an agreement that would allow
the legitimate Palestinian Government to take up its
responsibilities in Gaza as a step towards the formation
of a unity Government on the basis of the Palestine
Liberation Organization platform, and agree to hold
elections. Meanwhile, Hamas must ensure that calm is
maintained by ceasing militant build-up against Israel
and by maintaining security at the border of Egypt.
At the same time, I encourage Israel to step up its
measures to lift the closures and facilitate development
in Gaza as overall calm persists in the Strip, in line with
resolution 1860 (2009).

Turning very briefly to Lebanon, I should like only
to refer to the briefing a few days ago by the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, Sigrid Kaag, who briefed
the Council in detail on developments and risks under
resolution 1701 (2006).

Meanwhile, I also want to note that the ceasefire
between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic has
been maintained, albeit in a volatile environment. I
am alarmed by the recent spike in military activities
in Syria, which has resulted in several spill-over fire
incidents across the disengagement line and Israeli
retaliatory actions. I join the Secretary-General in
welcoming the announcement by the Governments of
Jordan, the Russian Federation and the United States
of a de-escalation zone and arrangements to support a
ceasefire and the delivery ofhumanitarian assistance in
south-western Syria.

In closing, let me emphasize that the events we
have witnessed over the past weeks in Jerusalem are
a reminder of how easy it is to reach the precipice
of a dangerous escalation in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory. We are not over the crisis yet,
but I hope that the steps that have been taken by Israel
will enable a return to relative calm in the next couple
of days. I hope that as agreements between Israel and
Jordan are implemented and a positive engagement with
the religious authorities takes places, we will avoid a
cycle of violence that would destroy all peace efforts
for the foreseeable future.

We must not lose focus on the need to restore a
political perspective or on the need to bring Palestinians
and Israelis back into an environment that is conducive
to negotiations on a final status arrangement and avoids
turning the national Israeli-Palestinian conflict into a
religious one.

