Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like begin by
thanking the United Kingdom for initiating today's
resolution 2379 (2017) and for taking a number of
suggestions on board, including from my delegation.

As the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
continues to lose territory, there are many challenges
that the Government of Iraq has to tackle to ensure
post-conflict restoration. They include rebuilding
vitally important infrastructure, carrying out national
reconciliation, facilitating the safe and voluntary return
ofinternally displaced persons and ensuring respect for
human rights, fundamental freedoms and international
humanitarian law. Bringing to justice those who made
the country and its people suffer from acts of terrorism
is also high on the list of priorities. Therefore, this
resolution is a welcome and much anticipated initiative
which gives Iraq the necessary support in addressing
this issue with the aid of the United Nations investigative
team. It will put at Iraq's disposal available international
and regional mechanisms for judicial cooperation and
technical assistance in investigating terrorist crimes and
gathering credible evidence quickly before perpetrators
can cover up their wrongdoings. It will facilitate and
streamline the international community's efforts in
assisting the country with strengthening the capacity of
its law enforcement and judicial bodies.

I should like to raise a few points with regard to the
implementation of the present resolution.

First, the team should cooperate fully with the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and international
and regional governmental and non-governmental
organizations that can assist in collecting evidence and
testimony on the crimes committed in Iraq by ISIL.

Secondly, unprecedented numbers of foreign
terrorist fighters among ISIL's ranks make the crimes
perpetrated by them transnational. Therefore, for the
sake of efficiently apprehending and prosecuting those
terrorists, we encourage the Government of Iraq to
join efforts with other States and share the evidence
collected by the team without any limits or reservations.

Thirdly, these pieces of evidence have to be
admissible not only to the Iraqi national courts, but
also to the courts of other States upon their request.
For this purpose, the team has to conduct its work in
accordance with universally recognized standards for
collecting evidence.

Last but not least, it is imperative that all those
responsible for committing crimes against the civilian
population, in particular violations of international
humanitarian law and abuses of human rights, be held
accountable without any preconditions. Victims of
those crimes deserve nothing less. In this regard, we
call on the Iraqi authorities to meticulously observe due
process and uphold human rights, in particular the right
to a fair trial, as there can be no place for victor'sjustice.

Finally, Ukraine stands ready to further contribute
to the cost of accountability for terrorist crimes
committed by ISIL.

