Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The situation in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict continues to remain very complex, spawning
ever new tragedies. The incidents on the West Bank of
the Jordan River and ceasefire violations around Gaza
are a clear confirmation of that.

We consider very important the publication on 1 July
of the Middle East Quartet's report on the situation of
the Palestinian-Israel settlement, in accordance with
the relevant decision of the ministerial meeting of the
Quartet in Munich in February. The document, which
reflects the desire of the international community to
maintain the prospects for a two-State solution, gives a
picture of the real situation on the ground and contains
specific recommendations. The implementation of
those recommendations could help push the peace
process out of the present impasse and contribute to the
resumption of a direct Israeli-Palestinian dialogue.

We attach great importance to the positions set
out in the report on the unacceptability of violence
and incitement to violence by both sides, on putting
an end to the Israel policy of settlement construction
and expansion in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
and on the illegal seizure of territory to the detriment
of the Palestinians living there. It is in that light that
we should examine the decision, recently made public
in Israel, to build an additional 800 housing units on
occupied Palestinian territory.

We deem it important that the report clearly
expresses the need to re-establish inter-Palestinian unity
on the basis of the Palestinian Liberation Organization's

platform and the principles of the Quartet. We also
deem important the confirmation in the report of the
Arab Peace Initiative as a consensual basis on which to
move forward to achieve a comprehensive settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict.

The report does not shy away from the serious
humanitarian situation in Gaza, which contributes
to instability and, ultimately, complicates efforts to
achieve a negotiated solution. It also underscores the
need to unite Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
legitimate and democratic Palestinian Administration.
Moscow welcomes the initiative by the President of
Egypt, Mr. Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, to offer assistance in
achieving peace between Palestinians and Israelis. We
believe that the efforts of Cairo in that context could
produce results. Russia, as a permanent member of the
Security Council and an active participant in the Middle
East Quartet of international mediators, will continue
with its efforts to find ajust solution to the Palestinian
question through the creation of an independent
Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital and coexisting peacefully
side-by-side with Israel.

The most important priority of the international
community is to resolve the conflict in Syria by having
the parties reach a mutually acceptable understanding
as the outcome of broadly representative negotiations
under the auspices of the United Nations. In the
framework of the Security Council and the International
Syria Support Group, a solid basis for a solution has
been developed that has already brought about concrete
positive results, including on the ground. The direct
interaction by the Chairs of the International Syria
Support Group has been very useful. The final word
now belongs the Syrians themselves. However, much
will depend on whether the opponents of Damascus will
set aside their destructive stance, which postpones any
peaceful solution. In that connection, we expect a more
dynamic and, most important, a more positive attitude
from our American partners as well as from influential
regional players. The United States, as a co-Chair of
the International Syria Support Group must, once and
for all, set aside all propaganda and learn to objectively
assess the situation. We call on the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to step up efforts to work with
the parties to the conflict. The negotiating process in
Geneva must be resumed as quickly as possible.

We intend to continue offering support to the
Government of Syria in its efforts to combat terrorist
groups led by the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
and the Al-Nusra Front. There can be no doubt that
in this fight there should be no delays or incentives.
We expect and hope that discussions are being held
in various capitals, including regional capitals, in
countries that are in a position to make a contribution to
weakening the terrorist threat. For the time being, there
are significant gaps that allow terrorists to cross borders
and acquire money, weapons, materiel, resources and
access to military-grade toxic substances. This must
be stopped.

A very serious destabilization of the region is due
to the conflict in Yemen. We are in favour of resuming
the intra-Yemeni negotiations, under the mediation of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, in Kuwait on 15 July, as the Yemenis
themselves have called for. We believe that compliance
with the ceasefire regime by all the parties to the
conflict is essential to promoting further dialogue. In
that connection, we call on all the parties to refrain
from aggressive rhetoric that could undermine the very
fragile mutual trust that has been achieved among the
Yemeni people.

Libya is still in a very serious situation. It has
not yet recovered from the foreign intervention that
undermined State control. The fight for influence
among various forces has had a negative effect and
the efforts to restore Libyan unity on the basis of the
political agreement concluded in Skhirat are moving
forward very slowly. Of course, the Government of
National Accord will need to be confirmed by the
House of Representatives in Tobruk. That is a step that
needs to be taken.

Dealing with the continuing negative trends in the
Middle East region requires collective efforts by the
entire international community. If we are to help the
Libyans, we need to facilitate genuine reconciliation
among them, and not cling to artificial schemes of
dubious utility. Russia is ready to work in this area, both
in combating terrorism as well as in promoting political
means to resolving existing conflicts in the region.

