The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council under the British presidency for
November, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Security Council, to His
Excellency Mr. Ruhakana Rugunda and to the Ugandan
delegation for their service as President of the Security
Council for the month of October. I am sure I speak on
behalf of all members of the Council in thanking
Ambassador Rugunda for his excellent stewardship of
the Council in what was a very busy and important
month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in C6te d'Ivoire

Progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire
(S/2010/537)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of cote d'Ivoire, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. N'Gbichi
(Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Choi Young-Jin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Cote d'Ivoire and head of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

It is so decided.
I wish to welcome Special Representative Choi,
who is joining today's meeting via Video-
teleconference from Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/537, which contains the progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

I now invite Council members to hear a briefing
by Mr. Choi Young-J in, to whom I give the floor.


