Mr. Karsgaard (Canada): I would first like to
warmly welcome the presence today in the Security
Council of His Excellency Mr. Leonardo Simao, Foreign
Minister of Mozambique.

I would also like to express Canada's admiration for
the courage and determination shown by the people of
Mozambique and their political leaders during the
transformation that has taken place since the signing of
the Peace Agreement in Rome in October 1992. After
years of war, Mozambique is now making a new start.
The process was at times frustrating and slow, but it has
been distinguished by a strong commitment to lasting
peace by both of the parties to the Agreement. That desire
for peace was most evident in the high level of
participation in last year's elections and the fervent
determination of Mozambique's election officials to
ensure that the voting was conducted freely and fairly.

We are encouraged by the role that the United
Nations has played in Mozambique. It has demonstrated
once again the readiness of the international community
to help implement the numerous and varied provisions of
a comprehensive peace agreement. It also confirms our
belief in how much can be accomplished through
multilateral action if the mandates set by the Council are
achievable, the time-frames remain realistic, our approach
is flexible and the commitment to peace among the
parties involved is genuine. The United Nations Operation
in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) undertook a complex task
that required a high degree of cooperation and
coordination between United Nations agencies, bilateral
donors, non-governmental organizations and the parties to
the Peace Agreement. That cooperation and coordination
was largely sustained throughout the two-year life of
ONUMOZ, and the objectives were achieved. A good
measure of the credit for this success must go to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Aldo
Ajello, who discharged his duties with determination and
skill.

The overall accomplishments of the operation should
not, however, keep us from re-examining the events of
the past two years to identify areas where improvements
or changes can be made. We are thinking, in particular,
of delays in the deployment of ONUMOZ and of
difficulties encountered in the launching of the de-mining

 

programme. At the same time, we should also look at what
worked well, to learn from our successes. Certainly this
should include the effectiveness of the demobilization
programme and the fact that the elections themselves went
remarkably smoothly, under difficult circumstances, thanks
in part to the useful support provided by the United Nations
Development Programme to the National Elections
Commission.

Canadians are proud to have contributed to the
successful conclusion of the peace process in Mozambique
through our bilateral and multilateral assistance, as well as
through our participation in ONUMOZ. Mozambique is
currently the largest recipient of Canadian aid in Africa.
Much of the over $100 million we have provided during the
past two years has directly benefited the peace process; it
has included food aid, grants for refugee repatriation,
support for troop demobilization and electoral assistance.

(spoke in French)

We should also acknowledge and commend the
contribution of Mozambique's neighbours in southern
Africa in sustaining the momentum for change and
democracy in Mozambique, both by their example and
through their direct involvement. The informal cooperation
that now exists on security issues in the region and the
conclusion of more formal economic cooperation
arrangements have contributed significantly towards
building confidence in the prospect of a more secure,
democratic and prosperous future for southern Africa.
Canada is encouraged by these developments and supports
the efforts now under way to enhance the capability of
regional organizations and the Organization of African
Unity, not only to contribute to the resolution of conflicts
but, more importantly, to prevent other conflicts.

The withdrawal of ONUMOZ and the formation of a
new Government in Maputo mark the end of the formal
peace process. The building of a sustainable democracy is
now beginning. We wish Mozambicans every success as
they confront the challenges of national reconciliation and
reconstruction. We also urge the new Government to
respect the political diversity of its nation, to promote
accountable government, to defend human rights and to
consult broadly as it develops its plans for the future. For
our part, I wish to assure the Council that Canada will
continue to offer financial and technical assistance to
Mozambique as it meets these challenges.

