Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Ukraine is seriously
concerned over the extremely dangerous situation in
the Middle East, which has been steadily deteriorating
since September 2000. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict
has now reached its most critical point, and risks
sliding into full-fledged war.

Ukraine strongly condemns the continued
violence, including terrorism, which almost every day
produces numerous additional victims and increasingly
aggravates the situation in the entire region. I would
like to add my voice to those of delegations that have
expressed their condolences to the families of all killed
and wounded Palestinians and Israelis.

Hundreds of dead and thousands of wounded on
both sides, considerable damage to the infrastructure,
and a dire economic situation and living conditions
among the population in the occupied Palestinian
territories - those are the consequences of the 17-
month-long confrontation. Obviously, the path of
violence is not bringing the parties closer to the
achievement of their goals and contradicts the true
interests and aspirations of both Israelis and
Palestinians.

Ukraine is convinced that there is no alternative
for both Palestinians and Israelis but to go back to the
negotiating table. It is really regrettable that the
favourable opportunity that existed after the speech by
Chairman Arafat on 16 December last year, which was
followed by three weeks that witnessed a major decline
in violence, was not utilized to move forward with the
political dialogue.

The current dangerous situation requires that
Israel and the Palestinian Authority take a number of
steps to restore calm and resume dialogue. We call on
the Palestinian leadership to take urgent and decisive
action to prevent terrorist acts, cease the violence and
stop the activities of terrorist networks. At the same
time, Ukraine condemns the excessive use of force and
the reoccupation of Palestinian-controlled territories. It
is our firm conviction that the practice of extrajudicial
killings, devastating raids into Palestinian-controlled
territory and attacks on heavily populated areas must
stop immediately. Any Israeli settlement activities on
Palestinian territories, as well as closures and economic
sanctions against the Palestinians, should also be
terminated.

We strongly believe that the Palestinian Authority
and its elected Chairman, Yasser Arafat, are legitimate
partners for Israel to resume negotiations with in order
to stop the violence and build peace. Any attempts to
weaken them could only undermine the prospects for
peace.

We noted the recent decision of the Israeli
Security Cabinet to lift the blockade on the
headquarters of Yasser Arafat. That is a positive step in
the right direction. However, we believe that all the
restrictions on the freedom of movement of the
Chairman of the Palestinian Authority should be lifted.

Today as never before, the parties should
recommit themselves to the renewal of the peace
process based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for
peace, as well as other principles laid down at the
Madrid Conference and in the Oslo Agreements.
Lasting peace can be achieved only through the
establishment of a viable, independent and democratic
Palestinian State and through ending the occupation of
Palestinian territories. On the other hand, it is also true
that lasting peace can be achieved only through the
reaffirmation and full recognition of the irrevocable
right of Israel to live in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders.

Ukraine continues to believe that full
implementation of the Mitchell recommendations and
Tenet understandings could bring the violence to an
end, restore mutual trust and confidence and create the
necessary conditions for the resumption of the Israeli-
Palestinian negotiating process.

It goes without saying that the primary objective
for the parties should be to stop the violence and to
prevent attacks against civilians. However, it is
becoming increasingly obvious that the security issues
cannot be effectively addressed if they alone are
tackled. We do agree with the Secretary-General that:

"Unless both parties have a political horizon on
which their hopes for peace and an improved
livelihood can be based, there will be no enduring
ceasefire." (S/PV4474, p. 13)

In that regard we are encouraged by a number of
new initiatives and ideas - which include the political
perspective - that have recently been put forward
from various quarters. We see merit in proposals
coming from the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia and
from European countries, as well as in the so-called
Peres-Abu'Alaa peace plan. Those proposals might
bring about new prospects for peace, and should
therefore be carefully considered by the parties and the
international community.

One of the major obstacles to peace in the Middle
East is the intensifying mutual distrust and total lack of
confidence between both the leadership and the peoples
of the two nations. Ukraine believes that the chances
for success of the peace process and for a final
settlement of the conflict will be significantly
strengthened by launching a wide process aimed at
developing confidence between Israelis and
Palestinians, engaging the intellectual, religious,
scientific, public, social, economic and other sectors of
their civil societies. My country is ready to assist the
parties in that regard.

The gravity of the present situation in the Middle
East requires more decisive engagement by the
international community, a more active role by the
Security Council, and renewed diplomatic efforts by
the co-sponsors of the peace process and by all other
international actors in order to assist the two parties to
stop the violence and to restore the peace dialogue. We
welcome the activities of the representatives of the
United States, the Russian Federation, the European
Union and the United Nations Special Coordinator -
the so-called "Quartet" - and call on them to intensify
their efforts. We also consider the personal
involvement of the Secretary-General in the process of
finding a settlement to the Middle East question to be a
critically important factor. We support his mediation
activities and encourage him to continue them.

Finally, the Security Council cannot remain
silent, and should give an adequate and prompt
response to the extremely dangerous situation in the
region. We expect that the Council will be in a position
to take an effective decision in that regard shortly.

