Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): In
Security Council resolution 1546 (2004), Council
members agreed to review the mandate of the
multinational force either at the request of the
Government of Iraq or by 8 June 2005. To facilitate
that review, I am pleased to report to the Security
Council on behalf of the multinational force, with its
28 member countries and 160,000 personnel, on the
efforts and progress of the force in fulfilling its
mandate.

I would also like to call the attention of Council
members to the letter of 24 May from Iraqi Foreign
Minister Hoshyar Zebari to the Security Council
President, which requests the Council to allow for the
continuation of the multinational force mandate until
the completion of the political process or until Iraq can
provide for its security needs on its own.

The mandate authorizes the multinational force to
take all necessary measures to contribute to the
maintenance of security and stability in Iraq, including
by preventing and deterring terrorism, in order to allow
the Iraqi people to implement freely and without
intimidation the timetable and programme for the
political process and to benefit from reconstruction and
rehabilitation activities. The multinational force also
provides assistance in building the capacity of the Iraqi
security forces and institutions through recruiting,
training, equipping, mentoring and monitoring, and
provides security for the United Nations.

Key goals for the multinational force are to
develop increasingly capable Iraqi security forces and
to transfer more and more security responsibilities to
them. Those are essential to ending attacks by
insurgents and terrorists and to developing the Iraqi
public's confidence in its own security forces. The
efforts of the multinational and Iraqi forces to improve
the security environment are buttressed by progress in
the political process, endorsed by resolution 1546
(2004). That progress encourages all Iraqis to affect
their political agenda through peaceful, democratic
means and to renounce terrorism.

The multinational force is committed to staying
the course in Iraq and will continue to assist the Iraqi
Government in providing security. In doing so, the
multinational force is committed to coordinating
closely with the Iraqi Government at the local and
national levels to employ more effective tactics to
defeat the insurgents and prevent their attacks.

A harsh security situation in Iraq has confronted
the new Iraqi Government. Dramatic, headline-
grabbing attacks against Iraqi citizens, aimed at
breaking their will, continue. In the face of that
violence, Iraqis have been increasingly willing to assist
the Iraqi and multinational forces. Iraqis also continue
to volunteer for the ranks of the security forces, and
those forces are assuming increased responsibility. We
welcome the commitment of Prime Minister Jaafari,
who has said that "the Government will strike with a
fist of iron every criminal who tries to harm any
citizen, be he a Sunni, a Shiite, an Assyrian, a Kurd or
a Turkmen".

In the long run, Iraqis want to defend themselves,
and the multinational force is making progress in its
goal of helping Iraqi security forces move towards self-
reliance. To date, some 165,000 Iraqi soldiers and
police officers have been trained and equipped. The
Iraqi army has over 90 battalion-level units conducting
operations. Some of those forces conduct independent
security operations, and others operate alongside or
with the support of the multinational force. The Iraqi
battalions are out in the cities and rural areas of the
country, and they are getting results. Iraqi police and
military forces are shouldering the burden in 12 of
Iraq's 18 provinces. There is much work to be done
and the challenge should not be minimized, but those
are valuable achievements.

The multinational force will continue to transition
responsibilities to Iraqi security forces until their
capabilities are sufficient to defeat the insurgents and
terrorists and to provide security without the force's
assistance. To that end, the force will continue to focus
on partnering, mentoring, teaching and capacity-
building.

Transitioning responsibilities also includes giving
Iraqi forces responsibility for particular areas, as
possible. That has already started in Baghdad and
Mosul with one military brigade each, and will
continue over time. Multinational force and Iraqi
commanders place a high premium on close
cooperation to ensure that their actions are
complementary and coordinated. Accordingly, joint
headquarters have been established at the national and
provincial levels to coordinate multinational force,
Iraqi Ministry of Defence and Iraqi Ministry of Interior
operations.

The multinational force, in coordination with the
Iraqi Government and security forces, international
donors, and national and international non-
governmental organizations, continues to support a
number of reconstruction and assistance activities in
order to maintain stability and security. Activities
include building schools and hospitals, improving the
infrastructure of roads, water and sanitation, and
removing landmines and unexploded ordinance. The
multinational force has also trained Iraqi engineers to
build local capacity to undertake such projects.

In previous quarterly briefings on behalf of the
multinational force, I have welcomed the assistance of
Ambassador Qazi and the United Nations Assistance
Mission For Iraq (UNAMI), as endorsed by resolution
1546 (2004) and requested by the Iraqi Government.
The United Nations has a leading and vital role to play
in providing valuable assistance to Iraq's political
transition. We urge the United Nations to provide that
assistance as fully as possible, as requested by the Iraqi
Government. To that end, we urge the United Nations
to deploy the necessary experts as soon as possible.

We recognize the difficult security challenges that
Iraq poses to the United Nations, and we welcome the
willingness of UNAMI and Secretariat staff to work
closely with the multinational force to ensure that
United Nations personnel face minimum risk and
deliver maximum support to Iraq. Multinational force
units from Georgia and Romania, with United States
and United Kingdom support, protect United Nations
facilities and staff in Baghdad and Basra. In addition,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany,
Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal,
Slovenia and Sweden have made financial
contributions for UNAMI protection. As the United
Nations expands its activities in Iraq, its security needs
will increase. We encourage countries to consider
additional assistance to the protection force, through
the provision of either funds or troops.

Consistent with Security Council resolution 1546
(2004), the multinational force is in Iraq to help the
Iraqis maintain security and stability until they can do
so unassisted. While the multinational force assists
with the provision of security, it also works to increase
Iraqi capacity to assume that task. A specific timeline
for the withdrawal of multinational forces cannot be
set. The multinational force will not remain in Iraq any
longer than necessary, but nor, consistent with the Iraqi
request, will it leave until the Iraqis can meet the
serious security challenges they face.

Any decision regarding force size will be driven
by events on the ground. The degree to which the Iraqi
people are satisfied with the way the Transitional
National Assembly approaches the constitutional
process and works to include all Iraqis will be of
obvious relevance to prospects for the future. We
realize that this is a difficult process and that we must
be patient. Acts of terrorism and insurgency will not
just disappear. We have seen that with the spate of
violence following the formation of the new
Government.

The Iraqi people are in the midst of forging a new
path - a free, democratic path, one that is chosen by
them. The multinational force remains committed to
working to create an environment that fosters such
progress.

