Ms. Coninsx: Allow me to begin by commending
Peru for its efforts over the past year to enhance the
Council's consideration of the challenges involved
in addressing the linkages between terrorism and
organized crime and to assist Member States in
identifying solutions. Those efforts have included an
Arria Formula meeting on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, a thematic
open briefing and a special meeting highlighting
regional specificities. They have also been reflected in
the renewed impetus given to this issue on the Council's
agenda. The Council has continued to build upon the
terrorism financing-related provisions of its resolution
1373 (2001), notably through its adoption of resolutions
2195 (2014) and, recently, 2462 (2019).

The territorial losses sustained by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant have certainly contributed
to the group's efforts to access funds through a wide
range of criminal activities, including drug trafficking,
weapons sales, kidnapping and extorsion. Other groups,
including Al-Qaida and its affiliates, have sought
similar financing avenues.

I wish to reiterate the determination of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to strengthen our understanding of Member
States' approaches and responses to the links between
terrorism and organized crime. Over the past year,
CTED has actively contributed to a number of
international conferences, workshops and expert
meetings focusing on those links, including at the
Council of Europe, the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Eurasian Group on Combating Money-
laundering and Financing of Terrorism and the Asia/
Pacific Group on Money-laundering. I also welcome
the close partnership developed in this area between
CTED, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute, which has proven extremely fruitful
in terms ofthe delivery of capacity-building assistance,
the issuance of dedicated reports and policy guidance
tools. In its work on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), including within the framework
of the aforementioned events, CTED has also become
aware of a number of academic and research initiatives
on this issue.

I commend the contribution of the research and
academic community, and I am particularly pleased to
be here today with Ms. Tamara Makarenko, who is one
of the pioneers of research in this area.

Within the framework of the country assessment
visits conducted on behalf of the CTC, CTED continues
to engage with national authorities on their perception
of the links between terrorism and organized crime, as
well as on identified cases in which such links have
been detected.

We have identified a number of relevant State
practices, including the creation of joint investigative
units and prosecution authorities to handle both
organized crime and terrorism. However, we continue
to note a significant disconnect between the level of
concern expressed by policymakers, the implementation
of legal frameworks addressing both terrorism and
transnational organized crime, and the actual level
of investigation and prosecution of cases involving
criminal and terrorist groups alike.

While I recognize that the links can take different
forms, depending on the geographic, political and
economic contexts, there are some specific areas
that we could explore in greater depth, both to better
understand the link and to address them in a more
effective way.

First, in its recently adopted addendum to the
Guiding Principles on foreign terrorist fighters, the
Committee recalls the need to intensify and accelerate
the timely exchange of financial intelligence, including
with a view to effectively identifying potential linkages
between terrorism and organized crime.

Secondly, the role of financial intelligence units
should be strengthened. Financial intelligence units
play a central role in States' anti-money-laundering
and counter-financing of terrorism efforts, but remain
generally under-used in the context of counter-terrorism.

Thirdly, the understanding of criminal and terrorist
activities achieved by intelligence services is not always
reflected at the investigative and prosecutorial levels,
where agencies responsible for countering terrorism
and those responsible for countering organized crime
too often tend to operate in silos. Inter-institutional
barriers to information-sharing, including between
and among local and national authorities, should
be overcome.

Fourthly, Member States should also conduct
terrorism-financing national risk assessments, which
provide an opportunity to detect, and respond to, active
or passive interactions between terrorist and criminal
groups. The participation of the private sector and
civil society in such exercises can greatly facilitate the
development of policy responses.

Lastly, links between terrorism and organized
crime may develop in prison settings, thereby increasing
the possibility of radicalization or the development of
connections that will enable terrorists to gain access to
criminal networks. It is therefore essential that States
increase the capacity of the relevant practitioners to
detect and deter such links.

I look forward to hearing more about Member
States' approaches and experiences in all those
areas. Events such as today's open debate enable us
to reaffirm our joint commitment to combating all
forms of support for terrorist groups and individuals,
as well as to promoting regional and international
cooperation through the dissemination of relevant tools
and practices. Rest assured that CTED will continue to
contribute actively to those efforts.

