Ms. Bird (Australia): As we meet today in the
Security Council, we all know - all too well - how
fleeting peace can be. As the Secretary-General has
reminded us time and again, countries that experience
armed conflict often remain at risk of relapsing into
violence for years after the conflict has ended. Some
90 per cent of conflicts between 2000 and 2009
occurred in countries that had previously experienced
civil war.

We meet with the benefit of the insights provided

by three seminal reports concluded in 2015 - that of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490), the review
of United Nations peace operations (see S/2015/446),
and the Global Study on the implementation of United
Nations Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
(S/2015/716). Like others, I welcome the participation
of Ambassador Rosenthal, Chair of the Advisory Group
of Experts, in today's debate. Together, those reports
lay out a clear framework for how the United Nations
can better work to achieve the goal of the Charter of the
United Nations of saving succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.

Central to that vision is the need to achieve
sustainable peace, which is not a nebulous concept.
Rather, it clarifies the fact that in order to achieve
just, meaningful and lasting peace we must prioritize
peacebuilding across the complete cycle of United
Nations engagement, from conflict prevention and
resolution through to reconciliation and recovery.

Sustainable peace requires us to take a longer-term
perspective in our efforts to maintain international
peace and security. It requires intergovernmental and
operational coherence among the principal United
Nations organs and United Nations agencies and
between Headquarters and the field. That needs to
be supported by integrated analysis, planning, policy
development and implementation.
Sustaining peace requires drawing together the
United Nations political, peace and security, human
rights, development and humanitarian arms, and
demands a whole-of-the-United Nations approach.
Fundamentally, it recognizes that to be sustainable,
peace must be nationally owned and inclusive of all,
particularly women, youth and civil society. And it
acknowledges that the scale of the challenge requires
close strategic and operational partnerships between the
United Nations and other key stakeholders, including
regional and subregional organizations, multilateral
financial institutions and the private sector.

As co-Chair of the intergovernmental phase of the
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
along with the Ambassador of Angola, Australia was
given the task oftranslating the widely supported vision
for United Nations peacebuilding set out in the Advisory
Group of Experts report into parallel draft resolutions
of the Security Council and General Assembly. Our
consultations are ongoing. We have been pleased by the
constructive spirit in which they are being held and the
strong demand that we are hearing from Member States
for a more comprehensive approach to United Nations
peacebuilding. That includes broad acknowledgement

that adequate, predictable and sustained financing
is essential to support United Nations system-wide
peacebuilding efforts.

I would like to conclude by stating that today's
debate is not about the scale or nature of the crises
facing the world, or whether the human cost of those
crises is too high. Those aspects are a given. The
question is how we seize the opportunity before us to
change how we conceive of and do peacebuilding and
how we ensure that our most vulnerable people - those
in conflict-affected countries - are not left behind in
our implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1).

Sustaining peace represents a crucial change in
mindset with regard to how the United Nations does
peacebuilding. It is not a new concept. Rather, it goes
to the very heart of the goals of the Charter. Australia
is committed to working closely with all Member States
to find consensus in that effort.

