Mr. Lancry (Israel): Just over a week ago, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1402 (2002),
calling for a meaningful ceasefire, an end to all acts of
terrorism and incitement, the withdrawal of Israeli
troops and cooperation with American Special Envoy
General Anthony Zinni in the implementation of Tenet
and Mitchell. Resolution 1402 (2002) lays out a
package of reciprocal steps to be carried out by both
sides. Even if one does not accept that those steps are
intended to be undertaken in sequence, surely one can
agree that they should at least be carried out
simultaneously. Israeli withdrawal, if it is not preceded
by a meaningful Palestinian ceasefire, must, at the very
least, be accompanied by one.

Israeli withdrawal under resolution 1402 (2002)
is not supposed to occur in a vacuum, and the fact that
Israel urges that such a withdrawal be accompanied by
a meaningful ceasefire is not a rejection of the
resolution, but a call for its faithful implementation.
For its part, Israel believes that, with the direct
involvement of Secretary of State Powell, the package
of steps envisaged in resolution 1402 (2002), including
Israel's withdrawal, can be fully implemented. To our
dismay, all indicators suggest that the Palestinian side
has no intention of even declaring a ceasefire, much
less implementing a meaningful one.

On Friday, Special Envoy Zinni met with
Chairman Arafat in his Ramallah compound and
presented a bridging proposal that the Palestinian
leader once again rejected. That rejection, coupled with
the Palestinian leadership's steadfast refusal to take any
action that might halt attacks on Israeli civilians,
demonstrates that the Palestinian leadership has yet to
abandon its strategic decision to use terrorism to
advance its cause.

In recent weeks, Israeli forces have discovered
documentary evidence of what our intelligence services
have long known: the Palestinian Authority has played
a central role in the support and financing of terrorist
operations. Scores of documents and thousands of
illegal weapons hidden in the Ramallah compound
confirm in striking detail the support provided by
Chairman Arafat and other high officials in the
Palestinian Authority for terrorist attacks and constitute
irrefutable proof of their complicity in the murder of
innocent Israeli civilians. Among the items discovered
were thousands of rifles, rocket-propelled grenade
launchers, mortars, mortar launchers, explosives and
hand grenades, all of which the Palestinian Authority is
forbidden to possess under signed agreements reached
with Israel.

The documents found in Chairman Arafat's
compound confirm that the Palestinian Authority
financed, with international and donor funds, the
terrorist activities carried out by Fatah Al-Aqsa
Martyrs Brigades, the group responsible for nine
separate terrorist attacks against Israel in the month of
March alone. One document attests to the fact that the
Palestinian Authority, under Chairman Arafat's
signature, provided ongoing funding for the Al-Aqsa
Brigades in the Bethlehem region by transferring
monthly salaries to the organization's activists and
funding for memorial ceremonies, posters and other
materials to publicize and glorify the deeds of suicide
bombers. An additional letter details an ambitious plan
to build a factory for manufacturing heavy weapons.
The cost to establish the factory was estimated in the
document at $100,000, and operating costs were
estimated at $15,000 per month. Those figures included
the purchase of machines needed to process the metal
required to manufacture weapons such as rockets and
mortars.

These findings attest to the importance of Israel's
military operations, which are being conducted in such
a way as to minimize, as much as possible, any harm to
Palestinian civilians. Our concerns in that regard have
extended the duration of the operation, but they are
both a legal and a moral necessity, and proceed from
the recognition that the Palestinians are our neighbours
and partners and will remain so. The majority of those
killed have been Palestinian fighters who either fired
on Israeli troops or were actively engaged in terrorist
activity. Israel has never and will never intentionally
target civilian areas. We must be careful not to accept
unfounded claims to that effect as fact, as is often the
case.

This morning, the Israeli Prime Minister, Ariel
Sharon, delivered an important statement to the Israeli
Parliament again expressing the wishes of all the
citizens of Israel to arrive at a peaceful settlement of
the conflict with our Palestinian neighbours. Prime
Minister Sharon welcomed the fact that such an
important Arab leader as Crown Prince Abdullah of
Saudi Arabia has, for the first time, acknowledged
Israel's right to exist within secure and recognized
borders. He described our willingness to engage in
negotiations and our search for a partner for peace and
declared his willingness to talk to any responsible
leader in the region any time, anywhere and without
preconditions.

Before I conclude, I would like to reiterate my
Government's urgent concern regarding the situation
along Israel's northern border. Since the Council last
convened, cross-border violations by the Hizbullah
have continued without respite. There has been no
movement from the Governments that supports
Hizbullah - Lebanon, Syria and Iran - to heed the
call of the Secretary-General and the international
community or to prevent attacks across the Blue Line.
Two days ago, five people were wounded in the village
of Ghajar during a heavy missile and mortar
bombardment from Lebanon. Among the wounded
were three children and an infant. Yesterday, Hizbullah
fired mortar shells, anti-tank missiles and rockets at
civilian and military targets in northern Israel in one of
the heaviest bombardments since Israel withdrew.
Since Israel withdrew from southern Lebanon in May
2000, in full compliance with resolution 425 (1978),
the widespread attacks in the Mount Dov region near
Mount Hermon and close to Moshav Avivim have been
carried out live on Lebanese television. Seven Israeli
soldiers have been wounded. In addition, this afternoon
the Secretary General of Hizbullah, Sheikh Hassan
Nasrallah, pledged that attacks against Israeli targets
would continue.

These illegal and unprovoked cross-border
attacks constitute an urgent threat to regional peace and
security and are being carried out by terrorists intent on
escalating the Palestinian conflict into a broader
regional confrontation. Let it be clear to everyone that
the cause of the instability along the northern border is
the acts of aggression by Hizbullah, with state support,
and that Israeli is doing its utmost, while reserving its
rights to respond, to prevent Hizbullah's attempts to
broaden the confrontation from succeeding. Despite
calls from across the international community, nothing
has so far deterred Hizbullah from its course. As the
Secretary-General declared in his recent statement
before the Council,

"The Government of Lebanon will be aware that
it is responsible for any hostile actions taken from
its territory". (S/PV.4506, Resumption 2, p. 6)

I appeal to the members of the Council to act
immediately to compel the responsible Governments to
end their support for Hizbullah and to prevent the
widening of the current conflict in the Middle East.

