Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting, as well as the three briefers for their
extremely relevant presentations.

The 1949 Geneva Conventions, whose seventieth
anniversary we celebrated yesterday, have been
universally ratified. Together with their Protocols
Additional, they constitute the key elements of the
international legal framework for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. As such, international
humanitarian law plays a central role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
helps to limit atrocities in the event of armed conflict
and thereby also facilitates post-conflict peace and
reconciliation processes.

Unfortunately, we all know that the rules of
international humanitarian law rules are being
increasingly violated. However, we must not draw
the wrong conclusions from that. International
humanitarian law remains more relevant today than
ever before. Its principles remain simple, practical and
adapted to the major changes in warfare. It is therefore
a matter not of rewriting the Geneva Conventions, but
of redoubling our efforts to ensure that they are better
respected and implemented.

This meeting of the Council provides me with
an opportunity to point out four simple and specific
ways that Belgium believes to be particularly
appropriate for strengthening respect for international
humanitarian law.
First, we must promote the dissemination of the
rules of international humanitarian law among all actors
concerned, as President Maurer also recalled. First of
all, the core principles of international humanitarian
law must be included in school curricula for the earliest
possible ages onwards to anchor a culture of humanity in
society. Next, armed forces must be adequately trained,
for example, by integrating international humanitarian
law into the teaching of military personnel. Finally,
public powers must leverage international humanitarian
law even in times of peace. Here, we stress the key role
played by national humanitarian law commissions not
only in advising and assisting in the dissemination and
implementation of international humanitarian law, but
also in holding to account those who violate the rules.

Secondly, States, be they parties or non-parties to
an armed conflict, and the international community
as a whole must take every possible measure in order
to implement their obligation to respect and ensure
respect for international humanitarian law. It is up to
them to set an example by using their influence when
they participate in a military coalition or when they
support an armed non-State group in the context of an
armed conflict. As the guarantor of international peace
and security, the Security Council must also remind
States Members of the United Nations and parties to
a conflict of their obligations. Belgium will therefore
continue, among other things, to work in favour of
safe, sustained and unhindered humanitarian access in
Syria, in our capacity as co-penholder for that dossier,
and specifically for the protection of children in the
context of our work as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

Thirdly, we must ensure that no measures taken in the
fight against terrorism hinder the work of humanitarian
organizations in their neutral and impartial activities.
Respect for international humanitarian law remains
essential everywhere and in all circumstances, and
the policies we may adopt towards terrorist groups do
not give us the right to depart from these rules. This
is why Belgium, together with the European Union,
will organize, next September on the sidelines of the
ministerial week of the General Assembly, a high-level
event on the impact of counter-terrorism measures on
the humanitarian sphere.

Fourthly and finally, States must not limit their
actions to prevention. It is imperative that we fight
impunity for the most serious crimes in order to
deter future atrocities. While this is primarily the
responsibility of each State, there is also a role for the
Security Council to strengthen its support for national
judicial procedures, hybrid mechanisms and the
International Criminal Court, especially in situations
that the Council has referred to it.

Seventy years ago, the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions was a historic moment reflecting our
shared humanity and our common values. The
anniversary we celebrate today should spur us to
renew our commitment to the respect of international
humanitarian law by taking specific measures aimed at
reducing as far as possible the too-numerous victims of
armed conflict.

