We welcome the holding of a virtual open meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We thank Mr. Mladenov for his lucid briefing. Peru notes with deep concern the gradual deterioration of the political and humanitarian situation surrounding the Palestinian issue. We continue to deplore the new fatalities, many of them minors, as well as the ongoing hostilities. Putting an end to that grave state of affairs is a major undertaking, but it is imperative. We acknowledge Israel's right to safeguard its own security and existence through legitimate self-defence, provided that it is conducted in accordance with the principles of legality, proportionality and precaution. The human rights of Palestinian citizens cannot be ignored. With regard to the latter point, we stress the need to hold the parties accountable for the many serious violations of international law and international humanitarian law. Impunity exacerbates the conflict and contributes to normalizing a disregard for human rights in other theatres of conflict in the Middle East. Peru also condemns hate speech, anti-Semitism and discrimination in all its forms. Ethnic, cultural and religious differences should be regarded as values of any society, never as threats. We are alarmed that the prospects for a political solution are becoming increasingly uncertain and that unilateral decisions and actions, or announcements of such with regard to possible annexations, may lead to an even greater escalation of tension and violence. We must recall Israel's obligation to comply with Security Council resolutions. In particular, we believe it urgent to put an end to the intensified settlement activities, property demolitions and evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, in line with resolution 2334 (2016). We also wish to reaffirm our commitment to the only solution to the Palestinian issue that we deem viable and consistent with international law, namely, that of two States with internationally recognized and secure borders, to be negotiated directly between Israel and Palestine, on the basis of the borders in place up to 1967, which must also lead to the determination of the final status of Jerusalem. We are facing an extremely turbulent and uncertain situation, characterized by the serious impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which knows no borders and which requires the coordinated and joint response of the international community. At this critical juncture, we emphasize the need to mobilize the support of the international community, with a view to mitigating the consequences of the disease among the most vulnerable Palestinian population. Providing greater financial resources to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East would be an important step in that direction. In that regard, Peru welcomes the readiness seen in recent weeks on the part of the Governments of Palestine and Israel to collaborate in the fight against the pandemic. We look forward to its being effective and we hope that it continues, particularly in the Gaza Strip. This must be followed by concrete signs of moderation and commitment to peace by the respective leaders. It is a matter of urgency that they immediately comply with the global ceasefire requested by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres as an essential measure to prevent and mitigate the devastating effects of COVID-19 and to strengthen diplomatic action. We would like to conclude by expressing our full support for Mr. Mladenov in his efforts to prevent further escalation and to promote dialogue between the parties.
