Mr. Prosor (Israel): Before I begin, I would like
to extend our condolences to the people of France
following yesterday's bombing of its embassy in Libya.
We also extend our condolences to the American people
following the attack in Boston last week. Our prayers
are with the victims, families and citizens of both
countries.

I want to congratulate His Excellency Ambassador
Eugene-Richard Gasana and the delegation of Rwanda
on their leadership of the Security Council this month.

Last Tuesday, the State of Israel marked 65 years
as the free and independent homeland of the Jewish
people. On that historic day, six and a half decades ago,
the leaders of the new Jewish State issued a declaration
of independence. It affirmed:

"We offer peace and unity to all the
neighbouring States and their peoples, and invite
them to cooperate with the independent Jewish
nation for the common good of all."

Israel wants peace. Not a day has gone by in the
past 65 years on which the people of Israel have not
yearned for peace. Last month, during his visit to
Israel, President Obama said "I know Israel has taken
risks for peace. I believe that the Israeli people do
want peace".

The Jewish tradition teaches that the world is
sustained on three pillars: truth, justice and peace.
Today, I would like to speak about the three pillars
upon which a true and lasting peace in our region
must stand. Those pillars of peace are the foundation
that must remain standing in the shifting sands of the
Middle East. Anything less would be a peace based on
illusions and delusions that is bound to crumble.

The first pillar is that peace must be built on a
foundation of education for tolerance and coexistence.
Peace should be fostered in homes, taught in schools,
nourished by leaders and woven into the very fabric
of society. The Charter of the United Nations urges
nations to "practice tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours".

It does not take an urban planner to realize that
the Palestinians are missing the blueprints to build a
peaceful neighbourhood. From cradles to kindergarten
classrooms and from the fields of summer camps to the
fields of football stadiums, messages ofintolerance fill
Palestinian society.

Under the Palestinian Authority, students learn
history from textbooks that glorify terrorists. They
learn geography from atlases that erase Israel from the
map. Gaza kindergarten graduations feature terrorist
dress-up. Five-year-old children stage plays that glorify
jihadists and suicide bombers. Instead of learning their
ABCs, Palestinian children are being taught hate.

Flip through the channels of Palestinian Authority
television and one might find a children's programme
featuring a young girl reciting a poem that calls Jews
"Allah's enemies, the sons of pigs [who] rap[e] women
in city squares". Apparently, that is what passes
for "educational television" under the Palestinian
Authority.

How can we expect children in Gaza to learn
tolerance when their own leaders repress them day in
and day out? Hamas has banned co-education, arrested
women for riding bicycles and prohibited women from
appearing in public with their hair uncovered. Earlier
this month, the Hamas police pulled dozens of young
men off the streets and brutally beat them for the
so-called "offence" of wearing trousers that were too
tight. I would say that that is taking the phrase "fashion
police" to a completely new level.

Month after month, the Council meets to discuss
what is wrong in the Middle East. Where are the
concerned voices in that debate for all the hate being
taught to Palestinian children? Where are the cries
denouncing the incitement that poisons the wells of
peace?

The second pillar is that peace must be built on a
clear recognition that Israel is the nation-State of the
Jewish people. Since King David laid the cornerstone of
a palace in Jerusalem 3,000 years ago, Jews have lived
continuously in the land of Israel. They saw the rise
and fall of the Babylonian and Roman Empires. They
endured crusades and pogroms until the the Jewish
State was re-established.

I have said it before and I will say it again - Israel
is committed to two States for two peoples. In 1947,
we readily accepted the United Nations plan to create
two States in the region, an Arab State and a Jewish
State. At the time, Arab leaders rejected the existence
of a Jewish State. Sixty-five years later, one still never
hears Palestinian leaders speak about two States for
two peoples.

While President Abbas claims to march steadily
towards peace, his actions fail to fall in step. Last
November, the Palestinian Authority built a monument
in a central square in Bethlehem depicting the
boundaries of a Palestinian State. That State extended
from the Mediterranean Sea to the Jordan River.
Israel was literally wiped off the map. Conveniently
enough - surprise, surprise - when foreign
dignitaries visit Bethlehem, the monument is removed
from its position and taken in for so-called repairs. As
the old saying goes, "You can fool some of the people
some of the time, but you cannot fool all the people all
of the time".

The Observer of the State of Palestine just now
cited things about Norway's aid to the Palestinian
Authority. Surprisingly enough, according to Norway's
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Palestinian Authority
misled Oslo when it claimed Norwegian aid money
had not been used to provide salaries for convicted
terrorists in Israeli prisons. The Palestinian Authority
has been using those types of underhanded tactics to
funnel money to convicted murderers with blood on
their hands. Last year, as the Palestinian Authority
was threatening to delay paying its civil servants, it
somehow managed to find the funds to triple - to
triple - the monthly payment to terrorists.
So while President Abbas speaks about peace, he
continues to publicly embrace Hamas. Abbas recently
renewed his efforts to create a unity deal with Hamas, a
terrorist organization dedicated to Israel's destruction.
In an interview last month with the Russian network
RT, Abbas went so far as to say that he did not see
much difference between the policies of the Palestinian
Authority and Hamas. Let me remind Mr. Abbas of
a simple truth. Hamas and its extremist ideology are
the enemies of peace. Their ideas do not empower
Palestinians to build a brighter future; they enslave
them in a darkened past. There will be no peace until
our neighbours recognize Israel as a Jewish State that
is here to stay.

Pillar number three holds that peace must be built
on security. At present, the cities and communities of
southern Israel remain under fire from terrorists in
Gaza, despite the fact that there has not been a single
Israeli settlement in Gaza since 2005. After 10 years
and more than 12,000 rockets, the Security Council has
not said one word to condemn the perpetrators. Israeli
citizens want real assurances for their security. The
situation in Gaza provides us with a valuable lesson
concerning any future arrangement in the West Bank.

As rockets are flying out of Gaza, new and more
sophisticated weapons are flowing in. Just this month,
security forces detained a vessel off the southern
coast of the Sinai peninsula carrying 60,000 rifles,
RPG launchers, machine guns, hand grenades and
ammunition. Ships like those routinely smuggle arms
to Gaza and to Sinai-based terrorist groups.

It is no secret that Iran is the primary supplier of
weapons and the greatest sponsor of terrorism in the
Middle East. Yet earlier this month, the representative
of Iran stood in front of the General Assembly to share
Iran's so-called concerns with the Arms Trade Treaty.
He had the audacity to say that the transfer of arms to
the Middle East has gravely affected the security and
welfare of the people of this region and led to many lost
lives in recent years (see A/67/PV.71). That is quite an
interesting statement to hear from a representative of
Iran. It is like the Mafia complaining that the crime rate
in New York is too high.

The Iranian regime spins lies almost as quickly as it
is spinning centrifuges. The ayatollahs are threatening
to combine their extremist ideology with missiles and
nuclear weapons. Make no mistake - Iran's ambition

for nuclear weapons is the single greatest threat to the
Middle East and the entire world.

The Iranian nuclear programme continues
to advance at the speed of an express train. The
international community's efforts to stop it are moving
at the pace ofa local train, pausing at every stop for some
nations to get off and others to get on. Last month, there
was yet another round of negotiations to reason with
Iran and convince it to abandon its nuclear programme.
Just days after negotiations ended, Iran announced two
key infrastructure projects. Surprise, surprise - both
of them expanded Iran's ability to process uranium.

At the same time that Iran is advancing its nuclear
ambitions, it is providing guidance to Bashar Al-Assad
to increasingly effectively butcher the Syrian people.
As we speak, Iran is sending Hizbullah fighters to
Syria to help execute their bloody plans on the ground.

In Lebanon, Hizbullah is building an army
equipped with 50,000 missiles - more than many
NATO members possess. They may now have access
to one of the largest stockpiles of chemical weapons in
the world. Hizbullah's leader, Hassan Nasrallah, claims
that he needs such an army to defend Lebanon against
Israel. The truth is that Nasrallah wants an army to
more effectively butcher his Arab brothers and sisters.

Hizbullah does not feel the need to limit its brand
of terrorism exclusively to the Middle East. Last month,
a court in Cyprus jailed a member of Hizbullah for
planning terrorist attacks against civilians. Yet that
still is not enough for some European Union members
to call Hizbullah what it is - a terrorist organization.
It operates with impunity on European soil, yet some
European lawmakers continue to insist it is a social
services organization. It does not take a Sherlock
Holmes to understand the obvious facts of the case.

The foregoing are just some of the threats Israel
faces in the region. Any peace agreement must be
based on reassurances for the security and safety of the
citizens of the world's only Jewish State.

Since Israel was born 65 years ago, we have been
forced to fight six wars in six decades to defend our
very existence. We know peace comes at a price. We
want peace, but not at any cost. We will not turn a blind
eye in the face of the threats that surround us. Now is
the time to put aside the distracting sideshows of the
debate and focus on how we can lay the foundation for
a genuine, lasting peace. It is naive to think that peace
can come from grand statements and vague promises.
It would be like trying to build a new house on a
shaky foundation - the whole structure is at risk of
collapsing.

For all those who believed that the so-called
Arab Spring would result in the blossoming of a new
Middle East, take note - democracy has not taken
root. Instead, what we have seen is more bloodshed and
more violence. To truly establish peace, we must build a
structure that can withstand the rough winds of change
that are sweeping the region.

Winston Churchill said, "We shape our buildings;
thereafter they shape us." The architecture of peace has
never been clearer. As we face historic challenges in
the Middle East, it has never been more important to
strengthen the pillars of tolerance, mutual recognition
and security. Those are the blueprints that need to be
followed by Israelis and Palestinians, and indeed by all
people in the Middle East, if we are to live in peace,
security and prosperity.

