At the outset, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks the briefers for their sobering remarks, and we commend the President of the Security Council for convening today's important and timely discussion. The hazards of climate change, the continued spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), and the proliferation of desert locusts are today erasing decades of progress in the global fight against hunger. For vulnerable groups in conflict- affected countries, including refugees, internally displaced persons and those made stateless as a result of political, socioeconomic and environmental forces over which they exert little influence, overcoming food shortages proves an insurmountable task. As millions suffer from acute food insecurity and conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen, South Sudan and other contexts, more must be done to combat these scourges. In many situations on the Security Council's agenda, acute food insecurity and conflict are inextricably linked, and both are exacerbated by climate change and compounded by other risk multipliers. For instance, the rise of intolerance, disinformation and hate speech creates an atmosphere of distrust where peace and security challenges emerge along ethnic, communal and political lines. This is exemplified by the painful and recurring cycles of violent conflict between Hema herders and Lendu farmers over long-standing land disputes in north-eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, leading to increased displacement and food shortages. Similarly, as a result of its six-year history of conflict, cycles of heavy rains and flooding and the associated factors of human displacement and economic disruption, food security in South Sudan has deteriorated significantly. Amid the coronavirus disease pandemic, which may further erode fragile peace processes, urgent multilateral action that brings together all actors across the peace, security, development and humanitarian nexus is needed. Against the backdrop of disrupted supply chains, movement restrictions and reduced funding, which significantly hamper humanitarian operations, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its full support for resolution 2532 (2020). Again we echo the calls for a global ceasefire and request that all parties to armed conflict engage in a durable humanitarian pause to ensure the sustained delivery of humanitarian assistance. International law, including international humanitarian law, is non-negotiable, and we encourage all parties that are well positioned to influence the course of events in conflict-affected countries to work towards the full implementation of resolution 2532 (2020), while respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of affected States. At this precarious moment there is an urgent need for the donor community, including the international financial institutions, to scale up assistance to conflict- affected countries and to ensure that humanitarian agencies receive the necessary funding to fully execute their response plans and continue their life-saving work. Likewise, in the same vein, we encourage more debt relief. If we are to make good on our collective promise of ending hunger by 2030, the entire United Nations system, including Member States and regional and subregional organizations, must renew their efforts to protect those made vulnerable by conflict and hunger.
