Ms. Bellamy: I too am very pleased to join you
today as the Council again takes up the issue of
children and armed conflict. The Council's ongoing
concern is deeply heartening to all of us at the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and indeed, I
am sure, to all those who are closely involved in this
issue - including my colleague, the Special
Representative, Olara Otunnu, who at this point, I
would say, deserves the highest praise for his very
important work.

I am also pleased, Madam President, that this
debate is occurring during your stewardship of the
Council. Your exemplary commitment to child rights is
well known, not least through your work as chair of the
Bureau for the preparatory process for the special
session of the General Assembly on children to be held
next year. I want to take this opportunity to thank you
for everything you have done to make today's debate
possible.

The Deputy Secretary-General and the Special
Representative have already presented the report of the
Secretary-General. I will just say that UNICEF
absolutely, fully, endorses the recommendations in it.

Resolution 1261 (1999) is an important step
forward. As the report notes, real progress has been
made. I will not go into all the details. Mr. Otunnu
listed a number, and I will touch on a few that I think
are particularly important.

The adoption of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in conflict is of course a
milestone. We urge its speedy ratification and entry
into force, a process that we hope will be quickened
during the forthcoming Millennium Summit.

We have also seen important meetings of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) at which groundbreaking
commitments were made to ensure the protection of
children in conflict. We also have great hopes for the
outcome of September's international conference on
war-affected children in Winnipeg, Canada, where we
are working closely with the Canadian Government on
final preparations.

On the ground, UNICEF is at work in over 25
war-affected countries, collaborating closely with
partners like Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the World Food Programme, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights - as well as with
numerous and very important non-governmental
organizations - to restart schools, provide educational
materials, reunite children and families, supply drugs
and vaccines, support the traumatized, operate clinics
and hospitals, dig wells, campaign against recruitment
and promote demobilization and disarmament.

UNICEF strives, with Olara Otunnu, to promote
the values, principles and concrete commitments of
resolution 1261 (1999), which reflect the obligations
and principles enshrined in the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and other human rights instruments.
This involves advocating the cause of child rights on a
daily basis with government officials, insurgents,
commanders, civil society representatives, religious
leaders, teachers, health workers, women's leaders and
with children and young people themselves.

But as our staff in the field regularly note, many
of the aspirations set out in the resolution remain
unfulfilled. We receive daily reports from the field of
sickness and malnutrition, of exploitation and rapes, of
killings and indiscriminate bombings, of recruitment
and abductions.

There are those who argue that words make little
difference, that the children of Somalia, Sierra Leone,
Afghanistan, Colombia and so many other countries of
course need much more than words and declarations of
intent. But we think that words do matter, especially
when they represent the commitment of a political
body with responsibilities as heavy as those of this
Council, charged as it is with the promotion and
maintenance of international peace and security.

The staff of UNICEF and other operational
agencies, who work day in and day out to assist and
protect some of the most vulnerable, exploited and
abused children in the world, all need the commitment
and support of this Council. They need to know that
Member States are actively working to uphold the
standards and principles of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Geneva Conventions.

What we ask today on behalf of the war-affected
children whom we attempting to serve around the
world is that Council Members do everything in their
power to ensure that the words that are contained in the
Secretary-General's report, and the words of the
Council's resolutions, become more than words, that
they become deeds, and that these deeds make a
difference to the lives of children.

All those who Violate children's rights or collude
in such violations - whether Governments or rebel
groups, manufacturers of or dealers in weapons of war,
or, simply, unscrupulous business people - must be
made to feel the power of the Council's words. They
must feel the opprobrium and repugnance of civilized
people everywhere. They must be shamed, disgraced
and held accountable for their actions.

The corridors of the United Nations are littered
with unfulfilled promises - promises that were made
in good faith to ease suffering, end exploitation and
protect children from the loss of childhood and from
rape, mutilation and recruitment as child soldiers. Yet
time and time again, in such places as Rwanda, Sierra
Leone, the Sudan, Afghanistan, Kosovo and East
Timor, cruelty and indifference have prevailed. It is not
too late to make good on those promises.

Although it would be almost invidious to single
out particular recommendations from the report - all
of which, as I indicated earlier, we endorse - there a
number of critical issues that we hope will be
emphasized in the outcome of this meeting.

One such issue is the need for education
programmes to be restarted as soon as possible, even
while conflict still rages. We know from experience in
such countries as Somalia and Azerbaijan that
education not only establishes hope for the future but
provides at least a semblance of a normal environment
for traumatized children, while lessening the chances
of recruitment.
Moreover, hospitals, clinics, schools and other
sites where children are most likely to be found, must
be protected from attacks and violence as set out in
international humanitarian law. We know from Angola
and Mozambique that children must have their own
demobilization programmes, separate from those of
adults and tailored to their special needs. We know
from the Sudan and Sri Lanka that, on the ground, all
parties to the conflict - insurgents as well as
Governments - must be actively engaged in upholding
the international standards that protect children.

We know from the Balkans and Sierra Leone that
the particular vulnerability of girls, especially their
vulnerability to sexual abuse and to other forms of
violence and abuse, must be addressed. We know from
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that lack of security for humanitarian personnel
reduces access to children who are in need, and the
consequences are drastic for their health and well-
being.

We know from Bosnia and Cambodia that
landmine-awareness programmes can significantly
reduce death and injury from mines and unexploded
ordnance.

We know from these and all of our other field
programmes that the implementation of the
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General's
report requires resources that will allow those of us
who are present in the field to be with children in need
and to work with them, their families and their
communities, and to implement real programmes.

We urge Council members to use their influence
to ensure that all of us receive the funding required,
and that it is sustained and consistent, so that we can
plan not just for the short term, but to ensure that
children are supported in their longer-term needs for
rehabilitation, reintegration and return to childhood and
normality.

UNICEF has every hope that the Council's
response to the report will be strong and unambiguous,
with determined and intensive follow-up. That means
that in authorizing any peacekeeping missions,
imposing any form of sanctions, facilitating a ceasefire
or finding ways to prevent conflict the Council will
ensure that children's rights are addressed in a practical
and effective way. Where warring parties or others
violate the provisions of any resolution, whether
resolution 1261 (1999) or one that results from this
meeting, we urge Council members to speak out,
collectively and individually, to make it clear that
violators are overstepping the bounds of decent and
acceptable behaviour.

Active steps must be taken to monitor the
behaviour of States and of other parties. The Council
should demand that all violations, broken promises and
unfulfilled commitments be brought to its attention.

I cannot overstate the gravity and the urgency of
this issue. We cannot ask war-affected children to wait
any longer for their rights to be respected. Developing
minds and bodies require attention now. As the Council
knows, childhood is finite, and once it is lost it cannot
be replaced. As the Secretary-General himself says in
his report, we "must do much more to move from
words to deeds, from the drafting of norms to an era of
application". My colleague, Mr. Otunnu, echoed those
words earlier. I urge the Council to heed the Secretary-
General's exhortation.

Once again, I thank you very much, Madam
President, for giving me this opportunity to participate.

