Mr. Kolby (Norway): My delegation would also
like to welcome the High Commissioner and to thank
him for his briefing. We would also like to join him in
his tribute to women on this International Women's
Day. The Prime Minister of Norway has issued a
statement in that regard in Oslo.

Norway views with increasing concern the
humanitarian situation of the refugees, internally
displaced persons and civilian populations at large in
the areas of conflict in West Africa. Humanitarian
agencies have only recently gained access to a few
individuals among what may total as many as 200,000
Sierra Leonean refugees and Guinean internally
displaced persons in the "parrot's beak". The
humanitarian agencies still lack access to refugees who
return through the areas controlled by the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) in Sierra Leone. We
understand that the redeployment of United Nations
humanitarian workers in the region depends upon
security on both sides of the border area. We have
taken note of the assessment that an organized return of
refugees through northern Sierra Leone is not possible
in the current situation.

We understand from the High Commissioner's
report that an agreement for safe passage for refugees
moving further north was made with the Guinean
Government during his visit. That is a welcome
development. In our view, in the current situation it is
of the utmost importance that the Guinean authorities
and the humanitarian agencies cooperate in relocating
these vulnerable groups.

In an extremely difficult situation, UNHCR and
the International Organization for Migration have
started an organized and voluntary repatriation
programme for Sierra Leonean refugees, travelling
from Conakry to Freetown by boat. We are concerned
about the reception capacity for refugees in Sierra
Leone. It is extremely important that the returnees do
not become permanent internally displaced persons
when they return home. The return of large numbers of
refugees may contribute to the destabilization of such
areas. We encourage the authorities, as well as the
humanitarian agencies, to take steps to prevent further
destabilization, if necessary with the assistance of the
international community.

Over recent decades, the increasing number of
internally displaced persons has presented the
international community and the humanitarian agencies
with especially difficult challenges. Very often,
internally displaced persons are among the most
vulnerable victims of armed conflict and complex
emergencies. As a group, they are not protected by any
particular mandated international humanitarian
organization. It is necessary, therefore, to address these
challenges on a pragmatic basis. Norway appreciates
the cooperation between the Sierra Leonean
Government and the Norwegian Refugee Council in
organizing an internally displaced persons conference
in Freetown later this month, aimed at finding practical
solutions to the needs of the internally displaced
persons in that country. The Norwegian State Secretary,
Raymond Johansen, will participate at the opening of
the conference.

Humanitarian workers carry out their relief and
assistance work under extremely difficult and often
dangerous conditions. In some conflicts, the warring
parties have targeted humanitarian workers themselves.
There have been serious incidents and episodes of
harassment of humanitarian workers in West Africa.
Hostages have been taken, and humanitarian workers
have lost their lives. We strongly condemn such
incidents, and we urge the Governments in the region
to do whatever possible to ensure the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel, as well as their free
and unimpeded access to the people who so desperately
need their assistance.

