The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

We appreciate the comprehensive and insightful
briefing by Special Representative Adeniji. We have
great appreciation for Ambassador Adeniji's leadership
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) and his contribution to peace in Sierra
Leone and the Mano River region. We also record our
appreciation for Force Commander General Opande for
leading the forces in an effective manner.

It is clear that a number of things are going in the
right direction in Sierra Leone. The Abuja Agreement
is being implemented. The Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) is sticking to its promises and participating in
particular in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), although it has yet to deliver on
all counts. The Kambia disarmament exercise has given
impetus to disarmament throughout Sierra Leone.

We are happy that UNAMSIL is continuing to
expand its range of activities in Sierra Leone to
facilitate the peace process. We are happy that the
Bangladesh contingent has helped by maintaining,
since much earlier than envisaged, a continuous patrol
presence in Kono, which is a vital diamond-producing
area, building confidence and UNAMSIL's operational
effectiveness. I thank Ambassador Adeniji for his
words of appreciation for the positive contribution of
the Bangladesh contingent.

We welcome the release of over 1,000 children by
armed groups, and we strongly urge that armed groups,
in particular the RUF, immediately release all children,
including girls, remaining with them.
We were encouraged to learn that prospects for
elections during the next dry season are brightening.
We welcome the intention of the Secretary-General to
respond positively to the request made by the National
Electoral Commission for the support of the United
Nations in this regard.

Although these positive developments have taken
place, the situation in Sierra Leone continues to be very
fragile. We are particularly concerned about three
areas. First is the difficult situation in the subregion as
a whole. We believe that there is no alternative to
dialogue among leaders of the Mano River Union for a
longer-term solution. In this regard, we appreciate the
contribution of the Economic Community of West
African States in fostering regional peace and
cooperation.

Secondly, the humanitarian situation remains
critical. Reports of violations of the human rights of
internally displaced persons and detainees cause
concern to us. Thirdly, resources are not forthcoming.
Enough resources are not there to take the DDR
programme beyond August. We are concerned that the
donors conference on 11-12 June in Paris did not result
in any concrete pledges, and there are already signs of
DDR slowing as a result of the lack of resources to
keep the initial momentum going.

The Special Court on Sierra Leone is still in the
making because the resources available are not enough
and scanty commitments to the United Nations appeals
for the subregion and for Sierra Leone have not
improved in spite of the improvements on the ground.

To sustain peace in Sierra Leone, the international
community will have to sustain its assistance. We will
not have peace in Sierra Leone on a shoestring. Key to
lasting peace in Sierra Leone is the rebuilding of the
economy. Steps to achieve that are DDR, national
reconciliation, in particular through the early set-up of
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the
Special Court, the restoration of State authority,
elections, and the promotion of the rule of law and
respect for human rights. While UNAMSIL will be
assisting in these steps, the support of the international
community and the right measures by the Government
of Sierra Leone will bring ultimate success.

We agree with the Secretary-General that there
could be the need for a further increase in the strength
of UNAMSIL, especially in View of the forthcoming
elections. We agree that the civilian police component
in Sierra Leone needs to be strengthened. We believe
that the public information capacity of UNAMSIL
should be increased along with the strengthening of
other peace-building components.

The Government of Sierra Leone will also have to
do its part. Taking the opportunity of the forward
deployment of UNAMSIL, it has to extend State
administration, law and order and basic services.

Let me conclude by reiterating Bangladesh's
continued commitment to peace in Sierra Leone. We
have never doubted the usefulness of international
peacekeeping in Sierra Leone, even during what
Ambassador Adeniji mentioned as being the darkest
days of UNAMSIL. We are happy that the risks we
collectively took for peace in Sierra Leone have
achieved some tangible results. Now it is incumbent on
us all to build on that for lasting peace in Sierra Leone.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to Ambassador Adeniji
to respond to the comments made and questions raised.

