Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (spoke in Spanish):
First, I wish to congratulate you warmly, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. I am confident that
under your able leadership, the work of the Council
will be carried out in a constructive and an efficient
manner. I also take this opportunity to congratulate
your predecessor, Ambassador Wang Yingfan,
Permanent Representative of the People's Republic of
China to the United Nations, on the exemplary manner
in which he steered the work of the Council during the
month of July.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, as well as to
other members of the Council, for having given me the
opportunity in my capacity as Acting Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People to participate in this important
debate on the critical escalation of violence in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem.

The Committee is extremely worried by the latest
dramatic escalation of tensions and violence in and
around East Jerusalem and in areas under full
Palestinian control. From what we have witnessed in
the past several days, it appears that Israel has no
intentions of abiding by agreements signed with the
Palestinian side and has firmly decided on wide-scale
military operations in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, as well as in areas
under full control of the Palestinian Authority. The
latest and most striking incidents include the takeover
of Orient House and other Palestinian institutions in
East Jerusalem and Abu Dis.

Besides being a blatant provocation, the Israeli
flag triumphantly hoisted on the roof of this Palestinian
institution was a vivid example of this policy. Three
days later, in a massive offensive-like operation
involving tanks, armoured personnel carriers and
bulldozers, supported by helicopter gunships, the
Israeli Defence Forces invaded the West Bank town of
Jenin and is now apparently set to do the same in Beit
Jalla and Bethlehem - all "A" areas under full
Palestinian control.

Israel continues to use sophisticated weapons,
such as missiles and helicopter gunships, in the
extrajudicial killing of suspected Palestinian militants.
The death toll is rising - now totalling more than 700
people, some 550 of them Palestinian. The Palestinian
economy is decimated and the infrastructure of the
occupied Palestinian territory has been further eroded.

What we hear as an excuse, obviously
unacceptable, is that these measures are taken in
response to the continuing violence on the part of the
Palestinians, including suicide bombings in Israeli
cities. We are certainly strongly opposed to any actions
resulting in the loss of life - Israeli or Palestinian.
After 34 years of occupation and with no prospect for a
better future, with promises for a peace settlement
shattered, the Palestinian people are left completely
defenceless and vulnerable to arbitrary and excessively
harsh actions by the Israeli military.

Only a couple of months ago, the
recommendations made by the Mitchell Committee
seemed to offer a way out of the impasse. However, the
unrealistic proposition that all violence cease before
the cooling-off period starts and negotiations resume
has brought us to the current critical situation. The
recent violations by Israel of international law and
provisions of its agreements with the Palestinian side
prove again that it has not been able to embrace fully
and unequivocally the fundamental principle of "land
for peace" and apply in practice the commitments and
obligations it made at Madrid and Oslo.

For some time, we have been discussing ways of
helping the parties out of the maze of the present crisis.
Obviously, the two sides - already left to their own
devices for too long - cannot achieve a breakthrough
now. They need the assistance of the international
community and this Council, which has been given the
primary responsibility in the area of international peace
and security.

Although all the elements are present, the Council
has on numerous occasions failed to take any tangible
action. We believe that the Mitchell Committee report
and its recommendations should be implemented in
their entirety. A framework for their implementation
should be established within a reasonable time span
and with international community monitoring the
compliance of both parties. Negotiations on security, as
well as consideration of the interim and permanent
status issues, should be revived as a matter of urgency.
The Committee is of the view that a permanent-status
agreement, long overdue, should be finally reached on
the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973). Only once there is a sovereign
Palestinian State, with guaranteed and safe borders,
will there be peace. Only then will the two
neighbouring peoples - the Israelis and the
Palestinians - be able to enjoy security and prosperity
and embark on building their relationship for the
future.

For over a quarter of a century now, our
Committee has been reiterating that the core of the
problem has been the continuing illegal occupation by
Israel of the Palestinian territory. Today, we call again
upon the Government of Israel to respect and live up to
the principles of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, and the provisions of all relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

The Committee has repeatedly put forward its
position with respect to the situation on the ground and
the threat it poses to international peace and security,
and with respect to the stalemate in the peace
negotiations, the deteriorating humanitarian situation
and the deplorable state of the Palestinian economy. I
would like to conclude by urging the members of the
Council to face the challenges before us and come up
swiftly with concrete and decisive steps aimed at
addressing the present crisis in the Middle East.

