Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, at the outset, I would like to
express my gratitude to you for your initiative to hold
this meeting of the Security Council at the level of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs to discuss the situation in
the Middle East. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his presence among us and for his statement.

The problem referred to as "the Middle East
issue" started over 60 years ago, and yet, despite the
passage of those 60 years, it has not grown old. It is
still as urgent, complicated and severe as if it were
only 60 months or 60 days old.

At the centre of the so-called Middle East
problem is the Palestinian people, who were evicted
from their land, rendered homeless and scattered
throughout the world. Those among the Palestinian
people who remain in Palestine have seen their rights
denied, their homes demolished, their identity
destroyed and their farms uprooted and razed, and
thousands of them are now held in Israeli prisons. And
now, at a time when the resistance of the Palestinian
people against this occupation, this Violence, this
expulsion, this destruction and this imprisonment is
being criminalized, we find on the opposite side, in
Israel, an increased push towards extremism and the
denial of the rights of others, as well as a growing
spirit of hatred towards Palestinians and the entire Arab
people.

Today, we face a new Government in Israel,
whose diplomacy is led by a man who does not even
bother to hide his hatred for Arabs and who had once
called for the destruction of Egypt's Aswan High Dam
and for the expulsion of the Palestinians from
Palestine.
At a time when some people describe the
Government elected by all Palestinians as an extremist
Government, when some countries have put that
Government on a list of terrorist governments, and
when the resistance movement in Lebanon is described
as terrorist, we do not hear anybody describing as
extremist or terrorist Israeli Governments that launch
wars, kill, destroy, uproot and raze farmlands and build
a racist separation wall.

Since the Oslo Accords, the Palestinians, through
the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Palestinian Authority, have been moving step by step in
negotiations and peace talks with the Israelis. They
have been moving from one international forum to
another in the name of peace and in pursuit of a
resolution of the Palestinian question. But what has the
end result been?

On the Israeli side, we have an increase in the
construction of settlements and the destruction of
Palestinian homes, and today, in Jerusalem alone, more
than 60,000 Palestinians face the destruction of their
homes and who will be rendered homeless.
Excavations under the Al-Aqsa mosque continue today,
with the goal of destroying and completely removing
the mosque. Israel also plans to construct an
underground railway near the mosque.

The Arab Peace Initiative, which is now six years
old, has been completely ignored by the Israelis. They
want to take everything: they want the land, security
and peace, and they offer nothing in return. The Israelis
reject the return of Palestinian refugees to their
homeland; they refuse to give up weapons of mass
destruction, which they continue to accumulate in their
arsenals; they refuse to withdraw from the Golan; they
reject a Palestinian State, which, in fact, is impossible
to establish because Israel has taken the land and water
sources, destroyed the infrastructure and imprisoned
the Palestinian people.

There are now more than 11,000 Palestinians in
Israeli jails, and we hear no discussion of their
suffering or of the importance of releasing them. In the
West Bank alone, there are more than 600 Israeli
checkpoints, which make the daily lives of Palestinians
an ongoing, continuous torture.

At the end of last year and early this year, Israel
launched a comprehensive war against the Gaza Strip.
The international conscience agrees that Israel's
actions constituted war crimes which affected all
segments of the civilian population. Thousands were
killed or wounded, and internationally banned weapons
were used. While we express our appreciation for the
Board of Inquiry and the fact-finding mission
concerning the Israeli aggression against Gaza, and
specifically against United Nations facilities in Gaza,
my delegation has also prepared a draft resolution to
establish an impartial investigating committee to hold
Israeli officials accountable and bring them to justice.
We also look forward to the report of the independent
fact-finding mission that was set up by the Human
Rights Council to investigate all Israeli crimes in Gaza
during the aggression.

Today, we need to raise the voice of right and the
voice of courage. Humanity has entered the twenty-
first century. We need a voice that calls for the
renunciation of violence and war and the killing of man
by his fellow man. We must all confront and stand up
to all forms of racism.

Muslims, Jews and Christians lived together in
Al-Andalus - Audalusia - for many centuries. They
lived in unprecedented brotherhood, and together they
produced a civilization that laid the groundwork for a
historic human renaissance that helped to take
humanity from the darkness of the Middle Ages to the
enlightenment and progress of recent centuries.

We therefore say today that we need to reproduce
the Al-Andalus experience, which we believe we are
capable of doing. That civilization was built on
coexistence, tolerance and acceptance of the other.

With full appreciation for the initiatives,
resolutions and plans seeking to resolve what we call
the Middle East question, and based on a spirit of
coexistence, our brother and leader Muammar
Al-Qadhafi has published in the White Book his Vision
for a true solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. That
Vision includes the creation of a democratic State in
Palestine where everyone lives equally, without
discrimination based on religion or race. In that State,
violence, confrontation and denial of the other would
end. My country has confidence in the ability of the
international community and of noble humanity to
realize that dream, just as the dream of coexistence was
realized in South Africa.

The White Book, written by our leader Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, contains a chapter entitled "Isratine",
describing a time when everybody in Palestine -
Arabs and Jews 4 shall share equally in the land,
water, freedom, and even the name of the State, as
happened when African Tanganyika and Arab-origin
Zanzibar were merged into one State called Tanzania.

In conclusion, although we do not agree with
much of the content of the draft presidential statement
submitted to us because it does not adequately address
the issues of Israeli settlements, the occupation of the
Golan Heights, the situation in Gaza and the Sheba'a
Farms, in appreciation of the good intentions and
positive attitude demonstrated in the preparation of the
draft presidential statement, in recognition of my
country's relationship with Russia and in order to
preserve the unity and consensus of the Council, we
will not object to the presidential statement.

