At the outset, I would like to congratulate South Africa for holding today's debate and thank the President of the International Court of Justice for his briefing. My delegation also commends the members of the Court for their work in the service of international justice through the peaceful settlement of disputes between States. The Niger, in accordance with the ideals of the Charter of the United Nations, which it joined in 1960, has always favoured the peaceful settlement of disputes with its neighbours, through referral to the International Court of Justice. We remain convinced of the primary importance of the role of the Court as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations for the pursuit of international justice. We therefore welcome the excellent relations that have always existed between the Security Council and the Court, in keeping with the Charter of the United Nations, in particular the briefings by the President of the Court, which keep the Council informed about the activities of the Court. The ability of the Court to issue decisions, pursuant to the Charter, on matters relating to the maintenance of international peace and security, which is the primary responsibility of the Security Council, is an extremely important aspect of its jurisdiction that we must continue to promote with a view to strengthening the complementarity between the two organs. With regard to the Council's prerogative under the Charter to request advisory opinions from the Court whenever necessary, my delegation would like to see greater involvement with the Court by the Security Council, as has happened in the past, through the referral of legal disputes to the Court, in accordance with Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter. My delegation encourages the Court to continue to issue its decisions objectively and impartially, as it has always done, in order to encourage States with disputes to avail themselves of the path of peaceful settlement through justice. Even if it requires great efforts, we must take measures to further encourage States with disputes to submit them to the Court and to ultimately comply with its decisions. That would only strengthen the rule of law at the national and international levels and ensure the maintenance of international peace and security. We also welcome the practice whereby the Court enables students from a range of geographic and linguistic regions to become familiar with the work of the Court and develop their skills in the field of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. We believe that such a practice could be considered by the Council in order to allow such young people to familiarize themselves with this organ; if done in a coordinated manner, it would also encourage them to do comparative research and analysis on the Council and the International Court of Justice. With regard to the capacity of national judicial institutions to fully grasp and better manage conflict situations, the Court could initiate relations with such institutions in general, and with those of countries in conflict or post-conflict situations in particular, with a view to building their capacity to take charge of certain matters. In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate its thanks to the President of the Court and call on the two institutions to continue exchanging information through such meetings with a view to maintaining dialogue and strengthening peace and security in the world.
