The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Brazil.

I wish to welcome Minister Audronius AZubalis
and to thank him for his presentation. I congratulate
him on assuming the chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
wish him a very successful tenure.

Brazil is convinced that regional and subregional
organizations can greatly contribute to further
strengthening the multilateral system, including in the
area of the maintenance of international peace and
security. I am certain that, under the Lithuanian
leadership, the OSCE will advance its dialogue and
cooperation with the United Nations. Collaboration
between the United Nations and the OSCE is a
concrete example of a partnership that has helped to
promote peace and security in Eastern Europe, the
Caucasus and Central Asia and to fight terrorism.

In Afghanistan, the OSCE has been actively
involved in efforts to foster political dialogue, increase
national capacities, and support the democratic
process. Brazil notes with satisfaction the close
coordination of OSCE with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in this regard. We
appreciate the assistance provided to the Afghan
Government in the fields of border security, police
training and the fight against drug trafficking.

In Kyrgyzstan, the OSCE played a constructive
role last year, in close coordination with the United
Nations and the European Union, in the context of a
challenging political environment. Brazil recognizes
the work that was done, inter alia, to normalize the
situation in the country, ensure security and stability,
help the victims of violence, and assist the process of
national reconciliation. With the active engagement of
the international community, we hope that the people
of Kyrgyzstan will be able to overcome current
difficulties, strengthen democratic institutions, and
create more opportunities for social and economic
development.

I note the priorities outlined by Lithuania for its
OSCE chairmanship in 2011. We were pleased to learn
that, along with efforts to address protracted conflicts,
attention will be given to a renewed commitment to
democracy, the rule of law and human rights, as well as
to new ways to promote energy security, media
freedom and tolerance education. Tolerance and
diversity are two defining features of Brazilian society.
Having hosted last year's Forum of the Alliance of
Civilizations in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil very much
welcomes OSCE initiatives in this regard.

Brazil joins in supporting the vision and priorities
established by Lithuania for the work of the OSCE in
the current year, and looks forward to a very fruitful
cooperation between that organization and the United
Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Minister Azubalis to respond to
the comments made and questions raised.

