Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Halabja 1988,
Srebrenica 1995, Darfur 2003. The list of examples in
modem history where violence has triumphed is long,
too long. Regrettably, it seems a new name will now be
added to that tragic list: Rakhine 2017. The reports of
systematic and widespread human rights violations and
abuses against the Rohingya community in Rakhine
state, as well as other gross violations of international
law committed in Kachin and Shan states, cannot be
neglected. We have seen clear indications of crimes
against humanity. Horrifying testimonies of torture and
inhumane treatment, rape and other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence, summary and arbitrary killings,
have left no one untouched.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, for having called
this meeting, marking one year since the violence
in Rakhine began to escalate. Let me also thank the
Secretary General for his strong statement, as well as
for his personal commitment and engagement. We also
recognize Ms. Cate Blanchett's important contribution
to mobilizing needed support and attention.

Sweden has actively contributed to the Security
Council's engagement on Myanmar since the first day
of our membership. Some steps to address the situation
have been taken - in November 2017, a united Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22)
setting out a plan for action; in March this year, the
Council paid a successful visit to the region to gain a
first-hand understanding and convey clear messages;
and in April, a United Nations Special Envoy was
appointed with strong political support for her
mandate. But clearly that was not enough. We need to
ask ourselves what more we could have done to prevent
these atrocities from happening in the first place.
Honest lessons must be drawn for future efforts to
ensure that it never happens again.

Yesterday, the Independent International Fact-
Finding Mission on Myanmar, a United Nations-
mandated body with distinguished membership,
presented credible and solid findings on the gravity
of the atrocities committed by the Myanmar security
forces. This is significant and must be followed by
meaningful action. The Chair of the Fact-Finding
Mission should be given an opportunity to present the
report (A/HRC/39/64) to the Security Council as soon
as possible. In that regard, we recall the letter circulated
to the Council in July, during the Swedish presidency,
proposing that the Fact-Finding Mission present its
findings and recommendations to the Council.

Several initiatives by the Myanmar Government to
meet repeated demands for accountability have been
announced, but they have regrettably all proven to
fall short of expectations. With facts now having been
established, the international community must shoulder
its responsibility and act on accountability. Sweden
has previously called for the Council to consider a
referral of the situation to the International Criminal
Court. In the light of the Fact Finding Mission's report,
we believe it is time to move forward, and we need to
consult among Council members on a draft resolution
to that end. At the same time, we should continue
to work in other international bodies to ensure the
establishment of an international mechanism for full
and independent investigations.

In addition to ensuring accountability, there are
several other matters that the Council already has
agreed upon that also need to be urgently addressed.

First, responses to the humanitarian needs of
the refugees in Cox's Bazar must be stepped up.
We commend efforts by Bangladesh. Substantially
increased financial support, however, is also needed
for bolstering resilience. In that regard, we welcome
the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank's
recent engagement. Protection in the refugee camps,
not least for the most vulnerable, must be improved.
Special attention should be given to survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence, be they women, girls or
boys. More secure land must be provided and general
security in the camps must be improved.

Secondly, the continuously dire situation in
Rakhine also needs to be addressed. Full access to
Rakhine for United Nations agencies, as well as for
non-governmental organizations and the media, is
urgent and necessary. The tripartite memorandum of
understanding signed with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Development Programme must be
implemented in full and without delay.

Thirdly, conditions for voluntary, safe and dignified
returns to areas of origin must be ensured. In that
regard, the implementation of the recommendations
of the report of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State, led by the late Kofi Annan, must be stepped
up to address the root causes, including the issue of
citizenship. Security, reconstruction and livelihood
programmes must also be urgently provided for.

Reflecting on one of the major tragedies in recent
times, the late former Secretary-General Kofi Annan
noted with regret that "in their greatest hour ofneed, the
world failed the people of Rwanda". The Council cannot
turn a blind eye to the atrocities committed against the
Rohingya. We must now take full responsibility and do
our utmost to end this nightmare. History will not look
kindly upon those who fail to do so.
