Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation would first
of all like to express its appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his report regarding the United Nations Mission
in Haiti (UNMIH). We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to Haiti, Mr.
Lakhdar Brahimi, and all the personnel of UNMIH for the
exemplary manner with which they have carried out their
tasks on our behalf. My delegation is pleased at the overall
success of the Mission, and especially at the continuing
smooth transfer of responsibility to the Haitian authorities.
The role of UNMIH has been crucial in assisting the
Government of Haiti in its efforts to build a more
democratic, secure and stable nation. Their success has
been reflected by the outcome of the recent elections held
on 25 June 1995, in which a large percentage of the Haitian
people assembled peacefully and safely to cast their votes
freely. Their enthusiastic participation in the presidential
election to be held later this year will be a further essential
step towards the consolidation of democracy. The
democratization process in Haiti, however, should be built
upon national reconciliation. In this regard, the efforts of
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to promote that process
have been indispensable in creating a climate conducive to
democracy, as Haiti prepares for the completion of these
elections and the subsequent presidential elections.
Eventually, the future of Haiti will be in the hands of its
people. International assistance only complements their
efforts to achieve peace, democracy and the development of
their country.

The restructuring of Haiti involves the reform of the
Government, the military, and the economy - all at the
same time. My delegation is of the view that without a
stable Government, the security of the people cannot be
guaranteed. Without security and stability, the economic
development of Haiti cannot be achieved. There is a link
between peace, stability and development in Haiti.
Therefore, adequate security is needed to protect the people
of Haiti. In this regard, we commend the UNMIH personnel
for their key role in establishing a civilian police force. The
full functioning of the National Police is necessary for the
consolidation of democracy and the revitalization of Haiti's
system of justice. Creating and expanding Haiti's National
Police will also be vital to the security of the Government
and its people. The establishment of a police force of an
adequate size and structure is not a simple task, but it is
essential to the security of democracy. My delegation
believes that the civilian police component of UNMIH
has played a major role in establishing such a police force.

The overall security of Haiti, and especially of the
capital, Port-au-Prince, has improved continuously since
the last report of the Secretary-General. Political violence,
vigilante killings and common crime have decreased
dramatically, indicating that the rule of law has become
stronger and more accepted by the citizens of Haiti.
Generally, the security of the Mission is on solid ground;
there are few threats to its personnel or challenges to its
authority. My delegation believes that by next February,
after the transition to a fair, just, and sufficiently strong
Government of Haiti, there will continue to be a strong
deterrent against crime. Hence, we hope that the UNMIH
mandate can be concluded as soon as a new,
constitutionally elected Government assumes office in an
orderly manner.

The results of the reforms in government, security
structures and the economy in Haiti have made possible
a variety of positive social changes. We applaud the
ongoing reform of the judicial and penal systems,
including new prisons, retrained guards and newly trained
prosecutors. These institutions will ensure that justice is
swift but fair and that the rights of accused and convicted
persons are not infringed.

We commend the many people who have promoted
projects to improve power supply, transport and
repatriation of refugees and the development of health
programmes. Swift progress has been made in such areas
as immunization, family planning, education and
programmes for the supply of food and clean water. Such
programmes are the ultimate goal of restructuring - that
is, raising the standard of living, for the betterment of all
Haiti.

To further these social goals, it is essential that the
development of Haiti's democratic process be
accompanied by economic development. The international
community should place emphasis on conflict prevention
and should aim at the roots of conflict, such as
underdevelopment and the lack of a legitimate political
institution. Therefore it is vital that the international
community ensure that its efforts to rebuild the three
pillars of this burgeoning democracy - government,
security structures and the economy - do not fall short
of our expectations.

My delegation therefore underlines the importance of
paragraph 10 of the draft resolution, which calls upon

 

"States and international institutions to continue to
provide assistance to the Government and people of
Haiti as they consolidate the gains made towards
democracy and stability."

The settlement in Haiti has proved to the world that
constructive cooperation and consultation between the
United Nations Secretary-General and the Secretary-General
of the Organization of American States (OAS) is critical to
the success of international assistance for political progress
and stability. The transformation of Haiti has proved that
joint efforts by the United Nations and a regional
organization can help to bring about peace and stability in
that region.

My delegation will support the draft resolution
extending the mandate of United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH) for a period of seven months, by which time, we
believe, Haiti will have a Government, chosen by the
people of Haiti through free and fair elections, that is
capable of governing peacefully and justly. By allowing a
little more time to facilitate the transfer of the control of
Haiti completely to the authority of the Haitian people, we
anticipate the development of Haiti into a safe democracy
that will be respected throughout the world.

On the basis of these considerations, my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

