Ms. Rasi: Thank you very much, Mr. President,
for inviting me to participate in this important
discussion in my capacity as President of the Economic
and Social Council. It is indeed an honour for me to be
here today.

I warmly welcome today's debate on complex
crises, which continues and consolidates the Security
Council's debates held over the past years focusing on
individual aspects of complex crises and international
response. Complex crises necessitate collaborative
responses in which the various organs of the United
Nations have a complementary role.

Recently, the most important contribution of the
Economic and Social Council to the response by the
United Nations to countries in crisis has been its
involvement in African countries emerging from
conflict. This involvement materialized with the
creation of Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on Guinea-Bissau
and on Burundi, whose mandate is to examine the
humanitarian and economic needs of the countries in
question, review international support programmes,
provide advice on their effectiveness and make
recommendations for a long-term programme of
support based on a comprehensive approach to peace,
security and stability.

The Economic and Social Council has started to
assess the work of these Groups in preparation for the
debate to be held at the substantive session of the
Council in July. The discussions held so far have
clearly highlighted the relevance and usefulness of the
Groups as mechanisms for promoting a comprehensive
approach to peace and development and mobilizing
support for the countries to avoid their relapse into
conflict. Although the Groups are mandated to work on
countries emerging from conflict, the lessons learned
from their work are also relevant to other crisis
situations, as what is at stake here is to ensure a
coordinated approach between major stakeholders and
proper consideration of the multiplicity of causes
behind a conflict.

The Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc
Advisory Groups have fostered a coordinated approach
to the situations in Guinea-Bissau and in Burundi
within the United Nations system at large: the
Secretariat and its political, economic and social and
humanitarian branches; the heads of United Nations
political offices in the countries concerned; the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), both at
headquarters and at the field level; and the funds,
programmes and specialized agencies of the United
Nations. The Groups have had to rely on them all to
have a clear picture of the situation, make policy
recommendations and propose mechanisms to support
those countries. By doing so, the intergovernmental
process has advocated and pushed for greater
coherence in the work of the United Nations system.
The Economic and Social Council, as an open forum
involving United Nations agencies, civil society and,
increasingly, the private sector, is in a unique position
for this task.

In addition, the Groups have engaged in close
interaction with the Bretton Woods institutions, a major
aspect of the evolution of the work of the United
Nations in the economic and social fields. Working
relations between the Economic and Social Council
and those institutions are a reality today in the
financing for development process and in the debates
on sustainable development. They remain less
systematic in the security and political fields, and could
be strengthened so that Bretton Woods institutions'
analysis and capacity of action can be fully used in
synergy with United Nations efforts. The role of those
institutions in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants, as in the case of
Burundi, also awaits stronger ties between us.

To ensure coherence, these initiatives by the
Economic and Social Council must be linked to the
work of the Security Council. I am pleased that our
respective bodies are interacting in a more frequent and
coherent way, as illustrated by the reference to the
Economic and Social Council Groups in the Security
Council's presidential statements on issues of common
concern. We must not lose this progress through which
our two Councils, with their respective roles and
responsibilities under the Charter, can make the
comprehensive approach to peace and development
that the United Nations system has called for a reality.

The United Nations Development Group/United
Nations Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs
working group on transition issues, established by the
Economic and Social Council in response to the
Secretary-General's 2002 report on strengthening the
United Nations (A/57/387), recently submitted its
report. The report on transition issues is based on
experience from very different countries. It reflects a
number of variations of transition and reveals clearly
the problems in the system-wide response. Key
findings of the report, for which we now need to find
concrete solutions, include the following.

Humanitarian assistance, rehabilitation, recovery
and reconstruction can and will overlap. These actions
must often be accompanied by continuous crisis
mitigation and prevention to avoid setbacks.

Peacekeeping and security must be part of a
coherent approach. Ownership at the central
Government level and the local level in the affected
country is essential. As the responsibility rests with the
country itself, capacity-building, a participatory
approach and strengthening of the decision-making
process are key elements of a real transition. Cross-
cutting issues of gender and human rights must be
taken into account in all planning and action.

Questions related to justice and rule of law issues
are often at the core of conflicts, and their importance
is becoming increasingly recognized in planning the
response of the international community to various
crisis situations. As addressing issues related to the
rule of law is necessary throughout the conflict cycle,
the development of an effective response by the United
Nations system to the challenges posed by complex
crisis situations would benefit from increased
cooperation between our respective bodies and
throughout the United Nations system.

Adequate, flexible and sustained funding is
required. There are important ongoing discussions
regarding external donors and conflict-related
assistance, and this will surely be reflected in the
various segments of the Economic and Social Council
as well.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the attention
of the Council to the upcoming Economic and Social
Council event on 12 July, as part of its substantive
session, on the transition from relief to development.
That event is a significant start and the first initiative
of its kind at the intergovernmental level. It deserves
an inclusive follow-up in some form. I trust that the
debates at, and outcomes of, that event will also be of
great relevance to the Security Council, as they will
contribute to improved United Nations interventions in
this critical phase of crisis situations.

