Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate China on organizing
this open debate, which is of particular interest to my
delegation, and to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the leading role that China is playing
in peacekeeping. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and for the action he has initiated since he
took office, sparing no effort to strengthen and reform
peacekeeping and provide Africa with substantial
support. We thank him for his efforts and reiterate
our full support to his mission to reform peacekeeping
in order to enable it to adapt to today's challenges,
including through the follow-up to his Action for
Peace initiative. My statement today will address three
main points.

First, with regard to the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) in the areas
of peace and security, the concept note (S/2018/1004, annex) clearly details the importance of Africa in every
aspect of peacekeeping - first in its role as a theatre
of operations, including for the five most important
missions of the United Nations, which served as
the standard for the Secretary-General's action plan
on troop safety and security, but also because of the
participation of African troop- and police-contributing
countries in United Nations operations. Furthermore,
almost 80 per cent ofpeacekeeping operations personnel
are deployed in Africa, which unfortunately continues
to be the focus of nearly 70 per cent of the Security
Council's work.

It is therefore clear that the two organizations have no
choice but to strengthen their cooperation in the area of
peace and security on a basis of mutual respect and their
respective comparative advantages. The Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, signed in April 2017,
reinforces that strategic partnership. In that regard, we
welcome the commitment of the United Nations, under
the leadership of the Secretary-General. However, we
have to consider the human and financial resources at
the disposal of each of the organizations, which are
a key element in the implementation of joint projects
aimed at promoting complementarity. A good example
of such complementarity is the case of the Central
African Republic, where the African Union is leading
the political process through the African Initiative.
In fact, as a result of the recent strategic assessment
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga is now part of the
panel of facilitators for the African Initiative.

My second point is about African troop- and
police-contributing countries. Morocco has been
contributing to United Nations peacekeeping operations
since 1960. An overwhelming majority of the
deployments from the Royal Moroccan Armed Forces
continue to be to peacekeeping operations in Africa.
They are currently deployed within MINUSCA in the
Central African Republic, and in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). In that context, the
Kingdom of Morocco is in the process of finalizing the
deployment to MONUSCO of a fifth rapid deployment
battalion, which represents a significant contribution
by the United Nations to our brother country's peace,
stability and security.

I would also like to point out that many African
troop- and police-contributing countries have
accumulated significant experience and expertise
in peacekeeping. We therefore believe that training
support would be more effective if provided by African
countries. Morocco, which has recognized experience
in United Nations peacekeeping, has been sharing it
bilaterally with many African countries, including
through scholarships to various military academies
and by sending experts abroad. We are in discussions
with the Secretariat about involvement in triangular
partnerships. It is clear that the supply of assistance
is much greater than the demand. The coordination
mechanism established by the Secretary-General
must now be implemented in order to ensure the
most effective support possible. We also welcome the
Secretariat's efforts to make continuing improvements
to the procedures and criteria related to deployment,
training, recruitment and reimbursement so as to adapt
them to current peacekeeping requirements.

My last point is on the financing of African
peacekeeping operations. Whether they are financed
by the AU or subregional organizations, this is a
crucial issue about inescapable facts. Considering the
challenges it has to deal with, Africa has pledged to
finance 25 per cent of the cost of such operations, and
in that regard, we welcomed the official launch on
18 November of the African Union Peace Fund, aimed
at eventually achieving our African organization's
financial independence. At the level of the United
Nations, it will be vital to continue discussing financing,
but not in the Security Council alone. After more than
15 years of discussions, it is high time to step on the
gas in order to make sure that Africa's positions and
demands on this issue are taken into full consideration.
Every military operation should be able to rely on
predictable funding to ensure its success. We need an
innovative and flexible approach and real political will
to advance this key issue for all African countries.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
peacekeeping is a noble endeavour, a symbol of
international solidarity and a flagship activity of
the United Nations, with soldiers who often work in
difficult conditions, risking their lives. I want to take
this opportunity to pay tribute to all who have made the
ultimate sacrifice, often thousands of kilometres from
home, for peace and stability, on behalf of the United
Nations. Morocco, in its capacity as a member of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union and
as an active participant in United Nations peacekeeping
efforts, will spare no effort to strengthen relations
between the AU and the United Nations for the sake of
peace and stability on our continent.

