The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
sense of civic responsibility once again
demonstrated by the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who participated
peacefully and in large numbers in the provincial
elections and the second round of the presidential
election, held on 29 October 2006.

"The Security Council expresses its
gratitude to the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Congolese National Police,
which played a central role in, respectively,
organizing the elections and providing security
for them. It underlines the role of the High Media
Authority, the International Committee of
Eminent Persons and the International Committee
in Support of the Transition (CIAT) in promoting
a smooth conduct of the electoral process and a
calm political climate and reaffirms its support
the

for them. It also welcomes the support provided
for the holding of the elections by the United
Nations Mission (MONUC), the EUFOR
operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the country's other international and
regional partners, in particular South Africa and
the European Union.

"The Security Council takes note of the fact
that voting generally took place in an orderly and
safe atmosphere. It deplores the isolated incidents
that occurred, notably in Bumba and Bikoro in
Equateur province and in Fataki in Ituri district.

"The Security Council recalls that the
Independent Electoral Commission is responsible
for announcing the election results. It calls on all
political actors and the Congolese people to await
and receive these results calmly and responsibly,
refraining from any incitement to hatred or
recourse to violence and respecting democratic
institutions and the rule of law.

"The Security Council attaches great
importance to the signing of a declaration of post-
electoral intent by the representatives of the two
candidates in the second round of the presidential
election, on 29 October in Kinshasa. It
emphasizes that political differences must be
settled by peaceful means only and calls on the
parties to comply with all the confidence-building
measures to which they agreed after the incidents
of 20 to 22 August 2006.

"The Security Council recalls that these
elections are historic for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and looks forward to the installation
of a democratically elected Government. It
stresses that the new authorities and all
Congolese political actors will be responsible for
ensuring the long-term sustainability of the
restoration of peace and stability and for
continuing to promote national reconciliation and
the establishment of democratic institutions and
the rule of law in the country."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/44.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
06-60665

