Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish first of all to express our gratitude for the 9
August 2000 report of the Secretary-General on
Ethiopia and Eritrea (S/2000/785), and for Mr. Miyet's
update at this formal meeting of the Security Council.
As we have noted on other occasions, we believe that
the format selected for this meeting makes for the
greatest possible transparency in our work.

The Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities signed
by Ethiopia and Eritrea in Algiers on 18 June 2000,
which was achieved thanks to the tireless efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) through
President Bouteflika, to whom we reiterate our
gratitude, was a key step towards restoring peace in a
conflict that has gone on too long and that has cost too
many lives.

But the signing of the Agreement was a first step.
Much remains to be done, and it needs to be done as
quickly as possible in order to secure a peace that has
carried a high price. The United Nations will have a
fundamental role to play in this connection.
The signatories to the Algiers Agreement
requested the presence of the United Nations, whose
forces should be dispatched to the field without further
delay so as to ensure the withdrawal of troops from the
front and the maintenance of the ceasefire. Time is of
the essence in this regard.

We should bear in mind that this is a classic
operation of keeping the peace between two regular
armies, as distinct from some other operations that
have been undertaken in Africa by the United Nations.
In his report of 9 August, the Secretary-General
proposes a clear-cut mandate that is in keeping with the
nature of the operation ahead of us. We support his
conclusions and we again express our willingness to
work with the requisite urgency.

With regard to the Mission itself, we would like
to highlight the following points that seem important to
us. The Mission should have a single chain of
command. The mandate should have a clear and precise
time limit in order to prevent its indefinite extension.
We support the Secretary-General's suggestion for
phased deployment.

Moreover, we believe that the point made in the
report about the need for both parties fully to guarantee
the freedom of movement and security of United
Nations personnel is fundamental. Without such a
guarantee it will not be possible for the Mission to
carry out the tasks assigned to it.

In regard to the last point, it will be vital to move
forward quickly in the task of demining in the
Mission's area of deployment. We consider the mine
clearance component a priority, as does the report.

We should not fail to place on the record our
concern over the serious humanitarian situation
afflicting Eritrea and Ethiopia. The report is very clear
in that regard. The international community should
mobilize all possible assistance to alleviate the effects
of this crisis. To that end, coordination of assistance
with the humanitarian community will be a priority
task that the United Nations Mission will have to
undertake.

When they signed the Algiers Agreement, Eritrea
and Ethiopia indicated their readiness to arrive at a
negotiated solution to the conflict. But if peace is to be
consolidated both countries must act with the greatest
restraint and caution, so as to create an atmosphere
conducive to dialogue. Prompt implementation of the
ceasefire Agreement naturally concerns the United
Nations, but it is also a task for which the parties to the
conflict are primarily responsible. Without their active
cooperation little can be achieved.

