Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We are grateful for the
informative briefing provided by the Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo. We also welcome the Minister
of the People's Power for Foreign Affairs of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Jorge Arreaza.

The Security Council is the principal organ charged
with maintaining international peace and security. Yet
today we are witnessing the Council being divided on
the internal affairs of a State Member of the United
Nations, with some even threatening to use force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, a fellow Member

of the United Nations. That is inconsistent with the
purpose of the United Nations, which was founded
to maintain international peace and security among
nations, based on the principle of the sovereign equality
of all its States Members.

It is important to note that the Charter of the United
Nations and international law proscribe the threat of
force. For us in South Africa the threat of force sets
a very bad precedent. We on the African continent
have suffered a great deal, as external forces used
undemocratic tools of regime change to solve problems
on our continent. In principle, we are strongly opposed
to that way of solving any problem. That approach takes
away the basic rights of the people of the country to
determine their own future.

Let the people of Venezuela decide their future. All
that we can do is help them, but the decisions remain
Venezuelan. We recognize the democratic processes
followed by Venezuela in choosing a President, but
we also recognize that Venezuela is currently facing
humanitarian challenges. South Africa draws from its
experience in overcoming one ofthe most repressive and
insidious racist regimes through dialogue, and believes
that internal, inclusive dialogue remains the only viable
and sustainable path to ending the political crisis in
Venezuela. Political dialogue should seem obvious and
the first logical port of call, yet the actions of some in
the international community have not been conducive
or encouraging to that approach. Isolating and vilifying
one party and calling for a specific, prescribed course
of action that would preclude dialogue will only foment
possible recourse to armed conflict. I reiterate: that is
inconsistent with the purpose of the Security Council.

While South Africa does not believe that the
situation in Venezuela poses a threat to international
peace and security, the efforts of the Security Council
in confronting the situation in Venezuela should be
framed by Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, in
that parties are encouraged first of all to seek a solution
through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and judicial settlement, or other peaceful
means oftheir own choice. Forcing the parties to accede
to and accept a prescription to resolving their own crisis,
including through ultimatums, will only encourage
further antagonism and division. We therefore call on
the Council and all those truly interested in the peaceful
resolution of the crisis in Venezuela to consider the
question: What is the alternative to dialogue? The
alternative - as we have seen in other cases where
dialogue was ignored by some in the Council - will be
a prolonged crisis and possible military entanglements.
That will only be to the further detriment of the people
of Venezuela.

South Africa is deeply concerned about the
humanitarian crisis in Venezuela. We are alarmed at the
unrest and loss oflife over the past weekend. Instead of
assisting the people ofVenezuela, the politicization and
weaponization of humanitarian assistance has served
to aggravate tensions in Venezuela, which can lead
only to violence and confrontation. It is of the utmost
importance that support for the people of Venezuela
does not serve as a focal point for increased tensions
and antagonisms or become a tool in the political
dispute that is being stoked by some external parties
and actors. We believe that humanitarian aid should not
be used for the political ends of parties to the crisis, but
should be delivered through the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in order
to ensure its neutrality and impartiality.

The Council cannot predetermine the will of the
people of Venezuela. The international community
should therefore promote a framework of inclusive
internal dialogue in order for the people of Venezuela
to determine their own destiny.
