Mr. Feltman: The Council has requested the
Department of Political Affairs to brief it on the political
and security implications of the recent developments in
Aleppo. At the outset, I wish to emphasize what the
Secretary-General said to the Council yesterday (see S/PV.7685). The pattern of systematic destruction
is evident in Aleppo. No corner of the city has been
spared. Aleppo is increasingly becoming a shell of
what it once was. Government aerial bombardment of
the city over the past two weeks represents some of the
worst of the war. Opposition shelling of Government-
controlled neighbourhoods has also led to death and
destruction. There is a clear danger that those attacks
and counter-attacks will continue to escalate and even
spread beyond Aleppo. We take note of the statement
just issued by the United States Department of State that
the United States and Russia concluded arrangements
late yesterday to extend the nationwide cessation of
hostilities to Aleppo, and we urge the parties to abide
by that immediately and comprehensively.

The Council will hear shortly from Under-
Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien on the humanitarian
dimensions of the recent developments in Aleppo. But
let me be clear - denying people access to essential
humanitarian reliefis a serious violation ofinternational
humanitarian law. Using starvation as a weapon during
conflict is a war crime. No cause can justify the toll
in civilian lives that we continue to see around the
country every day. All State and non-State parties to
conflict are bound by a strict obligation to comply with
the rules of international humanitarian law. I remind
Council members of the Secretary-General's call for
the situation in Syria to be referred to the International
Criminal Court. Those responsible for war crimes must
be held to account.

Unfortunately, ever more shocking reports have
been received from the city of Aleppo over the past
two weeks. We have all seen the horrifying images
of attacks on hospitals in both Government- and
opposition-held neighbourhoods of the city. Let me
once again be absolutely clear: intentional and direct
attacks on hospitals are war crimes. Indiscriminate
attacks on civilian neighbourhoods in Aleppo have also
continued. Both Government and opposition forces
have reportedly made attempts to achieve territorial
advances in recent weeks. Finally, reports of joint
military operations being conducted both by groups
that are parties to the cessation of hostilities and by
those outside it, such as the Al-Nusra Front, present a
major challenge to stabilizing the situation.

The overall situation in Aleppo increasingly
resembles some of the worst days of the period
before the cessation of hostilities. As I mentioned, we
understand that the United States and Russia concluded
arrangements for a day of silence in Aleppo and its
surroundings, starting last night at one minute after
midnight Damascus time, but its implementation has
proved challenging, even as it has led to an overall
decrease in violence. Consolidating and extending
that agreement would be an important step in the right
direction. We also hope that the arrangements of days
of silence announced earlier for parts of Damascus
and rural Latakia will also be consolidated, and we
welcome the news that the silence has been extended
to the eastern Ghouta suburb of Damascus for the next
48 hours.

We must put the cessation of hostilities back on
track throughout the country, and all should do their
fair share in that regard. Moving forward, additional
measures will also be needed to reinvigorate and ensure
enhanced monitoring of the cessation of hostilities.
In that regard, Special Envoy de Mistura held
consultations over the past two days with the co-Chairs
of the International Syria Support Group ceasefire
task force and is in Berlin today to meet with German
and French officials. He also met separately with the
head of the opposition's high negotiations committee.
I welcome the co-Chairs' decision to deploy additional
staff to Geneva to increase oversight of the cessation
of hostilities.

Turning now to the political process, Special Envoy
De Mistura was clear in his briefing to the Security
Council on 27 April: in order to be credible, the next
round of negotiations should be supported by tangible
progress on the ground in terms of a consolidated
cessation of hostilities and increased humanitarian
access. The Special Envoy intends to reconvene
intra-Syrian negotiations later in May, but doing so
without progress in those two areas runs a real risk
of becoming a failed political process. In particular,
the current levels of violence in Aleppo are having a
negative effect on the Syrian parties' ability to engage
in negotiations.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly said that
there is no military solution to this conflict. The basic
fact remains that the only way for peace to come to
Syria is through a political solution based on a credible
political transition that emerges from intra-Syrian
negotiations. With that in mind, during the round of
negotiations held from 13 to 27 April, Special Envoy
De Mistura developed a mediator's summary that
identified 18 points that are necessary if political
transition arrangements are to move forward.

During that last round of negotiations, progress
was made in the sense that all participants, including
the Syrian Government, accepted that a Syrian-led
transition is necessary in order to end the conflict.
In future rounds, we will have to determine how the
respective visions of a political transition that have been
put forward conform to the requirements of resolution
2254 (2015) for credible, inclusive and non-sectarian
governance; of the resolution's endorsement of the
Vienna statements in pursuit of full implementation of
the Geneva communique (S/20l2/523, annex); and of
its reiteration that a sustainable solution to the current
crisis in Syria must include, among other things, the
establishment of an inclusive transitional governing
body with full executive powers, which shall be formed
on the basis of mutual consent while ensuring the
continuity of governmental institutions.

In resolution 2254 (2015), the Vienna statements and
the Geneva communique, the international community
has already defined a number of core principles for any
transition. Chief among them for ensuring a credible
transition is the requirement set out in the Geneva
communique for all Government institutions, including
the security and intelligence services, to perform
in accordance with human rights and professional
standards and to operate under a leadership that
inspires public confidence, under the control of the
transitional governing body. We are at a point where
the renewed backing of the International Syria Support
Group is required to take forward the intra-Syrian
negotiations on a political transition process, based on
full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique.

As per resolution 2253 (2015) and numerous other
Council resolutions, combating terrorism is a top
priority. The need to tackle that issue, however, should
not prevent us from advancing serious negotiations on a
politicaltransition.Nowthatterrorismis being addressed
on a separate, credible and parallel international track,
it should not hinder progress on the political transition
process. Let us also be clear that there can be no place
for terrorism, in Syria or anywhere else. Through the
political process, one of the greatest contributions we
can make to fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and the Al-Nusra Front and their ideology is by
achieving a comprehensive political transition to an
inclusive, democratic and participatory State.

In accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy are trying to
arrive at an agreed way forward by August. We cannot
waste the opportunity provided by the negotiations in
Geneva. It would be a mistake to allow the parties to
the conflict to play for time or territory on the ground
so as to strengthen their positions at the negotiating
table. The United Nations will strive to resume the
negotiations as soon as feasible, in the hope that, in the
meantime, the efforts to put the cessation of hostilities
back on track, including in Aleppo, will bear fruit.

