Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): After a
brief period of calm that gave rise to hope for a return
to peace in the Middle East, the region, sadly, is again
plunging into a cycle of Violence. For several days, we
have witnessed a resumption of suicide bomb attacks
and a disproportionate reaction by the Israeli
authorities. Those reprehensible acts, which are
contrary to the spirit of international legality,
encourage the extremists on both sides and lead to a
resurgence of the old demons of intolerance.

It is obvious that the Palestinian groups targeting
Israelis are harming the cause of self-determination and
the creation of an independent Palestinian State. In the
same manner, the prolonged siege on the headquarters
of President Arafat and the near-destruction of existing
infrastructure are part of a process of weakening the
Palestinian Authority, which, under such conditions,
cannot meet Israel's security demands.

My delegation vigorously condemns the suicide
attacks that are killing innocent Israeli civilians, as
well as the continued siege and destruction of
Palestinian infrastructure. Such policies serve neither
the interests of the Palestinian people nor those of the
Israeli people. The only solution for putting an end to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict - and we will never
stop repeating it - is the cessation of hostilities and
the return to the negotiating table, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Such negotiations must be part of a
comprehensive framework that takes account of both
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and
of Israel's right to security. They must also take into
account, simultaneously and equally, the political,
humanitarian and security aspects of the question. To
do so - above and beyond the necessary political will
of the Israeli and Palestinian leaders - the
international community in general and the Security
Council in particular must continue their efforts to
reach a rapprochement between the two parties. In that
context, let me mention the recent meeting of the
Quartet, held in New York on 17 September, which laid
down a road map that we find reasonable and that we
support. That three-phase plan, if followed consistently
and implemented with conviction, will be one of the
surest ways of restoring confidence and leading the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples towards a way of
extricating themselves from the crisis, in a way that is
honourable, just and lasting.

My delegation does not doubt for a single minute
that with the joint efforts of the international
community, whose praiseworthy initiatives and
commitment are not lacking, we will together attain our
objective and contribute to the strengthening of
international peace and security.

