Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to the sponsors for having introduced the
draft resolution that has just been adopted by
consensus at this meeting. We are also extremely
grateful for the flexibility shown throughout a
negotiating process that was not always easy.

My delegation voted in favour of the resolution,
thereby joining a new consensus in the search for ways
to enable the international community to strengthen the
fight against terrorism and to increase the effectiveness
of the efforts of States to prevent, restrict and limit the
actions of individuals, groups and entities linked to
terrorist activities and, when that is not possible, to
find ways to bring those individuals and entities to
justice. In that way, the resolution contributes to
improving the Security Council's work in this complex
area.

My country has continuously demonstrated its
commitment to fighting terrorism. This year we have
also supported the Security Council's efforts to combat
terrorism by voting in favour of resolutions 1526
(2004), 1535 (2004) and 1540 (2004). Henceforth, and
in keeping with the text we have just adopted, the
international community will have at its disposal a
working group consisting of all members of the
Council, whose task will be to consider and submit
new measures to combat terrorism. Those measures
will have to be proposed and analysed with due
account for respect for international law and
international humanitarian law, which the measures
will have to reflect and incorporate.

We would like to emphasize that the resolution
refers to the imperative to combat terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations; the Council's concern with
the increasing number of victims, including children,
caused by acts of terrorism; the call to cooperate with
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1373 (2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004), which,
although they act in coordination, have different
mandates; and the call to adopt measures to combat
terrorism in accordance with international law in
particular, human rights, refugee and humanitarian law.

Finally, we very much appreciate the solidarity
with the victims of terrorism that is reflected both in
the preambular part of the resolution and in the
operative part, which requests consideration with
respect to establishing a fund to compensate victims of
terrorism. Innocent victims are the ones most affected,
and they are the ones to whom we should extend our
greatest solidarity and support.

