Mr. Nkingiye (Burundi) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to see the British presidency in
the Council during the month of December, which
brings the year 2005 to an end. We are also very happy
to commend the excellent work accomplished by the
Russian presidency, during which the Burundian
Minister for Foreign Affairs was able to address the
Council on 30 November last.

The Security Council mission last November to
Central Africa, under the enlightened guidance of the
Permanent Representative of France, bears witness
once again to the importance the Security Council
attaches to peace and development in the countries of
that region. It has added momentum to the peace
process in my country, Burundi.

As for the recommendations of the mission to the
Burundi Government, which appear in the report under
consideration (S/2005/716), I have a few comments to
make. Regarding the progressive disengagement of the
peacekeeping presence of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi (ONUB), the effort to combat
impunity and the completion of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme, I
would like to say that an agreed road map between
ONUB and the Government of Burundi was referred to
the President of the Security Council, dated
23 November 2005. The contents are set out in an
official Security Council document S/2005/736.

As Her Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Burundi stated
clearly on 30 November, the gradual disengagement
will be carried out in an orderly and reassuring manner
starting 1 January 2006 (S/PV.5311).

Areas where cooperation with ONUB is still
necessary have been identified. Among others is
support for the completion of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, as well as
support for transitional justice with regard to the
setting up of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
and the creation of a special court.

Concerning the forum of partners to support
reforms provided for in the Arusha agreement and
mobilizing international assistance for the
reconstruction of Burundi, the Government hopes to
take advantage of a donors conference to be organized
in the second half of February 2006, during which our
priority programmes for reconstruction and the revival
of the economy for 2005-2008 will be presented. We
hope our partners will be highly committed to the
success of that conference.

With regard to the Forces nationales de liberation
(FNL), as His Excellency the President of the Republic
of Burundi said during the Council's stay in
Bujumbura, we would like to reiterate the willingness
of the Government of Burundi to find a peaceful
solution to that question. In that context, we again call
upon the regional initiative for peace in Burundi, the
Security Council and friendly countries to exert their
influence in order to convince the FNL to return to the
negotiating table.

In parallel, the Security Council should follow up
appropriately on the correspondence addressed to the
President of the Security Council dated 21 October
2005 from the Tripartite Plus One Joint Commission
relating to the involvement of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the disarmament of the negative forces
operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including the FNL.

The peace process in Burundi has reached a point
of no return, thanks to the joint efforts of the regional
initiative, the mediation and the United Nations, and in
particular to the outstanding role played by the United
Nations Operation in Burundi. The people of Burundi
are now expecting the dividends of that process.

Reconstruction and sustainable development are
pivotal during this post-conflict period. We call on the
international community to support Burundi in
addressing that challenge. My Government hopes also
that Burundi will benefit from the activities of the
soon-to-be-established Peacebuilding Commission.

