Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like first of all to welcome the
President of the Palestinian National Authority, His
Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, and the Ministers
who are present at today's meeting.

I will not conceal the fact that I always hesitate
before taking the floor to address the Council when it
discusses the Palestinian question in any of its aspects.
That is because I know that this issue has been on the
agenda of the United Nations and of the Security
Council, which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, for more than six
decades. This situation has existed for six decades now,
with everything that this implies in terms of war and
humanitarian tragedy: six decades during which the
Security Council has adopted a series of resolutions,
none of which, unfortunately, have been implemented.

In fact, these days, when it comes to Palestinian
issues, the Council sometimes even refrains from
issuing a press release, no matter how grave the
situation it has discussed.

Perhaps appearance of the Arab Group before the
Security Council to ask the Council to listen to it
represents a new phase concerning this subject.
Unfortunately, this is the first time in the history of the
Council that a State or a group of States has told the
Council that all it wishes is the opportunity to express
itself in this Chamber. Is this not important for the
Council?

Should it not lead us to wonder what occurs every
time the Israelis begin negotiations with Palestinians?
What happens is an acceleration of the settlement
policy and an increase in the number of settlements,
which has risen considerably since the Oslo
Agreement, whose anniversary was commemorated
some days ago. Everyone knows that settlement
activity has increased in an unprecedented manner 4
and I do mean unprecedented - since the Annapolis
Conference.

I am basing my comments on this subject on an
Israeli report. As Mr. Mahmoud Abbas said this
morning, the Israelis know full well what is taking
place on the ground. This report, which was published
by an Israeli non-governmental organization (NGO),
compares the settlement policy for the first quarter of
this year with the same quarter in 2007. It says that
construction activities increased by 55 per cent and that
the number of tenders for new settlement construction
bids increased by 550 per cent. Thus, the settlement
policy in the occupied Palestinian territories has
increased considerably at an accelerated pace since the
Annapolis Conference, held last year.

All of this has happened despite the commitments
made pursuant to the Road Map and in spite of the
outcome of the Annapolis Conference and in spite of
international resolutions which reaffirm the illegality
of the settlement activities and call on the Israeli
occupation authorities to put an end to such activities
and to dismantle the settlements that have been erected.

In spite of this, the Israeli authorities have
intensified this form of activity in the West Bank
especially around Jerusalem. Everyone is aware of the
Israeli construction of the apartheid separation wall
despite the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice.

Settlement activity not only impedes the peace
process; even more, that policy serves the declared
Israeli aim of sabotaging the very notion of the
emergence of an independent, viable Palestinian State.
This poses a serious threat to both regional and
international peace and security.

In this regard, I would also like to cite an Israeli
report from which I will draw attention to a number of
extracts. Hundreds of thousands of dunums of
Palestinian land have been usurped and used for the
construction or expansion of numerous Jewish
settlements. The Israeli authorities prevent all
Palestinians from gaining access to these territories.
They exploit the existence of settlements in order to
justify their continued violation of numerous
Palestinian rights, including the right to residence, the
right to a livelihood and the right to movement. The
report indicates that Israel's radical changes to the map
of the West Bank will prevent any possibility of
building an independent and viable Palestinian State, in
accordance with the right to self-determination. I point
out that this is testimony contained in an Israeli report.

Settlement activity policy is an established,
systematic policy of successive Israeli Governments.
The Israeli authorities have used and continue to use
every means available to them and do not hesitate to
seize land under any pretext for the purpose of
establishing Jewish settlements. They transfer settlers
to this land and encourage settlers to expand by giving
them housing allowances and tax breaks and by making
investments.

The Israeli authorities encourage the settlers to
tighten their grip on Palestinians and their land,
compelling them to leave their land. As President
Mahmoud Abbas stated this morning, the settlers have
not hesitated to resort to violence against Palestinians
and their property. This has happened in the full view
of the occupying forces, who protect the settlers while
ignoring complaints lodged by the Palestinians. I
would like to refer here to the daily attacks on villages
in the Nablus area - attacks perpetuated against the
Palestinian people by the settlers. The most recent of
such attacks resulted in the torching of dozens of olive
groves in the village of Awarta on 14 September. There
was a wave of assaults on Palestinians in the village of
Burin on 13 September, resulting in six Palestinian
deaths and eight serious injuries.

I also wish to convey another testimony reported
to us. Israel has established a system of apartheid
within the occupied Palestinian territories, exemplified
by the establishment of two separate judiciary entities
in the same region, where the human rights of an
individual are based on his nationality. Such a unique
system reminds us of the apartheid regime in South
Africa. The report that just quoted also indicates that
the territories are controlled by various means,
including systematic violence against Palestinians by
settlers, with the support of the Israeli army, that has
also led to the expulsion of Palestinians from areas
around the settlements.

It is often said that the settlement policy is based
on security considerations. Establishing a link between
security and settlements is unfortunately an attempt to
justify Israel's acts of violence and serves as a pretext
for Israel to continue to benefit from international
protection. I should like to refer to a passage from a
World Bank report detailing the constraints that Israel
has imposed under the pretext of security but which
merely extend the settlement policy and the expansion
of settlements. The report stresses the fact that the
Palestinian Authority has made great efforts to honour
its commitment to the road map, to ensure respect for
the rule of law and to extend its authority over its
territory. However, those efforts have been largely
undermined by Israel's acts of violence. Thus, Israel's
pretexts have nothing to do with security.

I reiterate that Israel's settlement policy is
systematic and rooted in the aspiration to a Greater
Israel. It reminds us of David Ben-Gurion's vision, as
reflected in his view that there was no reason for Israel
to negotiate with the Arabs as they both bid claim to
the same thing. That means that the Israelis believe that
Palestinian territory is in fact Israeli territory and that it
is impossible to ascertain the extent to which the
Palestinian territories are indeed Palestinian. That
Israeli practice must be halted. It is a breeding ground
for lasting instability in the region and a clear
incitement to violence. Is that what he really wanted?

