Mr. Thiaw (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having invited me to brief the
Security Council in my capacity as Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel. I commend
the presidency of Cote d'lvoire for having taken the
initiative to convene this meeting.

Given the geographical and geopolitical position of
the Sahel, it is clear that peace, security, stability and
development in the region have a direct impact not only
on neighbouring African countries, but also on Europe
and the rest of the world.

(spoke in English)

The Sahel is one of the least developed regions in
the world. It faces simultaneous challenges of extreme
poverty, the dire effects of climate change, frequent
food crises, rapid population growth, fragile governance
and terrorist-linked security threats. The world-famous
trade and migration routes across the Sahel and the
Sahara are being taken over by transnational organized
crime organizations and large-scale traffickers. The
authority of States is being challenged. The justice
system is being questioned, while the traditional means
of conflict prevention and resolution have been made
somewhat redundant by modern States.

Conflicts over land, water and other resources are
increasing at an alarming rate. The growing number and
severity of the conflicts between farmers and herders
are largely due to competition, driven by fast-growing
populations and access to resources that are dwindling
due to land degradation and climate change. Criminal
activities, both on land and at sea, along with terrorist
networks, have reached levels that may threaten the
very stability of States as well as the social fabric of
societies. The profits generated from human, drugs and
arms trafficking can only serve to make the precarious
situation even less tenable. A small proportion of the
criminal or illegal proceeds is instead used to feed
extremism and exacerbate instability.

(Spoke in French)

While the humanitarian situation has improved
slightly in 2018, owing mainly to a relatively good
rainy season, there are still significant needs in the
region. More than 8 million people are at risk of food
insecurity in 2019. This year, around 10 million people
have experienced food insecurity in the Sahel, of
whom around 5.8 million are in Burkina Faso, Mali,
Mauritania, the Niger, Senegal and Chad - countries
that have experienced severe droughts since the end of
2017. Acute malnutrition has reached unprecedented
levels in those six countries and is likely to continue.

In 2013, the Council adopted the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which was a visionary
decision and a clear sign of our recognition of a shared
destiny in confronting the transboundary nature of the
threats in the Sahel. The Council therefore adopted a
long-term approach, integrating humanitarian, security
and development aspects. In 2018, the Secretary-
General gave new impetus to the Integrated Strategy
by adopting the United Nations Support Plan for the
Sahel i an inclusive document that was drawn up under
the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-General, based
predominantly on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union.

The Support Plan is part of a preventive, integrated
and concerted approach to strengthening governance,
security and development in the Sahel region. As such,
if the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
is to remain our sole frame of reference, the Support
Plan must form the basis of our collective action in the
10 countries of the Sahel. The Support Plan requires the
agreement and mobilization of all.
One of the aims of the plan is to strengthen
coordination and cooperation between the actors
involved in the Sahel. The Support Plan was designed
not only to strengthen the response of the United
Nations and the quality of support offered to the
Member States in the region, but also to provide a
standard for our partners. That is why, ever since I
assumed office as Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel, I have consistently facilitated
dialogue and forged partnerships. That has enabled me
to have many discussions with the leaders of African
countries and institutions that are the most involved in
the process. I have also sought to engage in dialogue
with different segments of society, including women,
youth and traditional leaders.

Today, we are at a criticaljuncture for the stability of
the entire Sahel region. On the basis of my discussions,
I would like to make three observations regarding the
implementation of the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel.

First, in order to ensure lasting peace and stability
in the Sahel, the root causes of its instability must be
addressed. An exclusively security-based approach
alone will not be enough to stabilize the Sahel. In order
to achieve lasting peace, we must launch in parallel a
vast development programme that will make it possible
to positively transform the economies of the region,
improve the living conditions of the populations and
restore hope to young people. Our efforts in the Sahel
give us the tremendous opportunity to move from words
to action and to apply, in one of the most disadvantaged
regions in the world, both the principles and the spirit
of the Sustainable Development Goals, namely, the
commitment to leaving no one behind. Our challenge
here is to ensure the effective operationalization of
the link between development and sustainable peace.
We must not only see an increase in development aid
and cooperation with Governments, but also establish
conditions conducive to mobilizing significant
private investment.

Secondly, solutions to the challenges that the Sahel
faces must be provided by local, national and regional
actors, and enjoy the support of external partners,
where necessary. The United Nations will continue
to cooperate with bilateral and multilateral actors and
leverage the initiatives already in place in order to
provide coherent and coordinated international support.
The countries of the region have made sustained
efforts and their actions are beginning to bear fruit,
as demonstrated by the relaunch of the Nouakchott
process, the revision of the African Union strategy
for the Sahel and the success of the Group of Five for
the Sahel donor and partner coordination conference,
held on 6 December in Nouakchott. In that context,
I commend the efforts of the regional bodies of the
United Nations with which we work closely, including
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
the United Nations Development Group for Western and
Central Africa and the United Nations country offices
in the 10 target countries. I also highlight the excellent
relations with the cooperation partners, many of whom
have connected within the Sahel Alliance.

On 17 December, I had the honour of addressing the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union at a
meeting devoted to international and regional initiatives
in the Sahel region. I drew the attention of members in
particular to the urgent need to find adequate solutions
to the growing and increasingly deadly conflicts
between farmers and herders in the Sahel. It is important
to prevent disputes related to competition for access to
natural resources from turning into ethnic, religious
or cross-border conflicts. In that regard, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union made it clear
that coordination and integration are not a choice but a
necessity. It was therefore agreed to further harmonize
our approaches and adapt our common responses based
on our comparative advantages, in particular through
the Ministerial Coordination Platform for Sahel
strategies, which needs to be strengthened so as to
realize its full potential as a political tool.

Thirdly, we must change the perception of the
region by highlighting its many assets and its potential.
The Sahel is in a unique position to boost its economy
through renewable energies, particularly solar and
wind energy. Those new technologies can also make
the primary sector * on which the vast majority of
Sahelians depend - less vulnerable and more adapted
to climate change. The success of those efforts will
depend largely on progress in good governance,
resource mobilization and the integration capacity of
the actors involved.

For its part, the United Nations is tasked with
rethinking its mode of operation in the Sahel in order
to include joint programming, further integration and
more effective action. To that end, we are setting up
a mechanism for the Sahel within the Sustainable
Development Goals Fund. The mechanism aims to
reduce fragmentation and make United Nations action
in the Sahel more effective. A flexible and transparent
mechanism of that nature will also make it possible
to respond more quickly and better to the often
unpredictable long-term needs that arise in the Sahel.

Let me conclude by welcoming the international
community's renewed focus on the Sahel region. We
have a strategy, a shared vision and an operational
support plan. Sahelians rightly believe that the
time has now come to turn our plans and words into
concrete action.

