Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): The millions of
South Sudanese caught up in this brutal conflict have
waited too long for their leaders to bring about an
end to the fighting. Despite the efforts of the region
to broker an agreement, the parties have not made the
compromises necessary to set the country on a path
towards peace, reconciliation and recovery. Instead
of engaging constructively and in good faith in the
negotiations at the High-Level Revitalization Forum,
the parties have continued to advance their interests
through military means.

Harrowing reports of violence against civilians,
including widespread sexual and gender-based violence,
continue to emerge from South Sudan. Violations
and abuses of international human rights law and of
international humanitarian law must come to an end.

With other members of the Security Council, we
share a deep sense of frustration at the intransigence
of the leaders of South Sudan. The Council stated its
determination to ensure that the parties abide by their
obligations and responsibilities in our presidential
statement of 14 December 2017 (S/PRST/2017/25). The
repeated violations of commitments by the parties must
have consequences. Resolution 2418 (2018), adopted
today, sets out clear conditions and deadlines for the
parties, adding international pressure to regional
efforts. It is for that reason that we voted in favour of it.

At the same time, we deeply regret that the Council
was not able to adopt the resolution by consensus. We
worked actively with members to find agreement on a
text that would have garnered greater support. To that
end, we believe that the resolution could have been
better coordinated with ongoing efforts in the region.

A regionally brokered and inclusive political
solution remains the only viable means of achieving
peace in South Sudan. We call on the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the wider
region to continue efforts towards such a political
solution. In that regard, we welcome the outcome of the
IGAD Council of Ministers meeting today. To give the
peace effort the best possible prospect for success, it is
imperative that we now stand unified and speak with a
single voice to the parties.

Today's resolution presents a clear choice for the
parties. We urge them to immediately respect the
cessation of hostilities agreement and urgently engage
in good faith on reaching a viable political agreement.

