Mr. Klein (spoke in French): Thirty-two months
have passed since, at the request of the Secretary-
General, I had the honour of accepting the leadership
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) a mission that the
Secretary-General himself originally set up. While it is
true that the United Nations was not invited to Dayton,
the fact remains that, at the end of 1995, the United
Nations was the only organization able to deploy on the
ground a major multinational police mission within a
complex post-war environment.

The Secretary-General thus entrusted to me the
responsibility of making a success of UNMIBH.
Towards that end, he advised me to spell out clear-cut
and specific mission goals, to prepare a plan and to
implement it, as had been done with regard to the
United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium. Three months
later, on the basis of an objective analysis of the
mission status, I came before the Council to announce
that the task to be carried out by the mission would
take two to three years. With the Council's support, we
set up the UNMIBH Mandate Implementation Plan -
better known by the abbreviation "MIP" - which
represented a pattern of guidelines based on six major
programmes designed to reform, restructure and
democratize the police forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

(spoke in English)

Today, I am pleased to report that UNMIBH is
making strong progress towards completing its core
mandate - on schedule and within its budget - by the
end of this year. Our MIP Action Plan for 2002 was
finalized last month and is designed to be our
performance plan and monitoring tool for the
completion of our remaining projects by December
2002.

The Council will recall that our core task was to
take 40,000 largely untrained police who were
organized on a mono-ethnic war-time footing, and to
turn them into professional, multi-ethnic police forces
made up of less than half that number, each with
human rights and professional training, working in
accountable police structures and with a basic level of
modern police equipment.

Our progress since the Secretary-General's most
recent report in November 2001 has been steady. Allow
me to outline just some of the highlights. With respect
to police reform, in January we completed the two-year
project of registration of all the 16,919 law
enforcement officers currently exercising police
powers in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have begun to
weed out those suspected of war crimes or other
crimes, and those violating the property laws. Last
year, for example, some 2,000 police officers
regularized their housing at our insistence, and a
further 3,000 are now being vetted.

All provisionally authorized police officers have
undertaken compulsory training courses in human
rights and many have received or are completing
advanced professional training. In close cooperation
with the Stabilization Force (SFOR), we have placed
particular importance on improving local police
capacity in crowd and riot control. In January,
UNMIBH and the SFOR multinational support units
conducted the first joint training of 100 members of
local police support units. In total, some 800 police, in
company-size formations, will receive such training
this year.

In the core area of police restructuring, a
comprehensive systems analysis of 21 police
administrations began in January. The Brcko District
Police Force that we established last year serves as our
model for a democratic, multi-ethnic local police
institution. Our goal is to accredit law enforcement
agencies that meet this model. The expected
completion of this project in September will coincide
with the final certification of individual police officers.

Minority police representation has steadily
increased. Through the two police academies that we
established, over 1,050 minority police officers,
including 365 women, have been recruited. Some 192
minority police have returned to their pre-war locations
through our voluntary redeployment programme, and
85 former officers have been re-employed following
refresher courses. We expect at least another 300
minority cadets this year, and more can be processed
once the European Union (EU)-financed rebuilding of
the police academies is completed.

Last month, I was delighted to oversee the
official administrative and physical integration of the
divided Mostar City Police. After six years of
international effort, this is the first physically
integrated administration at the cantonal and city level.
It is a tangible precedent for all other cantonal and
municipal institutions to follow.

Furthermore, we have now disbursed or
committed all of the $16 million contributed by donors
to the United Nations Trust Fund for the Police
Assistance Programme for provision of basic
equipment and facilities for the local police forces. In
addition, the United Nations Trust Fund for the
Restoration of Essential Public Services has supported
471 projects, costing over $17 million. This year we
will complete the remaining 64 projects, at a cost of
$4 million.

On institution-building, the State Border Service
has made extraordinary progress. By the end of April,
some 88 per cent of the border, and all airports, will be
under State Border Service control. The effective
operation of the State Border Service, together with the
introduction of a partial visa regime and an airport
landing card, resulted in a 66 per cent decrease in
illegal migration through Sarajevo airport in 2001 -
down from 24,000 to 8,000. This year we have
witnessed even further reductions and an estimated 20
per cent increase in customs revenues.

Working with the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we expect the new State Information and
Protection Agency (SIPA) to be established in the
coming months. SIPA will be the first national
organization responsible for the collection, analysis
and distribution of data to other law enforcement
agencies to improve the fight against international and
inter-entity crime. We have also established the
mechanisms for regional police cooperation through
the regular ministerial-level meeting on police and the
trilateral Regional Law Enforcement Agreement.
Successful operations have been conducted in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in Yugoslavia against arms
smugglers and traffickers of women. The success of
these joint operations has encouraged Hungary,
Bulgaria and Slovenia to seek to join the Agreement.

We are continuing to aggressively combat human
trafficking. In the past six months, under the STOP
programme, special teams of international and local
police have monitored 270 raids and interviewed 800
women and girls involved in prostitution. Since March
1999, some 410 trafficking victims have been assisted
and repatriated to their home countries.

We are now focusing on prosecuting traffickers
and brothel owners. With the assistance of our
Criminal Justice Advisory Unit, over 50 criminal
charges against traffickers have been brought.
Sentences have ranged from 4 to 36 months
imprisonment and substantial fines have been imposed.
For the traffickers, the days of impunity are over.

I would also like to emphasize that we have
investigated every single claim of alleged involvement
by International Police Task Force (IPTF) members in
trafficking. Despite media sensationalism, not one
allegation has been substantiated and no additional
information has been forthcoming. UNMIBH pursues a
rigorous zero-tolerance policy. It is indeed
disappointing that, despite our intensive efforts and the
consistent, outstanding work being done by the IPTF
officers, these unfounded rumours continue to
circulate.

Turning now to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
evolving engagement in the international arena, the
second rotation of Bosnia and Herzegovina police
officers to East Timor has been completed. The first
nine-person contingent of United Nations Military
Observers (UNMOs) is serving in Ethiopia and Eritrea;
a second cadre of UNMOs has completed training and
is about to deploy to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; and in the past three months, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Composite Transport Unit for United
Nations peace operations has been trained and fully
equipped and is ready to deploy this spring.

Those are just some of the milestones that make
me confident that UNMIBH will achieve its core goals
this year and hand over a successful operation to the
EU Police Mission. They are not just abstract
achievements. The bottom-line proof that police reform
is working is that over 92,000 refugees and displaced
persons returned to their homes last year, with very few
security-related incidents. Two weeks ago, several
hundred Bosniacs celebrated their Bajram at the site of
the destroyed Ferhadija mosque in Banja Luka and in
other previously difficult areas in the eastern Republika
Srpska without incident.

But much remains to be done in the next
10 months, and some challenges go beyond the
resources or authority of UNMIBH. First, there are
some major projects that depend on additional funding.
We are short by $3.5 million for capital and equipment
costs to complete the State Border Service this year.
About $1.5 million is required for the United Nations
Trust Fund for Police Assistance to complete basic
police equipment and facilities. And SIPA will require
a mix of local and international funding for start-up
costs. These shortfalls were the subject of two recent
UNMIBH donor conferences.

Secondly, the political support of the High
Representative has been and remains vital for the
completion of police restructuring. Our Police
Commissioner Project is fundamental to removing
political interference from police structures. Most
cantons and the Republika Srpska entity are on track,
but we are facing determined obstruction in the
Federation and in Canton Sarajevo from a political
party that claims it wants to be a partner of the
international community while it seeks to politicize and
suborn the police forces.

We are now in a situation where, if we do not act,
we risk jeopardizing success in the other cantons.
Therefore, I have sought and received my colleague
Ambassador Petritsch's commitment to helping us take
all necessary measures to ensure the full
implementation of the Police Commissioner Project.

Thirdly, I remain deeply concerned about the
inability or unwillingness of the local judiciary to do
its work. There is a grave imbalance in the rule of law,
whereby police standards have vastly improved but the
judicial system, as Ambassador Petritsch has said,
remains dysfunctional. Arresting criminals is useless if
they are freed by timorous or corrupt judicial officials a
few hours later and then intimidate witnesses or
threaten families of police officers.

Band-aid measures are not enough. As I stated
last Thursday to the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, immediate radical reform of
the judiciary and prosecutors is key to everything the
international community is trying to achieve in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Finally, I ask for the Council's support for
Srebrenica. While most of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
progressed, Srebrenica remains a tragic symbol of
underdevelopment and enduring hardship for displaced
Serbs and Bosniac returnees alike. Eighteen months
ago, the Secretary-General asked me whether the
United Nations could play a special role in that
desolate and tragic area. Step by step, through the
multi-agency Srebrenica Action Plan, the United
Nations Trust Fund and the opening of a model police
station, we have reduced the level of insecurity.
Returns have begun.

But, in essence, we have attended to the
symptoms of post-conflict paralysis without treating
the underlying causes. Towards this goal, we are
working closely with experts of the United Nations
Development Programme to establish a multi-year
sustainable economic and social recovery plan for the
wider area to facilitate two-way returns, recognizing
the special circumstances and needs of families without
men. A donors conference will take place in New York
this spring. Srebrenica is one area that cannot be
allowed to become, yet again, a victim, but this time a
victim of compassion fatigue.

Allow me to conclude with some brief
observations about other matters that will affect our
mandate implementation.

We have actively participated in the streamlining
exercise initiated and led by Ambassador Petritsch. A
conclusion has been reached which the High
Representative will now implement. Nonetheless,
bringing all of the elements of the rule of law together
in one task force is a positive initiative. As we have
learned yet again, the elements of the rule of law are
inseparable and can be achieved only through a holistic
approach. In our remaining months, we look forward to
participating in a revitalized effort in this entire arena.

But our biggest contribution to streamlining and
local ownership will be to successfully complete our
mandate and the smooth transition to a much smaller
and more specialized mission. With this in mind and in
accordance with the Secretary-General's instructions,
UNMIBH has been equally open and helpful to both
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe technical missions that have
produced reports on the expected international policing
requirements beyond 2002. We are gratified that both
these missions shared our assessment that around 480
highly skilled police monitors, plus civilian support,
would be required to preserve UNMIBH's
achievements while also coping with the inevitable
crises of a country that remains politically fragile, with
substantial unreconciled groups.

On the basis of our knowledge of UNMIBH and
our experience elsewhere, we consider that there is
sufficient time to fully plan and deploy the new
European Union mission in a seamless transfer,
providing that key pre-planning personnel begin work
in March or April and that financial resources are made
available to them to begin procurement of essential
equipment and facilities.

Our downsizing and mission liquidation planning
is well advanced. We intend to retain around 1,600
IPTF monitors until immediately after the October
elections and then to downsize to around 600 IPTF in
preparation for the transition to the European Union
mission. However, even with a seamless transfer, the
presence of SFOR will remain essential until there is
full political stabilization and substantial progress in
reconciliation. Of great importance to both these goals
is the arrest of Karadzic and Mladic. In this respect, I
fully support the recent robust actions of SFOR to find
these two war criminals. I wish them better success at
the earliest possible opportunity and full cooperation
from the local authorities.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the
Council for their tireless support for UNMIBH and for
having made their staff available to the Mission. It is
their work that has made the Mission what it is today.

The successful completion of our mandate ends
the peacekeeping phase of one of the largest police
reform and restructuring operations that has ever been
undertaken. We are on the verge, key in hand, of
closing an operation that has established new
conceptual and technical parameters for the
development of a culture of competence and integrity
for police forces within a structure and organization
that is based on the principles of transparency and
professionalism.

The termination of UNMIBH will also mark the
end of a decade of United Nations involvement in
peacekeeping in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this
connection, I am committed to completing the work of
UNMIBH and of shutting it down with head held high.
We must not forget, however, that, in the long run, our
legacy will be in the hands of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the leaders they will elect in the
forthcoming elections. I very much hope for a future in
which the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will make
wise choices and succeed in securing their due place in
Europe.

