Mr. Milanovic' (Serbia): Let me begin by welcoming
the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
two of whom are also officials of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and by
thanking them for their briefings today.

At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation of the acknowledgement of the continued
high level of cooperation of the Republic of Serbia
with the ICTY that the President and the Prosecutor
presented in their reports. As a consequence, there are
no outstanding indictees at large and all of the 3,466
requests for assistance received from the Office of the
Prosecutor or defence counsels for access to documents,
archives and witnesses have been complied with, with
only two of the most recent still pending. This has been
brought about not only through the compliance of the
Government of Serbia with its international obligations,
but also through its firm commitment to the principles
of international humanitarian law. Let me reiterate that
the Government of Serbia is committed to continuing
its cooperation, with the Tribunal and the Residual
Mechanism alike.

Serbia has followed with particular attention
ICTY activities to implement its completion strategy
and transition smoothly to the Mechanism. While
the Tribunal, regrettably, will not complete all of its
judicial work by the end of this year, as set forth in
resolution 1966 (2010), it is in the interest ofmy country
to see the trials against its citizens completed and have
their defences presented under a fair and expeditious
procedure. We hope that the remaining proceedings
will be completed as planned.

Serbia welcomes the progress made in the
establishment of the operational capacities of The Hague
branch of the International Residual Mechanism over
the past year, which is essential for the implementation
of the ICTY mission in accordance with its mandate
and, in particular, for enabling national judiciaries
to continue to prosecute war crimes. In this context,
I would like to mention once again, with particular
appreciation, the visit to Belgrade of Mechanism
Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow on 8 September,
during which a memorandum of understanding was
signed to facilitate continued cooperation in the
exchange of evidence to be used in cases tried by the
national judiciary of Serbia.

With the ICTY completion strategy entering its
final stages, the emphasis of war crimes prosecutions
has been shifting to national judiciaries, and will soon
be their full responsibility. Serbia, for its part, has
systematically and persistently continued to prosecute
war crimes committed in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia in the firm belief that the quest and respect
for justice and fairness are of vital importance. The
number of cases tried in domestic courts has increased
considerably in the past period. The facts speak for
themselves: the Serbian judiciary has so far tried
435 persons for criminal offences committed against
international humanitarian law, while 78 persons are
currently under investigation.

To further this task, an action plan has been
conceived, in line with the European Union (EU)
negotiating framework, under the chapter on judiciary
and fundamental rights, and has been submitted to the
European Commission. The implementation of the
action plan will further contribute to enhancing the
capacity and strengthening the work of the Office of
the War Crimes Prosecutor and other State bodies, in
line with our obligations as a nation, society and an
aspiring EU member State. Much, however, remains
to be done, and we are fully aware that the task will
require diligence and persistence. The assistance
provided to national judicial authorities by the Office of
the Prosecutor for the purpose of strengthening national
capacities has been vital and will remain a high priority
until the very closure of the Tribunal - as much in
Serbia as in the rest of the region.

In order to make a successful contribution to
regional peace and reconciliation, we believe that
regional cooperation must continue to be a priority.
With anything short of full cooperation by the countries
on whose territories the crimes were committed, justice
can hardly be served. Regional cooperation is and will
be of key importance in the struggle against impunity
for international criminal offences - all the more so in
the time to come. Such cooperation with the war crimes
prosecutors of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro and with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo has been constantly intensifying,
with the latest example demonstrated by the successful
outcome of the joint Serbian-Bosnian investigation
that led to the arrest on 5 December of five suspects
in Serbia and 10 in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
notorious case of the abduction and killing in 1993
of 20 people from a train near the Bosnian village of
Strpci. The 20 years of attempts to investigate this case
and uncover the perpetrators of this heinous atrocity
could not have succeeded without intensive cooperation
within thejudicial andpolice organs ofthe two countries,
particularly in the past two years. Let me also point
out that evidence has been exchanged in 252 cases so
far. Another recent positive element on this path is the
agreement on the exchange of liaison officers signed
on 11 September between the War Crimes Prosecutors
of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will
facilitate bilateral cooperation on access to evidence.

Given Serbia's earlier stated efforts, as well as
the aforementioned positive trends, it is imperative to
keep up the momentum. It is also our right to expect
all countries of the former Yugoslavia to do the same
and to investigate and try the cases of war crimes in
which Serbs were victims. This is their duty not only
towards the victims and their own people, but towards
humankind as well.

I have pointed out at previous Security Council
meetings on the ICTY, and most recently in a General
Assembly plenary meeting, the need to see the processes
before the Tribunal completed and to have defences
presented in a fair and expeditious procedure, arguing
that protracted procedures that prolong detention, often
indefinitely, are contrary to the recognized norms
regulating the rights of the accused. In line with that,
we take the case of Vojislav Seselj as indicative, with
the indictee having been held in detention without
sentencing for almost 12 years following his voluntary
surrender. I have underscored that this case is less
than conducive to the reputation of the ICTY and that
concrete measures should be taken speedily in order
to unlock the legal procedural deadlock in which this
case has remained. To that end, I wish to emphasize
that Serbia has never made any request to the Tribunal
but to complete the pending cases with full respect for
the trial rights of the accused and the defence. Since
then, as stated in President Meron's report (S/2014/556),
on 6 November the Trial Chamber, with a decision by
the majority, ordered the provisional release of Vojislav
Seselj to Serbia for an indefinite period on humanitarian
grounds.

Committed to the policy of peace and stability, as
well as to regional cooperation and dialogue, Serbia
does not condone warmongering rhetoric no matter
where it comes from. Likewise, my country cannot
accept allegations of collective responsibility and
guilt. Bearing in mind the path that our countries have
traversed over the past two decades, from the ashes of
war and devastation through the establishment of peace
and the quest for reconciliation, and coming to terms
with the past and particularly looking to the future and
to the work that remains ahead of us, the importance of
regional cooperation cannot be overstated. While much
has been said about the successes achieved so far, as
in any endeavour, to bear the full fruit of success one
has to be forward-looking, courageous and persistent.
Abusing events and occurrences for one's political ends
is neither forward-looking nor courageous, and can
only be said to be effective in awakening the demons
of the past.

The statements made by Vojislav Seselj after his
temporary release are no different from those he made
regularly in the ICTY courtroom. Besides, he has said
on a number of occasions that he would not accept
any restrictions on his public statements. Yet, he was
released nonetheless. In deciding on the release, the
Trial Chamber certainly knew quite well the kind of
statements he would make. His statements against the
Government of the Republic of Serbia and its policies
cannot be attributed to the Republic of Serbia, and
there is no basis whatsoever to accuse my country
and its Government of anything levelled against them
in Mr. Seselj's statements before or after his release.
As to the impact of those statements and the political
views that they advocate, the results of the past several
elections offer sufficient testimony to their marginality.

Regional destabilization is not in the interest of
Serbia, just as it is not in the interest of the Balkan
countries or of Europe. What we all aspire to is respect
for civilizational and democratic achievements, the rule
of law and the economic progress and stability of the
region. It is difficult to build peace and stability in the
region, but it is very easy to raze it. Hate speech is,
let me remind the Council, not exclusive to Serbia but,
sadly and regrettably, a region-wide phenomenon.

As I stated in the previous Security Council
debate six months ago (see S/PV.7192), bearing in
mind that Serbia is firmly committed to cooperation
with the ICTY and that 20 years have elapsed since its
establishment, I would like to point out once again that
my country attaches great importance to the initiative
aimed at ensuring that those convicted by the Tribunal
in The Hague be allowed to serve their sentences in
the States that emerged in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. In that context, let me recall that, since
2009, Serbia has requested to sign such an agreement
with the ICTY and sought very actively to promote
the initiative all along. Its officials have written to the
United Nations and the ICTY on numerous occasions,
yet, regrettably, no progress has been made.

Without prejudging the outcome of this purely
humanitarian request, and bearing in mind that President
Meron has on a number of occasions stated in his
reports and in public statements that the International
Residual Mechanism is actively working to secure
additional agreements to increase its enforcement
capacity and that he welcomes the cooperation of States
in that regard, Serbia would appreciate an opportunity
to sign such an agreement. The results of its many years
of cooperation with the ICTY indicate that my country
takes this question very seriously and that it is ready to
accept international supervision of the enforcement of
sentences and provide all necessary guarantees.

I take this opportunity to reiterate the readiness of
Serbia to, and its interest in, addressing the questions
of ICTY archives. We advised the Security Council of
our official position on the matter in October 2008. My
country is ready to participate actively in all future
discussions and to continue to cooperate with the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals on
this question. Also, as in the past, Serbia is ready to
fulfil all obligations resulting from cooperation with
the ICTY and the International Residual Mechanism.
Let me conclude by expressing once again my
country's satisfaction concerning the progress made in
the establishment of operational capacities of the Hague
branch of the International Residual Mechanism. Its
work is and will continue to be of key importance in
facilitating the full establishment ofjustice, in particular
in enabling the continued work of national judiciaries
in prosecuting war crimes. The international judicial
system has a key role to play in the process, and it is
obligated to make a contribution through full respect
for international norms and human rights principles.
Let me point out once again that Serbia is committed to
regional peace, stability and reconciliation.

