Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, and Mr. William Lacy Swing, Director
General of the International Organization for Migration
(IOM), for their timely updates.

Over the past week, a video of African migrants
sold as slaves in Libya has rightly sparked moral
outrage around the world. It is an abomination to see
human beings bought and sold. Those reports should
be profoundly disturbing to all of us and should inspire
us to act. As Ambassador Haley said last week (see S/PV.8111), there is no place in our world for slavery.
We must hold the perpetrators of such acts accountable
for their crimes.

We welcome the condemnation of slavery and
human trafficking by the Libyan Government of
National Accord and its announcement that it is
conducting an investigation into the latest reports. The
United States reiterates its call for a full investigation
and for those involved to be brought to justice as soon
as possible. That video was the latest of many deeply
disturbing reports about the treatment of migrants and
asylum seekers in Libya.

The fact is that ruthless smugglers are preying
on desperate migrants and refugees with no regard
whatsoever for human dignity. Human traffickers
detain such people in appalling conditions, where
beatings, torture and rape have become commonplace.
Migrants and refugees who cannot afford exorbitant
ransom payments are abused and exploited. They are
forced to work on farms or construction sites or as part
of armed militias in gangs or, as we saw, are sold off to
the highest bidder.

Under those circumstances, the United States
welcomes international efforts to provide assistance
and protection to displaced people and migrants in
Libya, including the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and IOM. that we just heard about. The international
community must support greater documentation of
abuses in Libya, as well as programmes to ensure the
humane treatment of migrants and refugees. Since
2011, the United States has contributed generously to
the regional humanitarian assistance programmes of
UNHCR, IOM. and other partners and has provided
more than $150 million specifically to help refugees and
vulnerable migrants in Libya, as well as those displaced
internally by violence. Upholding international
protection obligations is vital.

We urge the European Union and all Member
States to ensure that there is consistent vetting of
Libyan partners and an international presence at
disembarkation points and in detention facilities, as
well as a process to guarantee access to protection. Of
course, the only long-term solution to the challenge
of migration through Libya is to stabilize Libya.
The smugglers responsible for abusing migrants and
refugees are part of sophisticated transnational criminal
networks that thrive in ungoverned or unstable spaces.

Those migrant smuggling and human trafficking
networks also smuggle arms, narcotics and illicit
fuel across borders. Their earnings support terrorist
organizations, like the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida affiliates. Their presence
contributes to Libya's instability, as well as to security
challenges that affect the entire Mediterranean and the
Sahel. Instability breeds criminal behaviour and human
rights abuses, which in turn lead to further instability
and additional abuses, and the cycle continues.

We should continue looking for any opportunity
to disrupt criminal networks in Libya using the tools
of the Security Council, including our Libya sanctions
regime. However, while we face an immediate
imperative to disrupt and dismantle smuggling
networks, the members of the Council must also
recommit to supporting the United Nations efforts to
advance a more stable, unified and secure Libya. The
only viable way to achieve that goal is for all of us to
lend our full support to the political process organized
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salame' on the basis of the Libyan Political
Agreement, which remains the only valid framework
throughout the transitional period. We must all use our
influence to make sure that all actors in Libya engage
with the United Nations in good faith and stress that
political dialogue is the only way forward.

Any attempt to assert false deadlines, cut short the
United Nations-facilitated political process or impose
a military solution will only further destabilize Libya,
which would only help the smugglers responsible for
abusing migrants and refugees. The United States
reiterates its commitment today to ending all forms
of slavery, cracking down on the perpetrators and
promoting stability in Libya. It is vital that we work
together to achieve those goals. We must rally support
to end impunity for those abuses and ensure human
rights for all in Libya.

