Mr. Pascoe: I am very reluctant to follow the
eloquent statement made by the representative of
Guinea-Bissau, but let me answer, if I might, one or
two questions that were raised in this meeting.

In the first instance, let me say how gratified I am
by the very widespread understanding around this
Chamber of the importance of bringing together all of
the elements - political, security and development
elements - to work together. The representative of
Costa Rica stated it extraordinarily eloquently, but
many others had the same thought.

We are delighted to be working with the
Peacebuilding Commission. We find the Commission
to be extremely active and energetic and we believe
that it adds a great deal to all of the United Nations
efforts in Guinea-Bissau.
The question was raised about the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau and
what we are doing with it. As the Council knows, it has
been very deeply involved in the past in trying to work
with the Government, the people and the leaders there
on moving the political process forward. It is very
deeply involved in helping with things like the
elections and with some political issues. It has also
been working very hard on and raised some of the first
alarms about the drug issue. It has been very effective
in having the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and others be involved in this issue.

We are hoping that, in a reorganization of the
Office in the next few months, we can also make sure
that we tighten the integration of the programmes
overall to be most effective. I should say that
Mr. Omoregie would be with us to be answering these
questions, except that he is recuperating from a
medical procedure so he could not be with us today,
and I apologize for that, as does he.

The question was also raised by the
representative of the Russian Federation about the
national anti-drug strategy. Yes, indeed, the
Government of Guinea-Bissau does have a good
national anti-drug strategy, which was solidly backed
at the Lisbon conference last December with pledges
by the international community of over $6 million. The
effort there, of course, is a very strong one to get
control of the drug problems that have been discussed
by many of us here today.

The authorities have asked for assistance. They
have been looking for additional assistance. Let me
join with Ambassador Viotti in her appeal this morning
for disbursement of the pledges that were made at the
Lisbon conference, because I think that it is very
important that we all work together to build the anti-
drug capacity. Again, UNODC has been working hard
on that matter. It has a permanent representative in
Guinea-Bissau who is now working on these issues.

Finally, there were several questions raised about
our suggestion on the panel of experts. That suggestion
arose from requests from people in the Government for
assistance by the international community to provide
support for addressing the problems. Clearly, even with
the most effective development of the internal fight
against the drug problem, there are many international
issues and problems there that the Government is
having trouble dealing with. We agree completely that
the most important long-term thing objective is
building up the institutions, but this request is for some
additional help along those lines. We are happy to
discuss it with the Council in the weeks ahead to see if
the idea has merit and if something could usefully be
done in that area.

