Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): Allow me, on behalf of the delegation of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, first
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Jordan's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Let me also welcome your initiative,
Sir, which is very timely and on the right topic. We
are convinced that this debate will meet with success
under your able leadership. My delegation would also
like to note the remarks made by the Under-Secretary-
General, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman.

It is 70 years since the end of the Second World
War, which imposed unspeakable suffering and
misfortune on humanity. With the end of the Second
World War, the desire of humanity was to establish a
world free of war and to achieve common prosperity and
development for all people. Despite decade after decade
having passed since that time, we cannot see any major
breakthrough in achieving peace in the world. Instead,
we are witnessing the challenges. In the world, large
hotspots and the anachronistic and outdated military
alliances of the cold war era continue to strengthen.
Military alliances are still formed and large-scale
military exercises continue to be launched one after the
other, posing a greater threat to international peace and
security. The act of interference in and infringement
upon the sovereignty of other countries and attempts
at regime change and armed invasion continue in an
open manner under the pretext of so-called freedom,
democracy, non-proliferation and counter-terrorism.
We can name all the pretexts.

That reality demonstrates that international peace
and security is increasingly the primary issue of the
world. In particular, global attention is focused on
the trustworthy and responsible attitude and role
of the United Nations in its mission to maintaining
international peace and security. In that regard, the
delegation ofthe Democratic People's Republic ofKorea
would like to underscore the following principles.

First, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is
cognizantofrespectforsovereigntyandnon-interference
in internal affairs as fundamental principles that should
be strictly abided to in international relations with a
view to achieving international peace and security.
Whether a large or a small country, there is no aspect of
international law that allows or tolerates infringement
by a big Power on the interests and sovereignty of a
small country. The Charter of the United Nations clearly
stipulates sovereign equality and non-interference
in internal affairs as fundamental principles to be
upheld among States Members of the United Nations in
international relations.

The acts of a specific State Member misusing its
privileged status in the United Nations should no longer
be tolerated. The acts of defying the Charter of the
United Nations and considering itself more equal than
others by making a show of its strength and attacking
other Member States should no longer be tolerated.

I want to draw attention to a second principal issue.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea insists that
the United Nations should pay due attention to and
make every effort with regard to the unresolved issue of
crimes against humanity committed during the Second
World War. As for past crimes committed by Japan
against the people of Korea, China and South-East
Asian countries, a precedent cannot be found in the
history of humanity regarding the degree of savageness
and brutality. It is a common issue. It does not concern
only Asian countries but all humanity. Of the past
crimes committed by Japan, the main unresolved crime
is sexual slavery, in particular that imposed on 200,000
Korean women by soldiers of the Japanese Imperial
Army. It is becoming an increasingly wide-ranging
issue throughout the world with growing outrage at and
condemnation of crimes that trampled on the dignity
of Korean women and of the Korean nation as a whole.

The reality is that Japan is now hell-bent on
denying and covering up its past crimes. Recently, it
went as far as to commit a further error by stabbing at
the wounded hearts of the victims and their States. The
most representative example is the visit to the Yasukuni
shrine by Mr. Abe, Prime Minister of Japan. That visit
is a totally anachronistic crime intended to prompt
the Japanese people to revive their militarist ambition
and to incite them to commit another crime against
humanity, thereby deluding the entire Japanese territory
and population towards its own total destruction.
The Asian countries and the international
community did not hesitate to voice their outrage at
and condemnation of the visit. A State Member of the
United Nations that has a close alliance with Japan did
not hesitate to adopt a resolution on the sexual slavery
of Korean women, as well as those of other Asian and
European countries.

All those facts indicate that Japan is being driven
into the role of offender. Mr. Abe should never gamble
politically against the international community again.
Instead of visiting the Yasukuni Shrine, he should
visit Germany. That way he could at least learn about
the best example of past crimes being settled in an
excellent manner. That is in the best interests of Japan.
It is the only way to shake off the inferior morality that
is unique to Japan, and thereby restore the international
community's confidence in Japan.

There is no place for Japan's militarism in this
world. With regard to the Korean people, during the
military occupation Japan massacred 1 million Koreans
and, as I have told the Council in the past, they turned
200,000 Korean women into sex slaves, which is out
of an estimated total of 300,000 women sex slaves
under the euphemism of so-called comfort women.
Furthermore, they abducted or drafted over 8.4 million
Koreans and put them into forced labour sites during
the Second World War.

The Korean people will never forget, no matter how
much time and how many decades pass by. Without fail,
the people will be repaid for what Japan has done to
provoke the anger of our ancestors.

