The President (spoke in French): The Security

Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Following consultations among members of the

Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
repeated violations of the ceasefire arrangements
by the Plateforme and Coordination armed groups
in and around Kidal over the last months, which
threaten the viability of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. The Security Council
urges the signatory armed groups to cease hostilities
immediately, to strictly adhere to the ceasefire
arrangements and to resume dialogue without delay
for the implementation of the Agreement.

"The security Council urges the Government
of Mali, the Plateforme and Coordination armed
groups to fully and sincerely maintain their
commitments under the Agreement. The Security
Council recalls its readiness to consider targeted
sanctions against those who take actions to
obstruct the implementation of the Agreement as
well as those who resume hostilities and violate
the ceasefire, as expressed in its resolution 2295
(2016).

"The Security Council acknowledges the steps
taken by signatory parties over the last year to
implement the Agreement, welcomes the progress
towards establishing interim administrations in the
north of Mali and expresses its deep concern over
the persistent delays for the full implementation of
the Agreement. The Security Council underscores
the pressing need to deliver tangible and visible
peace dividends to the population in the north and
other parts of Mali in order to keep the momentum
of the Agreement.

"The Security Council urges the Government
of Mali, the Plateforme and Coordination armed
groups to take urgent and concrete action to fully
deliver on their obligations under the Agreement

without further delay, in particular to deploy joint
security patrols, to accomplish the process of
establishing interim administrations in the north
of Mali, to operationalize the commissions for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of armed combatants, and to accelerate the
redeployment of the Malian Defence and Security
Forces throughout the country within the framework
of the Agreement.

"The Security Council urges the Government
of Mali to engage with the Secretary- General,
through his Special Representative for Mali, to
establish concrete benchmarks and timelines to
assess the progress towards the full implementation
of the Agreement and recalls its request to the
Secretary-General to include them in his December
2016 report.

"The security Council calls on members
of the Comite de suivi de l'Accord and other
relevant international partners to sustain their
support to the implementation of the Agreement.
The Security Council emphasizes the central
role the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General should continue to play to support and
oversee the implementation of the Agreement
by the Government of Mali, the Plateforme and
Coordination armed groups.

"The Security Council encourages bilateral
and multilateral partners to increase their support
to accelerate the redeployment of the Malian
Defence and Security Forces, once reformed and
reconstituted, to the north of Mali, particularly
by providing relevant equipment and training, in
coordination with the Government of Mali and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
within the framework of the Agreement.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern
over the expansion of terrorist and other criminal
activities across Mali, and in particular into central
and southern Mali, as well as the intensification
of intercommunal violence in the centre of Mali.
The Security Council emphasizes that the Malian
authorities have primary responsibility for the
provision of stability and security throughout the
territory of Mali.

"The Security Council strongly condemns

the continuing attacks, including terrorist attacks,
against the Malian defence and security forces,
MINUSMA and the French forces. The Security
Council underlines the need to bring perpetrators,
organizers, financiers and sponsors of these
reprehensible acts of terrorism to justice. The
Security Council urges the Government of Mali to
take measures to ensure that those responsible for
these attacks are held accountable.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
significant capability gaps within MINUSMA
and underlines its request to the Secretary-
General to expeditiously identify options and
take all appropriate additional measures to enable
MINUSMA to fully implement its mandate and to
ensure the safety and security of its personnel. The
Security Council urges Member States to urgently
provide adequate capabilities to MINUSMA, in
particular aviation and transportation capabilities,
to fill in these gaps.

"The Security Council reiterates its serious
concern over the insecurity which hinders
humanitarian access, condemns attacks against
humanitarian personnel and emphasizes the
need for all parties to respect the principles of
humanitarian assistance - humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence * in order to ensure
the continued provision of humanitarian assistance.
The Security Council also emphasizes the need for
all parties to ensure the safety and protection of
civilians receiving assistance and the security of
humanitarian personnel operating in Mali.

"The Security Council calls on Member States
in the region, notably through the Group of Five
for the Sahel and the African Union Nouakchott
Process, to advance their cooperation with
MINUSMA in order to strengthen regional security
and facilitate the implementation of its mandate."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l6/l6.

The meeting rose at 3 pm.
