Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): First of all, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation for
convening this open debate. I would like to express
my appreciation for the briefing we just received
from Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman on the
current situation in the Middle East.

As regards the Middle East peace process, Rwanda
firmly believes that now is the time to take bold and
concrete steps towards sustainable peace. The ongoing
direct negotiations must achieve a lasting solution to
the Israeli/Palestinian conflict and hence give way
to the vision of a two-State solution, where a secure
State of Israel lives side by side with a viable State of
Palestine. We applaud the renewed commitment by
both Israelis and the Palestinian leadership to advance
these talks, and Rwanda pledges its continued support
to both parties. We are encouraged by the holding
of the Quartet meeting of 27 September in New
York, attended by both Israelis and Palestinian chief
negotiators, and we hope that both parties will keep the
current momentum aimed at achieving a comprehensive
agreement. Furthermore, we emphasize the need for all
concerned parties to strongly support the peace process
and avoid engaging in subversive activities that would
undermine the progress achieved.

On the issue of Syria, Rwanda remains concerned
with the current situation in the country, where a human
tragedy is unfolding with spillover effects on the entire
region. We reiterate our indisputable condemnation of
all forms of violence by whomever commits it.

Rwanda welcomes the progress made following the
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination
and destruction of chemical weapons in Syria. We
are encouraged by the close cooperation between the
Syrian Government and the joint mission by the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons to eliminate and destroy the
chemical weapons in Syria. On this note, we urge the
Syrian rebels to permit the joint mission access to
chemical weapon sites in areas under their control, and
we call for all parties to sign a ceasefire agreement in
order to ease the process of dismantling Syria's deadly
weapons.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our call to all
stakeholders to stop the supply of weapons to either
side of the conflict, and we urge all parties to desist
from violations and abuses of international human
rights and humanitarian law, bearing in mind that the
perpetrators will be held accountable before a court of
law. Rwanda further calls upon all parties to facilitate
safe, immediate and unimpeded humanitarian access to
those in need.

As we have said before, it is evident that there is no
military solution to the Syrian crisis. Rwanda remains
committed to the initiative to convene the "Geneva II"
conference next month in order to promote an inclusive,
Syrian-led political process leading to a transition
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people. We welcome the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States for Syria, Mr. Brahimi, who is on a Middle
East tour to garner support for a Geneva II conference.
Rwanda calls upon all parties concerned to set a date
for the conference to avoid further speculation.

Allow me to comment briefly on Lebanon. The
situation in that country is particularly worrisome,
as violence is becoming more and more sectarian,
creating further political and security challenges. The
international community must condemn these acts and
effectively support President Michel Sleiman and the
Lebanese Government for their commitment to the
Baabda Declaration and their dissociation policy. Peace
and stability in Lebanon is paramount and should be
firmly maintained with the support of the international
community. We call on all parties in Syria to fully
respect the sovereignty, political independence and
territorial unity of Lebanon, and we also call on all
Lebanese actors to avoid further escalation and to
embrace the path of political understanding.

