Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
initiative to organize this open debate and to thank you
for the concept note that you circulated among all
delegations. The topic is extremely relevant not only
for the Security Council, but for the entire United
Nations system. We associate ourselves with the
statement made by the representative of the Kingdom
of Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
but would like to add some specific remarks.

As a country that benefited directly from a United
Nation mission, Guatemala recognizes the fundamental
importance of the Organization's peacekeeping
operations. They are a basic activity of the United
Nations and an indispensable tool for the work of this
Organization, in which we participate as a troop-
contributing country.

At the same time, United Nations peacekeeping
operations are faced with increasing demand,
expanding scale, increasingly diverse mandates and
growing complexity. This is taking place in a context
of limited financial and technical resources, placing
great pressure on our capacity to respond. Thus, the
issue of how to enhance the effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping operations has been on our
agenda for many years, and today more than ever
before, answers are needed.

For our part, I should like to make the following
observations. First, and as indicated in the concept
reference note, we agree that it is important that
peacekeeping operations have clear, feasible and
verifiable mandates tailored to the particular situation
of each case. We believe that, in the formulation and/or
extension of mandates, every available tool should be
taken into account on the basis of a needs assessment
for each case. Resolution 1353 (2001) provided us with
a comprehensive vision of what should be done in that
regard.

Secondly, we should ensure that missions receive
sufficient financial resources to fulfil the mandates
entrusted to them. In that connection, my delegation
believes that the expression "major financial
contributors" should not be used in relation to
peacekeeping operations, as it runs counter to the letter
and the spirit of the Charter. All Member States
contribute to the budget in accordance with their
capacity to pay.

Thirdly, consultations with countries that are not
Council members and that contribute troops to
peacekeeping operations should be enhanced. Thus, it
is necessary to improve the relationship between those
who formulate mandates and plan and manage
peacekeeping operations and those who carry out such
mandates. Troop-contributing countries should
participate fully from the outset in all aspects and
stages of peacekeeping operations, helping the Security
Council to take appropriate, effective and timely
decisions.

In that regard, we highlight the importance of
strengthening and intensifying the interaction between
the Working Group on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and the troop-contributing countries. We
commend the important work being done by Japan as
Chair of the Working Group, and we look forward with
interest to the interim report on the work of the Group

in 2009, which, we understand, will be distributed
shortly.

Fourthly, the concept note mentions joint
meetings between political experts and military experts
to discuss aspects of peacekeeping operations. My
delegation believes that such joint meetings, held
within the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34), are vital. Thus, it would also be
desirable to expand the coordination between the
Security Council and other General Assembly forums,
in particular the C-34, which, as members are aware,
was established pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 2006 (XIX), precisely to consider in depth
all aspects related to peacekeeping operations.

Fifthly, we have closely followed the process of
the non-paper originally entitled "Project New
Horizon" and recently issued as "A New Partnership
Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for United Nations
Peacekeeping". We hope that the document will be
considered by the C-34 with a view to producing a
detailed assessment of the current and future
challenges to peacekeeping operations indicated in the
document by both Departments.

In conclusion, we believe that we have much
better information today about how to address the
challenge facing us than we had a number of years ago.
We have significant assets at our disposal as a result of
lessons learned in many complex operations over the
past 15 years, in addition to the guidelines set out in
the now-classic 2000 Brahimi report (8/2000/809), the
"Peace Operations 2010" proposal, the restructuring of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
creation of the Department of Field Support. In
addition to all that, we now have the evaluations and
recommendations contained in the New Horizon
document. Over the past few years, interesting
functional associations have also been established
between the United Nations and regional forums, in
particular the African Union.

In short, we must abandon incomplete reforms,
tensions within management and command systems
and the disproportionality between mandates and
resources, as well as problems of scale, since those
aspects only reduce the efficiency of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. My delegation firmly
believes that in the future, through strengthened
cooperation and political will, we can achieve effective
United Nations peacekeeping operations in keeping

with the relevant aspirations and objectives set out in
the Charter.

