Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank you, Madam, for
convening this meeting. We welcome the Foreign
Ministers of Azerbaijan and Kenya and the Minister of
Defence of Uganda, and thank them for their
statements. We also welcome the Foreign Minister of
Uganda, and thank the Under-Secretary General for
Political Affairs and the African Union (AU)
Commissioner for Peace and Security for their
briefings.

Eighteen years ago on a hot summer day,
24 Pakistani peacekeepers wearing the United Nations
Blue Helmet laid down their lives in Mogadishu while
saving their colleagues belonging to other nations.
Fifty-seven Pakistani soldiers were injured in the
incident. Pakistan's association with the cause of
Somali peace has grown ever since. This loss did not
deter us from continuing our engagement with Somalia
and our Somali brethren, whose cause of lasting peace
and stability Pakistan has supported all along. We
therefore associate ourselves strongly with the purpose
of this meeting and value the briefings given earlier.
We shall work for Security Council's sustained
engagement with Somalia and encourage contacts with
and coherence in the work of the African Union on the
subject.

We extend our full support to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and welcome the
strategic concept of its operations, which has been
endorsed by the African Union Peace and Security
Council. The briefing of the countries contributing
troops to AMISOM. provided us with an important
insight into the challenges faced by them in
implementing their mandate with sparse resources. We
commend their efforts. Predictable and continuous
funding for AMISOM. must be ensured. The increase of
AMISOM. uniformed personnel from 12,000 to 17,731
will help consolidate the gains made recently. A well-
equipped and motivated AMISOM. can better deliver
on the ground. The international partners of Somalia
and the Security Council must work in tandem to
improve peacekeeping operations in Somalia.

The development and enhancement of the
security forces of the Transitional Federal Government
are essential ingredients of the strategic concept. We
believe that international assistance, including through
wider engagement of the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture, can be enlisted for the purpose.

We share the concern expressed by speakers
about the situation in Somalia. Drought and famine
have exacerbated the humanitarian situation. Noting
that all international projections point to the
continuation of the humanitarian crisis into 2012, we
call upon the international partners to remain seized of
the matter.

On the political front, we welcome the progress
made towards constitution-making, as manifested in
the Garowe Conference. Such progress paves the way
for the smoother implementation of Kampala Accord
and the political road map, as well as an amicable
resolution of the current parliamentary crisis. In this
regard, we support efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the AU and the United
Nations. We look forward to the London conference
and hope that it will prove to be an important milestone
in Somalia's journey towards peace and stability.

Somalia's multidimensional challenges and
problems necessitate a comprehensive approach that
takes into account political, security, economic and
environmental factors. Such an approach will also help
end the menace of piracy off the coast of Somalia. We
believe that the African Union's sustained engagement
with Somalia augurs well for peace and stability in that
country and the subregion. The Security Council would
do well to seize this opportunity and make amends for
years of neglect suffered by Somalia.

Pakistan has worked for peace in Somalia over
the years, including in our previous term on the
Security Council. We have also been active in the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation Contact Group on
Somalia and the United Nations Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. We will remain a
steadfast partner of Somalia.

