Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Costa Rica has consistently and firmly continued
to condemn attacks against the Albanian civilian population
in Kosovo, the violation of that population's most
fundamental rights and the savage destruction of unarmed
small towns and hamlets. Time and again, we have
expressed our repudiation of the policy of ethnic cleansing
undertaken by the authorities of Serbia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We are in favour of an
international position of political firmness vis-a-vis the
Belgrade Government.

In the face of the suffering of the Kosovo population,
my delegation voted in favour of Security Council
resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1199 (1998). Through these
resolutions, we demanded that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the authorities of the Albanian community
in Kosovo enter into dialogue without any preconditions,
with a view to putting an end to the crisis and finding a
negotiated political solution to it. Moreover, we have
demanded that the Yugoslav authorities cease all military
action in Kosovo which affects the civilian population and
that they withdraw all security forces which are being used
to repress that population.

Hence, we cannot fail to express our satisfaction at the
signing last 16 October of an agreement between the
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia, with the purpose of
establishing a verification mission in Kosovo entrusted with
the monitoring of compliance with the demands stipulated
in resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1199 (1998), as well as the
commitments agreed to by the Yugoslav authorities to
comply with the terms of such resolutions. We believe that
the Verification Mission will be a key instrument in
guaranteeing the peace process in Kosovo, in preventing
new violations of human rights and for international
humanitarian law in the region.

Thus, the delegation of Costa Rica believes that it is
necessary and indispensable for the Security Council to
authorize the dispatch of an international observer mission
to verify compliance with the obligations agreed to by the
Yugoslav authorities in the 16 October agreement.

Moreover, no longer is this question merely a
political one. What we have here is a moral and ethical
imperative for the international community. Inasmuch as
this moral objective leaves no room for doubt, and in that
an international presence in Kosovo would take on a high
moral character, Costa Rica would never fail to lend its
support to a multilateral action aimed at such a noble
purpose. That is why we are supporting the draft
resolution we have before us.

Nevertheless, having said this, we would like to state
some of our misgivings, which are of a legal nature, with
regard to certain aspects of this draft resolution. A goal
such as this one, which is ethically and morally
unquestionable, deserves to be achieved by means of
international law. We are not objecting to the goal of the
draft resolution, but to its form and lack of clarity, in
light of our firm position on absolute respect for
international law and the tenets of the Charter.

We believe that any Security Council resolution
must be strictly in keeping with international law and
with a sound political concept. The adoption of any
measure which implies the use of force or military troops
must meet all the legal, political and strategic
requirements of the Charter and be based on practical
experience. Any action which implies the use of force -
with the very limited exception of the right of legitimate
defence - thus requires clear authorization by the
Security Council for each specific case.

We believe these principles to be implicit in the
primary responsibility of the Security Council with
respect to the maintenance of international peace and
security and in the absolute prohibition of the use of force
in international relations. The Security Council cannot,
nor should it, transfer to others or set aside its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. For this reason, we do not believe that the
Security Council should, in any case, authorize missions
with military troops whose limits and powers are not
clearly pre-established or whose mandate may be

 

conditioned to the subsequent decision of other organs or
groups of States.

The Security Council alone can determine whether
there has been a violation of its resolutions, adopted in the
exercise of its mandated powers. Only the Security Council
can authorize the use of force to ensure compliance with its
resolutions, in exercise of its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I wish to conclude by repeating that these comments
on the law will not stand in Costa Rica's way to lending its
support for the draft resolution before us, bearing in mind
its profound ethical and humanitarian meaning.

