Ms. Mabudafhasi (South Africa): My delegation
is very pleased, Sir, that you are presiding over this
important meeting today. It is indeed proper that under
your presidency we are considering the situation in
Africa.

The United Nations Charter determines that
collectively we must save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, reaffirm faith in fundamental
human rights and the dignity and worth of the human
person, and promote social progress and better
standards of living for all. Specifically, Article 24
confers on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The urgent need for peace and security in Africa
poses a special challenge for the Security Council.
There can be no doubt that the root causes of conflict
in Africa include poverty and underdevelopment, two
issues which fall outside the mandate of the Security
Council. Given this reality, the question is, how can the
Security Council remain relevant to the search for
comprehensive peace in Africa while at the same time
remaining true to its mandate? We believe that the
mandate of the Security Council is premised on the
broader framework of the United Nations and not in
isolation therefrom. This mandate includes maintaining
peace and security through arrangements with regions
and subregions, as specified in Chapter VIII of the
Charter.

The international community, including the
Security Council, has a contribution to make towards
the now globally accepted need for an African
renaissance. We would therefore like to focus attention
on how the Security Council could broaden its
engagement in Africa.

We firmly believe that in order to achieve this, it
is necessary to define the context of such an
engagement. In a historic action, the leaders of Africa
have defined such a framework in the New Partnership
for Africa's Development (NEPAD). The aim is to
address issues of peace and security while dealing with
the roots of conflict.

The New Partnership for Africa's Development is
a holistic, integrated, sustainable development
initiative for the economic and social revival of Africa,
involving a constructive partnership between Africa
and the developed world. It is a pledge by African
leaders, based on a common vision and a firm and
shared conviction, that they have a pressing duty to
eradicate poverty and to place their countries, both
individually and collectively, on a path of sustainable
growth and development and, at the same time, to
participate actively in the world economy and body
politic. NEPAD offers a historic opportunity for the
developed countries of the world to enter into a
genuine partnership with Africa, based on mutual
interest and benefit, shared commitment and binding
agreement, under African leadership. In proposing the
partnership, Africa recognizes that it holds the key to
its own development. The adoption of a development
strategy, together with a detailed programme of action,
marks the beginning of a new phase of partnership and
cooperation between Africa and the developed world,
including multilateral organizations.

To this end, we seek the Council's partnership in
order to implement the following three elements of
peace and security identified by NEPAD: the
promotion of long-term conditions for development
and security; building the capacity of African
institutions for early warning; and enhancing African
institutional capacity for the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts. Indeed, the
institutionalization of the commitment to the core
values of NEPAD has as its basis the promotion of
peace, security, democracy, human rights and sound
economic management.

Clearly, if the Security Council is to
comprehensively address the problems we face on the
African continent, it cannot rely solely on the tools
provided in Chapters VI and VII of the United Nations
Charter. The Security Council will forever be faced
with issues that are beyond its mandate. My delegation
would urge that the Security Council review its
relationship with the Economic and Social Council.
How these two main Councils of the United Nations
work together will go a long way towards addressing
some of the challenges that we face in Africa. In fact,
in NEPAD, the African leaders go to great lengths to
demonstrate that the problems of Africa cannot be
resolved in isolation. This should be done through an
integrated strategy that connects peace and security to
poverty and underdevelopment 4 some of the key root
causes of conflicts in Africa.

My delegation calls upon the Security Council
and the United Nations to assist Africa to rebuild its
capacity to manage all aspects of conflict by
strengthening existing African regional and subregional
institutions in the following key areas: the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts; peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace enforcement; post-conflict
reconciliation, rehabilitation and reconstruction; and
combating the proliferation of small arms, light
weapons and land mines.

Our aim is to contribute to this debate by drawing
attention to both the New Partnership for Africa's
Development and the soon to be launched African
Union (AU). The AU structures will seek to entrench
peace, stability, democracy, respect for human rights
and justice; create conditions for economic growth and
sustainable development; eradicate poverty; and
entrench social progress and prosperity for all. These
two initiatives hold the key to resolving the scourge of
conflict in Africa and to setting the continent on a path
towards sustainable development and economic
growth.

The Government of South Africa has long
expressed its commitment to promoting peace and
security in our continent. Together with other African
Governments, we seek to end the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons. Next month, South Africa will
host the inter-Congolese dialogue, which we hope will
finally bring peace to the troubled Great Lakes region.
We have also come before the international community
to promote a new partnership for Africa's development.

With this contribution to the debate, it is our hope
that the Security Council will consider its role in
matters where its mandate may be limited and require
cooperation with other bodies of the United Nations.
Our experience in Africa demonstrates that peace and
development are mutually reinforcing. It is therefore
our sincere hope that the debate today will launch a
dialogue with the Security Council on how to
comprehensively address the complex conflicts in
Africa.

