Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank Judge Carmel
Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their written
reports (S/2019/417, annexes I and II) and the briefings
they have just delivered to the Security Council. I
also congratulate Judge Agius on his appointment as
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

Belgium commends the work of the Mechanism,
which of course has been marked over the past six
months by the verdict of the Appeals Chamber in the
Karadeic' case, sentencing him to life imprisonment.
Despite a reduced budget, the Mechanism continues
to demonstrate a high level of activity while upholding
the Security Council's vision of being a small, effective
entity of a temporary nature.

Fighting impunity and ensuring justice for the most
serious crimes under international law are fundamental
obligations that are primarily the responsibility of
the States concerned. The efforts of Member States,
supported by the Mechanism, contribute directly to
the process of intercommunal reconciliation. That
is why it is essential that all the countries concerned
cooperate, not only among themselves but also with
the Mechanism.

In this regard, it is regrettable that eight individuals
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda are still at large. Belgium recalls that all United
Nations Member States have an obligation to cooperate
with the Office of the Prosecutor in its efforts to
locate and prosecute the remaining fugitives. Council
members must, of course, set an example for others
to follow and we are delighted that South Africa has
expressed its willingness to cooperate. We support the
Prosecutor's appeal for the South African authorities
to now honour that commitment in practice as soon as
possible, which will contribute significantly to the fight
against impunity for the crimes of genocide and crimes
against humanity that were committed in Rwanda.

In the same vein, Belgium is very concerned by
the persistent reports from the Office of the Prosecutor
regarding the denial of crimes and the glorification
of war criminals in some countries of the former
Yugoslavia. The role of the Mechanism in combating
hate speech and any ideology advocating discrimination
is paramount, but it requires the full cooperation of
the States of the region. My country also regrets a
further slowdown in regional judicial cooperation in
the Balkans, without which those responsible for war
crimes will go unpunished. We therefore call on the
States concerned to reverse the current trend and recall,
in particular, the commitments they made in that regard
a year ago at the Western Balkans Summit in London as
part of the Berlin process.

In resolution 2422 (2018), the Council encouraged
the Mechanism to consider the introduction of a
conditional early release scheme. The aim was to
respond to the concerns expressed by some Member
States following the early release of several sentenced
persons. Belgium welcomes the new Chairman's
intention to consult with other interested parties and
is currently considering appropriate solutions in this
regard. It is indeed essential that the Mechanism be able
to continue its activities in a peaceful atmosphere.
The mandate of the Mechanism is unique. In
addition to its judicial activities, it has other residual
functions such as assistance to national courts. The
latter is directly involved in States' responsibility to
investigate, prosecute and adjudicate the perpetrators
of serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Belgium fully supports the Mechanism in the pursuit
of its mandate, which allows hundreds of victims of
the Balkan wars and genocide in Rwanda to make
their stories heard and to testify about the atrocities
of the 19905 so that they will never be forgotten. The
Mechanism is thus a model that the Security Council is
rightly highlighting today, 17 July, Day of International
Criminal Justice.

