Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I will be
brief in my statement, given that we will be continuing
our discussion in consultations after the meeting.

I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Ghassan Salame, as well as Ambassador
Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for their briefings.

Mr. Salame outlined for us the tragedy following
the unprecedented confrontations in Tripoli, as well as
the damage caused to civilian buildings. That shows
that the situation is clearly out of control. It is important
to respect the arms embargo on Libya pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011). The raging war among those
who are linked by land, brotherhood and religion
reflects one of the chronic fractures in Libya arising
from the violation of so many agreements.

One of the most serious points raised is the
proliferation of hate speech and its echo on social
networks. That is a mushrooming danger, deeply rooted
in the soil of war. Words are distorted. The sons of the
same country turn against one another. Good offices
are subverted. As the Arab proverb goes, one must
watch one's words in order to avoid such confrontation.
Upholding the mechanisms to monitor hate speech
on the Internet is part of the work of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), which is operating
in very difficult and critical conditions. Mr. Salame
mentioned the humanitarian suffering caused by the
intensity of the recent armed confrontations. The most
severely affected are the most vulnerable, namely,
the illegal migrants in detention centres. We recall
the attack on the Tajoura detention centre, which was
condemned by the Security Council on 5 July. We
call on all concerned to ensure the safe provision of
humanitarian assistance to those in need of it, free from
any obstacles.

Once again, we reiterate that there is no military
solution. As the Eid Al-Adha festival draws near, we
call on all parties to respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law and to not
attack civilians or civilian infrastructure. Peaceful
solutions must be underscored; violence must be
rejected. UNSMIL's appeals must be heard. We support
what Mr. Salame said and the ideas that he explained
earlier this morning.

We also note the increase in the activities of
terrorist groups, which are making the most of current
terrorist activities and striking civilian installations.
Such terrorist activities call for the Security Council
to condemn them and provide the necessary support to
Libyan authorities to respond to such challenges, which
undermine regional stability and international security.

Lastly, with a view to reaching a comprehensive
political solution, we commend the efforts of
Mr. Salame and call on the Libyan parties to work
together to reach a peaceful political settlement of
their differences and to work in earnest to achieve
the necessary political and security conditions of the
agreements reached in Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi
to hold transparent, comprehensive and peaceful
presidential and parliamentary elections with a view to
achieving a unified and stable Libya.

