Ms. Nufiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Chairmen of the Committees
created under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) for the information provided. For
several years, our country has been providing the
Security Council with detailed information on terrorist
acts against Cuba perpetrated by various individuals
and organizations, as well as on the conspiratorial
protection the United States Government gives them.

On numerous occasions we have addressed the
Council, the last time on 6 May 2008, and we have sent
letters to the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Security Council, denouncing concrete cases of
flagrant violations of resolution 1373 (2001).
Unfortunately, nothing has been done so far. More than
one and a half years have passed since the release in
the United States of the terrorist Luis Posada Carriles,
who has been rightly called the most notorious terrorist
of the Western Hemisphere.

It is important to highlight that in June 2008, the
Supreme Court of Justice of Panama ruled that the
pardon given to Posada Carriles and his accomplices in
August 2004 by the former President of that country
was null and void. As may be recalled, that presidential
pardon enabled Posada Carriles and his accomplices
Gaspar Jime'nez Escobedo, Guillermo Novo Sampoll
and Pedro Remon Crispin to escape to the United
States. All those terrorists had been detained in
November 2000 when they were preparing an
assassination attempt with explosives against President
Fidel Castro, who was in Panama on the occasion of
the tenth Ibero-American Summit.

In spite of the fact that the United States
Government itself has admitted that he is a dangerous
terrorist, Posada Carriles was only charged with petty
immigration offences by United States authorities.
While Posada Carriles walks freely down the streets of
that country, various news media give an account of how
he keeps actively in touch with terrorist and extreme
right-wing elements in the United States and how he
participates in events held in Miami in his honour and in
recognition of his terrorist acts against Cuba.

The United States Government continues to
disregard the request for the extradition of Posada
Carriles, submitted on 15 June 2005 by the
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Cuban Government demands once more that the
United States authorities return the terrorist to
Venezuela or prosecute him on United States territory
under article 7 of the Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.

While avowed and unscrupulous terrorists are
released, the United States Government keeps as
political prisoners in high-security prisons, five Cuban
anti-terrorist fighters who were only trying with great
altruism and courage to obtain information on the
Miami-based terrorist groups in order to prevent their
acts of violence and to save the lives of Cuban and
United States citizens. Once again, Cuba demands the
immediate release of Gerardo Hernandez, Ramon
Labafiino, Fernando Gonzalez, Antonio Guerrero and
Rene Gonzalez. Last 12 September marked 10 years of
their unjust and cruel imprisonment in United States
prisons for combating terrorism.

Cuba reiterates its request to the Security Council
and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to urgently take
into consideration the comprehensive information our
country has provided, so that all necessary steps can be
taken in accordance with the adopted resolutions. Cuba
is ready to interact directly with the 1373 Committee if
that would be considered useful. We are at the full
disposal of the Committee to provide a more detailed
presentation to its members and to provide any
additional information or clarification they may
consider necessary.

Double standards must not prevail. The Security
Council must not continue to keep conspiratorial
silence in view of that blatant affront to the victims of
terrorism throughout the world. Cuba has never
allowed nor will it allow its territory to be used for
terrorist actions against any State, without exception.
We will continue to fight terrorism firmly, in all its
forms and manifestations as before.

As in the past, Cuba will continue to strictly
comply with Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) and will carry on its
cooperation with the subsidiary bodies established
pursuant to those resolutions.

