Mr. Butagira (Uganda): At the outset, permit me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and also to
congratulate your predecessor. I shall be brief.

First of all, I would like to commend and thank
the Security Council delegation that visited the region,
in particular Uganda. Let me place on record our praise
for the able leadership of the Ambassador of France,
who led that important delegation.

Uganda is concerned at the presence of negative
forces on the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The negative forces comprise both local
militias in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that
have failed to integrate and that pose a threat, and
foreign rebel forces. Action is needed to deal with
these negative forces. Uganda expresses its concern
that the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is functioning as a preserve for them: they are
there, they are preserved, and nothing is being done to
deal with them. Obviously, their presence continues to
pose a threat to the region as well as to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Therefore, we welcome recent moves by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to head
up forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
deal with these negative forces.

Recently, as a result of the operations of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in Ituri
against the local militias, some of the armed groups
fled to Uganda. I am glad to say that Uganda
responded quickly by arresting and disarming them.
That shows the cooperation Uganda is extending in that
regard. We therefore, would welcome equally robust
action by MONUC with regard to foreign rebel forces
on the soil of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, the proposed draft resolution before the
Council to address the issue is most welcome.

Our request, as contained in the letter of the
Ministers of the Tripartite Plus Joint Commission,
referred to by the representative of Rwanda, was
specific in giving MONUC a robust mandate to disarm
those negative forces.

However, there may also be a problem where
MONUC may not be able to directly disarm those
people. Therefore, the possibility of empowering the
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
strengthening their capacity to handle the situation,
assisted by MONUC, would be welcome. Uganda
would welcome that assistance, if the job can thus be
accomplished.

Our bottom line is that those people must be
obliged to disarm. The era of voluntary disarmament
has passed, but that does not also mean that the door is
closed to those who wish to voluntarily come forth. In
that regard, Uganda has established an amnesty office
in Ituri, specifically for those who respond to voluntary
disarmament. We are prepared to receive them and
resettle them at home. But there must be a cut-off
period, beyond which those people must obligatorily be
disarmed.

I am pleased to report that within the framework
of the Tripartite Plus Joint Commission and within the
framework of joint verification mechanisms, the region
has moved quickly to address the issue of negative
forces. There has been the proposal to establish a joint
intelligence cell, wherein the countries concerned can
share intelligence. There is a proposal by Uganda that
there should be established, within the armed forces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda,
liaison officers who would primarily deal with the
intelligence issues, as well as other issues, to locate
these people and recommend how they can be dealt
with.

With regard to the situation in northern Uganda, I
will have occasion to address that when the issue of
civilians in armed conflict is before the Council. But
let me say this, the Ugandan Government is now
addressing the issue of the humanitarian situation in
northern Uganda. It is not as alarming as it is
sometimes portrayed. The Ugandan Government is
providing security escorts for humanitarian convoys to
deliver relief, but it has also taken steps to decongest
the camps. Seven hundred internally displaced people
who are in the camps, are now being resettled. There
are arrangements to take them back home. We appeal
to the international community to assist in resettling
the people, because they need tools, such as hoes and
others, and seeds in order to resettle. That process is
under way.

I would just emphasize that the camps were
established only temporarily, as a protection measure.
We are conscious of the fact that conditions there are
not good and the camps should, therefore, be gradually
disbanded.

Lastly, there is the issue of the rebels who were
loyal to Koni - the fanatical rebels. I think that
faction is more or less coming to an end. With the
cooperation of the Sudan, those who remain within the
region and are terrorizing people are being dealt with.
Soon, we hope, the countries of the region will
cooperate with Uganda to execute the warrants of
arrest that were issued against the top leaders of that
ferocious group.

I want to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
address the Council.

