Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like at the outset to
thank the Chinese presidency for having convened this
important debate on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). My thanks go also to
Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH, for
her excellent briefing on the situation in Haiti.

It is my pleasure to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the key role played by the Group of Friends of
Haiti, which, effectively coordinated by Uruguay, has
been able to mobilize the international community in
supporting Haiti.

At a time when MINUSTAH is moving towards
its close, the Senegalese delegation would like to
pay the Special Representative and all Mission staff
well-deserved tribute for their work on behalf of the
Haitian people during some of the worst times in their
long history.

From 22 to 24 June, that is, two months after the
adoption of resolution 2350 (2017), which extended
for a further final period of six months MINUSTAH's
mandate and established the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), the Council
undertook, under the Bolivian presidency, a historic
visit to Haiti, its first to this country, which, I would
recall, is the first black republic and the first democracy
in the Americas hemisphere.

During said visit, the Council was able to see for
itself the remarkable progress made at the political level,
with the return to constitutional order following a very
successful transition, as reflected in the democratic
election and investiture of President Jovenel Moise,
after several years of institutional stagnation.

Today, galvanized by President Moise, the
Government of Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant has
set itself the lofty goal of revitalizing the key sectors
of agriculture, the environment, transport, security,
justice, energy, education and health, as well as carrying
out decentralization efforts, in order to meet the needs
of Haitians throughout the country.

All of these actions are complemented by the
adoption of an ambitious joint legislative reform
programme that includes 51 draft bills and is aimed at
improving the business environment, strengthening the
role and authority of the State and ensuring better land
management, with a view to rehabilitating the damaged
Haitian ecosystem.

During its aforementioned visit, the Council
witnessed the commendable efforts made by the
Haitian authorities to turn the economic and security
situation in the country around, and also was able to
take stock of the magnitude of the remaining challenges
stemming from the environmental, economic and
social vulnerability of the country, which is exposed on
an ongoing basis to the constant threat of drought and
flood. Thus the international community, in particular
the United Nations, must continue to support the Haitian
Government in its efforts to relaunch the economy and
improve the living conditions of its people.

We must bear in mind, therefore, that in Haiti
today 2.35 million people are living in a situation of
food insecurity. Nor must we lose sight of the fact that
cholera, although no longer as widespread as it once
was, remains a threat; that infrastructure is insufficient;
that the performance of judicial and administration of

justice institutions must be strengthened and supported;
and that residual insecurity remains a source ofconcern.

All of this goes a long way towards explaining
the tremendous hopes that the Haitian people have
pinned on MINUJUSTH, the new Mission, which
we firmly hope will, in accordance with its mandate,
help consolidate the rule of law through improving
accountability, respect for and the promotion of human
rights, the creation of a secure environment, and support
for justice and the operationalization of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) following the withdrawal of the
military component of MINUSTAH.
MINUJUSTH alone cannot do everything, thus
Haiti stands in greater need than ever of the support of
its development partners.

Accordingly, my delegation welcomed the visit
to Haiti by the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of
the Economic and Social Council which provided
the opportunity for examining ways to strengthen
the partnership between the Government and the
international community with a view to supporting
the country's economic recovery and development. In
supporting the Secretary-General's new approach to
confronting the cholera epidemic that has affected Haiti
for several years, my delegation believes that that should
be better addressed by the international community in
close collaboration not only with the Government, but
also with the victims in Haiti.

In that regard, it is worth recalling that the recent
call by Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
on Member States to contribute generously to financing
the Secretary General's new United Nations approach to
cholera in Haiti, the cost of which is estimated at $400,
but for which only $2.7 million have been received
to date.

As MINUSTAH is on the verge of completing its
withdrawal, the Senegalese delegation urgently calls
on the international community, beginning with the
United Nations system and international financial
institutions, as well as the Haitian Government, to join
efforts so as, on the one hand, to prevent any form of
security vacuum - because despite the outstanding
work carried out by the Haitian National Police, the
security and justice sectors remain vulnerable and
need to be strengthened - and, on the other hand,
help the country improve its resilience in the face of
frequent natural disasters and lay the foundations for
sustainable development.

We must succeed in the transition between
MINUSTAH and MINUJUSTH in close cooperation
with the United Nations country team.

