Mr. Diarra (Mali) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me to express my delegation's
satisfaction at your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council during this month of February.
Moreover, my delegation is grateful to Benin for
having initiated this debate on the topic of small arms,
which is so very important to our African continent.

It has been a little more than a year since the
Security Council considered and adopted a statement
on this issue. The report submitted by the Secretary-
General on 7 February 2005 (S/2005/69) evaluates the
progress achieved since 2004 in the implementation of
the 12 recommendations contained in his previous
report of 20 September 2002.

I should like here to thank Under-Secretary-
General Abe for his presentation of the report.

Regarding recommendation 1 - on the development
of an international instrument to enable States to identify
and trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small
arms and light weapons - the second session of the
Open-ended Working Group, under the chairmanship
of Ambassador Anton Thalmann of Switzerland, made
progress in discussions on the standards that should
apply in this area in future. We look forward with
interest to the conclusion next June of the Working
Group's efforts.

We welcome also the contribution made by the
United States and Canada to the strengthening of the
Interpol Weapons and Explosives Tracking System,
and we call on other countries to act along those lines.
That system could provide expertise in the framework
of the legal instrument that is in the process of being
negotiated. My delegation supports the establishment
of a mechanism to coordinate assistance to Member
States in implementing the United Nations Programme
of Action of July 2001.

Strengthened interaction between the General
Assembly and the Security Council in combating the
proliferation of small arms could be a way of ensuring
better cooperation aimed at the adoption of a long-term
strategy.

The Secretary-General has proposed the creation
of a small committee to study ways and means of
achieving such cooperation. That practical proposal
could be taken into consideration.

The illicit exploitation of natural and other
resources in conflict areas exacerbates crisis situations
by increasing the demand for arms and intensifying
their illicit proliferation. My delegation believes,
however, that in post-conflict situations - that is, at a
time when weakened States need resources to
consolidate their institutions and programmes -
embargoes on natural resources should be relaxed, if
not lifted, in order to enable the country to make use of
them.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes have made noteworthy progress, as
noted in the report of the Secretary-General. My
delegation welcomes the work done since 2004 by the
inter-institutional working group on DDR to elaborate
policies, guidelines and procedures for the
establishment of such programmes.

My delegation believes that the Security Council
should give due consideration to the reintegration
aspect and ensure that it is covered by the budget for
peacekeeping operations. That involves the
reintegration of former combatants in their
communities and taking account of the needs of their
dependents.

Similarly, my delegation believes that regional
management of DDR programmes make it possible to
prevent transborder movements of combatants among
neighbouring countries in areas of conflict.

The adoption of legislative and other measures,
including end-user certificates, is part of the
international and regional cooperation framework that
includes the responsibility of supplier and user States
to prevent the diversion of such weapons for illegal
purposes. In that connection, the ECOWAS subregion
is working closely with the United Nations Office for
West Africa in order to agree measures to be taken to
implement the Secretary-General's recommendations.
A programme of work for the two institutions covering
the period 2004-2005 has been agreed. That
cooperation will benefit the new ECOWAS Small Arms
Project (ECOSAP) established by ECOWAS in October
2004 to replace the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development (PCASED).

In order to limit the illicit proliferation of small
arms and ammunition, we must strictly implement all
the Security Council embargoes on weapons and
related materiel. The establishment of monitoring
bodies to support the work of sanctions committees is
an operational measure that should be supported by
strengthening the technical capacity of countries
bordering areas of conflict.

The growing participation by States in the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms and the United
Nations standardized instrument for reporting military

expenditures is a positive trend that should be
encouraged.

At the national level, the contribution of the
Republic of Mali to the fight against the illicit
proliferation of small arms and related materiel
includes the strengthening of our law on arms and
munitions in order to include the international
commitments our country has assumed.

On the bilateral level, Mali has established a
border commission with each of its seven bordering
countries to establish a framework for cooperation to
combat arms trafficking.

At the subregional level, the ECOWAS
Moratorium on Small Arms, which was renewed in
2004, should be made a legally binding instrument.
The recent creation of a Small Arms Unit in its
Executive Secretariat and the technical support
provided by PCASED also strengthen cooperation
between the States of West Africa. Our subregion is
also benefiting from the valuable support of the United
Nations Office for West Africa. My delegation calls for
the strengthening of that cooperation.

On the continental level, my country reaffirms its
commitment to the Bamako Declaration of December
2002 and to the September 2002 Algiers Plan of
Action.

Finally, at the international level, the conduct of
my country is determined by the July 2001 United
Nations Programme of Action, the negotiations under
way to agree an international instrument to identify and
trace illicit small arms and the resolutions and
statements of the Security Council on the subject.

