Mr. Choi (Republic of Korea): Let me begin, Madam
President, by extending to you my delegation's sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. We are
confident that under your presidency the Council is in good
hands. I also wish to thank your predecessor, Ambassador
Sir John Weston, for his efficient and successful conduct of
the business of the Council during January.

We appreciate the President's initiative to hold this
open orientation debate on the situation in Angola. We are
sure that this kind of debate on key issues of common
interest to the Member States will contribute to enhancing
the transparency of the Security Council's work. We also
highly commend the Secretary-General's comprehensive
report on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III).

We pay tribute to UNAVEM. III for the indispensable
role it has played in consolidating peace and stability in
Angola since its inception one year ago. My delegation
expresses its appreciation to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, the Organization of African Unity,
the Joint Commission and the three observer States for their
efforts to assist and facilitate the process of national
reconciliation in Angola.

The Republic of Korea is strongly committed to the
achievement of lasting peace, reconciliation and
reconstruction in Angola. This commitment is evidenced by
the participation in UNAVEM. III of an army engineering
unit from my country.

When this Council presided over the inauguration of
UNAVEM. III one year ago, it was unanimously welcomed.
This initial jubilation at the long-awaited conclusion of the
Lusaka Protocol gave way to a more sober mood as the
Angolan parties entered the stage of grappling with the
practical difficulties of implementing the Protocol. The
frequent breaches of the cease-fire, delays in the quartering
and disarming of UNITA troops and many other problems
referred to in the Secretary-General's report have resulted
in a serious setback for the peace process. We express our
disappointment at the lack of progress in the
implementation of the Protocol.

None the less, in the positive new developments
referred to in paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Secretary-
General's report we see chances of moving the peace
process forward. The agreement between the Angolan
Government and UNITA on 21 December last to resume
fulfilling their respective obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol and the subsequent agreement on a new
timetable for implementation have put the stalled peace
process back on the right track.

The steps taken by the Angolan Government in the
last few weeks to implement its obligations under the
Protocol are encouraging. We welcome in particular the
start of the quartering of the rapid-reaction police and the
release of all registered prisoners by the Government of
Angola. We encourage the Angolan Government to
continue its efforts in good faith towards implementation
of its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol, and we urge
UNITA to reciprocate by fulfilling its share of obligations
under the Lusaka Protocol.

The peace process in Angola now stands at a very
critical juncture. Its future hinges on the successful
completion of the most immediate task, that of quartering
UNITA troops. In this regard, we note Mr. Savimbi's
commitment to complete the quartering of 16,500 UNITA
troops by 8 February. The fulfilment of Mr. Savimbi's
pledge will be the test of UNITA's sincerity and political
will to abide by the Lusaka Protocol. We sincerely hope
that Mr. Savimbi's commitment will become a reality
within the next few days. We also call upon UNITA to
release all remaining prisoners without further delay.

We believe that the deep-seated mutual distrust
between the two parties lies at the heart of the problems
impeding the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. In
this context, we urge President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi to engage in serious political dialogue with a
View to achieving national reconciliation based on mutual
confidence, respect and tolerance.

It must not be forgotten that the ultimate
responsibility for bringing lasting peace and stability to
Angola rests with the Angolan parties themselves. The
international community's assistance can succeed only
when the Angolan parties have the political will to help
themselves.

In conclusion, we call upon the Government of
Angola and UNITA to cooperate fully with UNAVEM. III
for the successful implementation of its mandate.

 

