Mr. Thoresson (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf ofthe Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

I would like to start by thanking the Venezuelan
presidency for having organized a debate on a topic that
remains as relevant today as it was when the Charter
was adopted, more than 70 years ago.

Not since the Second World War have we faced such
great challenges as we do today, with unprecedented
numbers of people fleeing violent conflict, massive
human rights violations and emergencies. Violent
extremism is threatening the social fabric of States
and societies, and climate change is the greatest threat
to many States. No State can tackle these challenges
alone. It is our shared responsibility, and it requires
global, regional and local solutions.

More than 70 years after its adoption, the Charter
of the United Nations stands as an enduring sign of
multilateral cooperation based on respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. We continue to
firmly believe in and support the United Nations in
leading our global collaborative efforts. We believe
that the purposes and principles of the Organization,
as embodied in the Charter, are as important as ever
before. They constitute the bedrock of the rules-
based world order on which our collective peace and
prosperity rest.

In the area of peace and security, we need to do
far more and far better to live up to the standards set
by the Charter. The Charter calls on States to, first
and foremost, strive to achieve peaceful settlements of
disputes through negotiation, mediation, and judicial
means. History has shown clearly that this is not
only the right thing to do, but the most efficient way
to prevent conflicts. That insight echoes last year's
important reviews relating to United Nations peace
and security efforts. They put the primacy of politics
and the importance of conflict prevention front and
centre. We must seize this opportunity to implement
the proposed reforms.

Lasting peace is not achieved through military
engagement, but through political solutions and
responsible governance based on the rule of law. Early
warning and the prevention of armed conflict are
among our greatest responsibilities and need much
more investment from all of us at all levels. To lay the
foundations of a sustainable peace, we must deliver
on the promise to create a culture of prevention. This
includes ensuring respect for human rights, which
is essential to prevent conflict. For the Council, that
means taking a broad view of peace, security and
development, and putting the Charter above national
interests.

As forcefully stated by the Secretary-General
in his report for the upcoming World Humanitarian
Summit, we must uphold the norms that safeguard
humankind. The Secretary-General reminds us that the
inherent dignity and worth of the human person are the
bedrock of the Charter of the United Nations. Attacks
against civilians, massive and indiscriminate bombing
and shelling of populated areas, and the blocking of
humanitarian assistance are all demonstrations of
flagrant disrespect of international humanitarian law.
The perpetrators of the grave crimes we see committed
every day must be held accountable for their actions in
order to bring justice to the victims and to deter future
crimes.

The founders of the United Nations showed
remarkable foresight in stressing the role of regional
organizations in the prevention and resolution of
conflict. Indeed, the Charter encourages the peaceful
settlement of disputes by regional arrangements before
referring them to the Security Council. These vital and
mutually reinforcing partnerships now need to be made
even stronger and more strategic. The United Nations
needs to not only work alongside regional organizations
in different theatres, but also enable them to share the
burden in accordance with the Charter.

Providing support and resources to the African
Union and to African subregional organizations for
operations authorized by the Security Council is of
particular importance in that regard. The Nordic
countries' support to African solutions to African
problems is not only a political commitment, but a
practical one, demonstrated by the many strands of
cooperation that exists among us in the field of peace
and security. Let me stress that this is a two-way
street. African States are often the first to deploy their
peacekeepers to theatres where peace is elusive. This
needs to be acknowledged, and lessons need to be
learned from the African experience.

Many speakers today have referred to the opening
words of the Charter: "We the peoples of the United
Nations". Our pursuit of peace and development is for
the benefit not only of States and communities, but,
most fundamentally, for individual men, women and
children. A world based on the rule of law and respect
for human rights; a world where every individual has a
right to economic, social and cultural development, and
where social progress and better standards of living are
for everyone is a world that is safer for everyone. Allow
me to end with the words of Dag Hammarskjold:

"The principles of the Charter of the United
Nations are, by far, greater than the Organization
in which they are embodied, and the aims which
they are to safeguard are holier than the policies of
any single nation or people."

