Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the member
States of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), namely, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan.

We thank the Slovak presidency for holding an
open meeting of the Security Council on the
implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006). We are confident that this debate will help to
improve the exchange of information among countries
and international organizations and give a new impetus
to cooperation aimed at facilitating the implementation
of the Council's resolutions. The Council's openness
and responsiveness to the opinions of Member States
and international organizations will help to make the
implementation of Council measures related to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction more
effective and results-oriented.

The success of collective efforts is directly linked
to the effectiveness of action taken at the national
level. Non-proliferation measures, such as those aimed
at the physical protection of sensitive materials and at
border controls, are regarded by States as important
means to ensure their own security.

We consider international export control regimes
to be useful. The strategy of further improving national
export control systems is elaborated within the
framework of such regimes. It is clear that much
remains to be done to make these mechanisms clear
and transparent for the international community as a
whole. Better understanding of how and why certain
goods get onto control lists could help some countries
address their concerns about the discriminatory trade
barriers allegedly created by these regimes.

Regional organizations that operate on the basis
of common interests, trust and cooperation can play a
positive role in eliminating concerns about the
allegedly discriminatory nature of measures used by
the international regimes. Regional organizations can
offer practical assistance to States in elaborating
effective national non-proliferation policies, including
with regard to the implementation of Security Council
resolutions. Such cooperation could take place in the
form of information exchange; consulting; the
elaboration of general principles for non-proliferation
policies; and joint practical actions, from the
elaboration of legal norms to the monitoring of their
implementation.

A significant number of regional events,
including those held in collaboration with the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), attests to States' interest in cooperation
within regional organizations on non-proliferation
issues. One such event, held recently in the CSTO area,
was a regional workshop for the States of Central Asia
and the Caucasus on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). It was held by the Monterey Institute of
International Studies and the Government of
Kazakhstan in Almaty in October 2006.

The member States of CSTO cooperate on non-
proliferation issues in various formats: bilaterally,
within economic integration unions and with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention and
other entities. Four Central Asian CSTO member States
are parties to the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone in Central Asia. The Treaty is an important
practical contribution to the strengthening of the
nuclear non-proliferation regime. It also contributes to
the implementation of the safeguards regime of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and to the
control of nuclear materials. The membership of States
in various regional and international organizations is an
important element promoting effective coordination
and a results-oriented approach in their non-
proliferation efforts.

Economic integration unions play an important
role in the harmonization of export control legislation.
Six out of seven CSTO members are engaged in such
efforts within the framework of the Eurasian Economic
Community. Standardized export control lists have
already been drawn up, and the process of making
national legislation uniform is currently under way.

The CSTO defines its role in the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the
region taking into account the military and political
nature of its activities. The principal areas of practical
cooperation approved within the CSTO include the
establishment of a mechanism for regular
consultations, joint assessment of the degree of threat
of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
assessing the vulnerability of sea, air and land
shipments, and networking to ensure effective
cooperation among the relevant agencies of CSTO
member States.

CSTO member States believe that new forms of
cooperation to ensure the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction should complement and strengthen
the methods of work already utilized by the
international community within the framework of
current non-proliferation regimes and international
institutions. Those new forms of cooperation should
not be an obstacle to international cooperation in the
economic, trade, scientific and technical areas,
conducted in accordance with the norms of
international law.

CSTO member States are principled and
committed advocates of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials. Countering new threats and
challenges to national, regional and international
security, including international terrorism, will
continue to be a significant component of the work of
the CSTO.

