I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their interesting briefings. I will focus on three issues today: the joint declaration and the need for political progress, the follow-up to the recent prisoner exchange, and the catastrophic impact of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen on children. Nearly a month has passed since our last meeting on Yemen (see S/PV.8770) and yet virtually no progress has been made. Unlike last month, there has been no further escalation of violence, but fighting continues, in Ma'rib, Al-Hudaydah and other places. The Yemeni people continue to suffer every day. Last week was the first anniversary of the signing of the Riyadh agreement. Its implementation remains far too limited. During his briefing in October, Special Envoy Griffiths seemed to show some optimism about a possible meeting of the parties to finally agree on the joint declaration. However, for this to happen, all parties must show a genuine willingness to sit around the table and talk. Today, this still does not seem to be the case. I must repeat myself: only dialogue can end the war and resolve the deep differences in Yemen. We urge all actors to re-engage in peace talks under the auspices of the United Nations. It goes without saying that Special Envoy Griffiths continues to have our full support. Belgium is pleased to note that the agreement on the exchange of a large group of prisoners has been fully implemented. We once again commend the International Committee of the Red Cross for the crucial role it played in negotiating and implementing the agreement. This prisoner exchange is one tool for building confidence between the parties. We clearly need more of these tools. We hope that other similar agreements will be made possible in the near future. In my third and final point, I would like to address, once again, the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. While the conflict continues, the humanitarian situation is worsening. Years of conflict, economic decline and the coronavirus disease have made Yemen one of the worst places to live on this planet. This is especially true for children. A recent joint analysis by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, UNICEF and the World Food Programme revealed that in some areas of Yemen, more than one in five children suffer from acute malnutrition. It is no coincidence that one of the highest figures was found in the Al-Hudaydah lowlands: 27 per cent of children there have an acute need for basic food. Children suffer from acute malnutrition, as do mothers - a quarter of a million pregnant and lactating women in Yemen need treatment for malnutrition. According to Lise Grande, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for Yemen, we are approaching an irreversible situation and risk losing an entire generation of young children. Additional funds are needed to address this humanitarian disaster. In this respect, the European Union and its member States are assuming their responsibility. Tomorrow, the European Commission's Humanitarian Aid Office will convene with Sweden a second meeting of humanitarian and development actors on the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Following a first meeting in February, it will again address the issue of funding and humanitarian access. I am equally proud to inform the Council that Belgium has contributed more than $30 million this year to the core funding of the Nobel Peace Prize-winning World Food Programme. But what is most needed is to urgently put an end to the fighting and the war. The parties to the conflict and those who support them bear a grave responsibility. We urge them to lay down their arms and finally put the people of Yemen ahead of their own narrow interests.
