The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

In December 2014, under Australia's critically
important leadership, the Security Council held its first
meeting on the situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea (see S/PV.7353), focused on the
widespread and systematic human rights violations
documented in the comprehensive report of the United
Nations Human Rights Council's commission of
inquiry (A/HRC/25/63). Accordingly, the situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is now an
item on the Security Council's seizure list.

Given that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea continues to carry out widespread and systematic
human rights violations, inflicting immeasurable
suffering on the North Korean people, and given the
ongoing threat posed by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to international peace and security,
the reasons for the Council to meet on the situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea persist.
For as long as the situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea remains unchanged, the Council
should continue to hear briefings about and engage in
debates on the human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, in this Chamber. We
therefore support the adoption of the agenda.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to draw the attention of members to document
S/2015/931, which contains a letter dated 3 December
2015 from the representatives of Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America addressed to the President of
the Security Council.

In view of the request contained in document
S/2015/93l and the comments made by the representative
of China, and the comments I made in my national
capacity, I propose to put the provisional agenda to the
vote. Accordingly, I shall put it to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhana's.

In favour:
Chile, France, Jordan, Lithuania, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

Against:
Angola, China, Russian Federation, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)

Abstaining:
Chad, Nigeria

The President: There were 9 votes in favour, 4
votes against and 2 abstentions. The provisional agenda
has been adopted.

The situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea

Letter dated 3 December 2015 from the
representatives of Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2015/931)


The President: Since the provisional agenda was
adopted, I shall suspend this meeting and we shall
resume, after a brief recess, to continue consideration
of the agenda item.
The meeting was suspended at 2.45 pm. and
resumed at 2.50 pm.


The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I give the floor to Mr. Feltman,


