Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, thank you for welcoming some of us
back. Allow me to congratulate you belatedly on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of August. Let me also thank the delegation of Greece
for a very successful presidency last month.

I join previous speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2005/525). My Government

pays tribute to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the donor
countries for their tireless efforts in bringing
Afghanistan back within the fold of the international
community.

There is some cause to rejoice as the political
process mapped by the Bonn Agreement proceeds. The
parliamentary elections planned for 18 September offer
a glimmer of hope that this process will continue to
give shape to an Afghan political life founded on a
constitutionally acceptable and representative
Government. However, there is growing concern about
whether the elections will create a strong and stable
parliament, as some political parties are being
sidelined. We therefore urge the establishment of a
mechanism that will guarantee participation by all
political parties and all sectors of society, including
women.

Another aspect of major concern is the increase
in the cultivation and the trade of narcotics, which
funds crime, corruption and illegal armed activities. As
the Secretary-General's report indicates, Afghanistan
remains the largest producer of opium, providing
nearly 87 per cent of the world's total supply. The
magnitude of the problem calls for serious and
committed regional and international engagement to
combat the production of opium in Afghanistan. We
commend the efforts of the Afghan Government, the
United Nations, the United Kingdom as the lead nation
and all other countries that are assisting Afghanistan in
reducing the cultivation of illegal drugs. Those efforts
have resulted in a slight reduction compared to last
year. Nevertheless, we consider that replacing opium
production with that of other crops is only a half
measure. Those efforts must be accompanied by
intensifying the world campaign against the use of
illicit drugs. For without a reduction in the demand for
such drugs, the illegal supply will continue.

We are pleased to note the renewal of an
agreement between Afghanistan and neighbouring
countries that guarantees the voluntary return of
Afghan refugees from those countries with the
assistance of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. It is also a significant step
that the returnees are being registered as voters for the
September parliamentary elections.
We are also encouraged by the positive effect of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
maintaining peace in Kabul, and we support the call for
the expansion of ISAF beyond Kabul to other urban
areas. The deteriorating security situation in some parts
of the country needs to be addressed in a more creative
and robust manner. We wish to express our
condolences to Spain and to the relatives of the
personnel who lost their lives in Afghanistan recently
in a helicopter incident.

The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, institution-building and
reform, the legal and regulatory framework and the
economic reconstruction of Afghanistan are still
daunting challenges for the Afghan authorities, for
UNAMA and for all the countries assisting Afghanistan
in its slow and painful transition from being a pariah
State to being an internationally respectable legal State.
We salute the progress achieved so far, but the work
that remains to bring Afghanistan to a state of peace
and normalcy is nowhere near completion. It is
therefore imperative that the funding gap for the
coming elections, for building democratic governance
institutions, for reintegration and for reconstruction be
filled to ensure the uninterrupted continuation of
peacebuilding programmes.

The Tanzania delegation calls upon the
Government and the people of Afghanistan to work
together for peace, to conduct fair and inclusive
parliamentary elections, to engage in confidence-
building measures and to cooperate with the United
Nations and the development partners that are assisting
them in building democratic institutions and in the
reconstruction of the Afghan economy. We call on the
illegal armed groups to desist from further violence
and from disrupting the political process and instead to
join in the restoration of peace and security and in their
country's development efforts after two decades of
devastating violent conflict.

In conclusion, Mr. President, we welcome and
support the draft presidential statement prepared by
your delegation on the situation in Afghanistan.

