Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish you every
success. We thank you in particular for convening this
meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. I would also like to thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and the Under Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs for their valuable and important briefings at the
beginning of this meeting.

Palestine has been occupied for half a century and
the Palestinian people have been denied their right
to self-determination. For half a century, the United
Nations has been unable to assume its responsibility
according to the Charter of the United Nations. For
half a century - despite numerous international
conferences, resolutions and advisory opinions 4 the
Palestinian people have been languishing under the
yoke of the Israeli occupation and suffering from the
failure of the international community.

The international community has agreed on
the illegality of the Israeli occupation and has been
condemning Israel's aggressive practices against the
Palestinian people, in violation of international law,
including its settlement activities, its confiscation of
Palestinian land and its use of excessive force against
the Palestinian people. Israel continues to detain
thousands of Palestinians, including women and
children. Nevertheless, the international community
has not taken any effective measures to put an end to
the Israeli occupation and to hold Israel responsible for
the occupation and for its repeated crimes against the
Palestinian people.

My country therefore once again welcomes
the French initiative to hold an international peace
conference according to the terms of reference of the
peace process and, most important, the Arab Peace
Initiative, which my country put forward 14 years ago,
and based on relevant Security Council resolutions.
Those efforts aim to develop an effective international
mechanism that would put an end to the Israeli
occupation of the State of Palestine according to a set
timetable.

We hope that in 2017 the world will raise its voice
and say "Enough occupation." For over half a century,
we have witnessed a lack of political will. We have
witnessed stalling and denial of the rights of Palestinian
people. During this half a century, we have seen
attempts to stoke violence, terrorism and instability in
the region and across the world. We call on the Security
Council to adopt a measure that is up to the challenge.
It should respond to this lack of accountability and
it should take into consideration the gravity of those
violations. It should courageously grant the Palestinian
people its right to self-determination and its right to
establish its independent State along the 4 June 1967
borders. It should ensure the liberation of all Arab
territories, including the occupied Arab Syrian Golan
and Jerusalem.

In that regard, I would like to welcome the latest
resolution adopted by UNESCO, which admits that
Jerusalem is an Islamic heritage. That is an important
step towards fulfilling the international community's
obligations to the Palestinian people.

I would like to refer you, Mr. President, to the
statement issued on 4 October by the League of Arab
States regarding the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Aleppo. According to the statement, the League is
greatly concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Aleppo and other Syrian cities. The
statement condemns, in the strongest possible terms,
the heinous crimes committed by the Syrian regime
against unarmed and defenceless civilians, and the
continued systematic destruction of all infrastructure.
The statement reaffirms that those practices run counter
to all religious values. They are a flagrant violation of
international conventions on the protection of civilians.
They are a violation of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Those practices
once again prove that the regime is disregarding its
most basic obligations, namely, to protect its citizens
and to protect civilians.

The statement also condemns the heinous terrorist
crimes committed by terrorist organizations, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
the Al-Qaida-affiliated Al-Nusra Front, across Syria.
Crimes committed by the Syrian regime and by these
terrorist groups amount to war crimes, and their
perpetrators should be brought to justice. The statement
also holds the Security Council - most important the
permanent members - and those interested in, and
concerned about, the Syrian crisis accountable and fully
responsible for the continued humanitarian tragedy
occurring before the very eyes of the international
community. The statement also calls on the Security
Council to promptly take effective measures in order
to implement resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2269 (2016)
in order to enforce the ceasefire and the cessation
of hostilities and implement mechanisms to ensure
humanitarian deliveries to besieged civilians.

My country welcomes the recent humanitarian
pause and the promises to facilitate humanitarian
deliveries. We are convinced that this is an initial step.
We hope that it will lead to an air ban and a no-fly
zone being imposed on the regime and its allies. The
members of the Iranian forces should withdraw from
Syria, together with the Hizbullah militias and the
militias of other criminal groups. They should be held
responsible for their crimes in Syria. Sieges should be
lifted in all cities in Syria and humanitarian deliveries
should be ensured without restrictions. All those steps
would pave the way towards political negotiations
based on a political transition according to the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution
2254 (2015) and in line with the views of the High
Negotiating Committee, in a manner that would meet
the aspirations of the Syrian people.

My country reiterates its support for the efforts of
the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in
line with his mandate to ensure a political transition.
We are committed to providing unconditional support
to the Syrian people, while respecting its decisions in
any way possible.

We support the friendly country of Iraq in its
war against terrorist organizations. We support its
operations to liberate Mosul. My country has been at
the forefront with other countries to develop and build
an international coalition against ISIL. However, we
are greatly concerned by the participation of sectarian
militias and armed groups in the liberation of Mosul.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has long warned against
a return to vengeful criminal acts based on sectarian
hatred, including the torturing of civilians and summary
executions. We call on the international community and
the Security Council to ensure an end to those practices
and guarantee the protection of civilians.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia welcomes the
initiative by Yemeni President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour to extend an invitation to the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and to halt
military actions for 72 hours. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia supports a permanent ceasefire based on the
full implementation of resolution 2216 (2015) and in a
manner that ensures a return to negotiations based on
clear terms of reference and on the road map presented
by the Special Envoy. There is a need to complete the
political transition process as per the Agreement on the
Implementation Mechanism for the Transition Process
in Yemen, in accordance with the initiative of the Gulf
Cooperation Council.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will spare no effort
to protect its national security and its borders against
the repeated violations committed by Houthi militias
and their allies, which have launched rockets against
the Kingdom, including some with a range of more
than 600 kilometres. We are surprised that the Security
Council has remained silent in the face of Iran's flagrant
violation of Council resolutions. Iran continues to
smuggle weapons and rockets to the Houthis, in clear
violation of the relevant Council resolutions. While
the representative of Iran has shed crocodile tears
over the victims of Yemen, those tears will fool no
one, especially the citizens of Yemen. Yemenis are
aware of the Houthis' intention to take control of the
Government. They know that the actions of the Houthis
are at the heart of their suffering.

Iranians have attempted to link events in Yemen
to what has been committed in Syria, including the
massacres. They have chosen to forget that the Syrian
regime deliberately targets hospitals and civilian
structures, thereby seeking to eliminate all civilians in
Aleppo. Those acts of the Syrian regime are in stark
contrast to those of the international coalition, which
seeks to ensure the safety of Yemenis.

We call on the Security Council to hold an urgent
debate and to discuss the letter we addressed to the
Council on 14 September regarding Iranian violations,
including the smuggling of weapons to the Houthis.
The Council should impose sanctions on Iran and on
all those who violate Council resolutions so that the
resolutions do not become dead letters and to ensure
the Council's credibility across the globe.

