I would like to thank the Niger for organizing this debate during its presidency of the Security Council, and I thank the briefers for their briefings. The massive ongoing flooding in the Niger is a dramatic demonstration that climate change is intensely affecting the Sahel. These floods have now caused more deaths in the country than the coronavirus disease. Some may think that the Security Council is not the best forum for a meeting on climate change, but Belgium believes it is appropriate that we meet to discuss the consequences of climate change on conflict and humanitarian needs. The Lake Chad region is a symbolic case - a terrible but convincing example - where the interaction of climate change and armed conflict is undermining sustainable development, creating a long-term humanitarian catastrophe and nurturing extremist movements that capitalize on weak governance. The links between climate and conflict are already today an appalling reality for these populations. Vulnerability to climate change is not always greatest where environmental degradation and climate change are having the most severe effects. This vulnerability to climate change is mostly defined by the capacity of communities to adapt and prevent climate risks. Where this capacity is low, as in situations of fragility, people are most vulnerable. Belgium therefore calls for a deeper analysis of the humanitarian challenges brought by the interaction between the environment and conflict as well as reflection on the ways humanitarian and other responses can strengthen resilience. We hope a virtual ministerial meeting organized jointly with the Niger, the European Union and the International Committee of the Red Cross and scheduled for 25 September can start the reflection on these overlapping vulnerabilities. Let me share with the Council some of our observations in advance of our meeting on 25 September. First, many conflict and post-conflict countries receive very little climate funding, whereas they might be the countries that need that funding the most. In addition, overall, a large part of official development assistance in fragile countries, as well as half of the aid to extremely fragile countries, is humanitarian in nature. As such, it acts as a sort of fire extinguisher, but it does not contribute to the prevention of conflict. It is extremely challenging to align aid to the multidimensional and long- term needs of fragile contexts, of which climate change is a part. Trying to address this challenge, the Belgium has launched a four-year humanitarian project aimed at youth resilience in the Lake Chad region. The programme is being executed by Plan International and our partners at Oxfam. Experience teaches that aid efforts in fragile contexts need to be adaptable, flexible and innovative, and it must be executed in close coordination with local authorities and the academic world's understanding of how climate change affects specific situations. After all, it does not really help to teach young men and women how to fish when there is no lake left to fish in or when access to the lake has been rendered impossible by security measures. Secondly, the Security Council needs to act. During our current term on the Council, one of Belgium's priorities has been to mainstream climate-related security risks into relevant Council mandates. We are pleased with the progress made so far, and we vow to continue pressing on this issue whenever a mandate comes up for renewal. But let us also look at the broader picture. A climate and security angle should be incorporated throughout the entire cycle of conflict, from prevention initiatives through mediation strategies to peacebuilding plans and peace talks. This includes engaging in negotiations on the sharing of natural resources, anticipating future climate risks and making the local population more resilient. For all of this to be successful, it is crucial that climate-risk assessments be made available, including to the Security Council, and incorporated in more general conflict and fragility assessments. I cannot but underscore the role of the Climate Security Mechanism and the wider academic world in this matter. Lastly, essential civilian infrastructure is regularly targeted during conflicts, which destroys the livelihoods of communities and increases their exposure to climate change. Allow me to note that international humanitarian law does indeed reach protecting the natural environment.
