Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and the Slovakian delegation on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of February as well as for presiding over this
debate on Timor-Leste.

We are pleased to have Prime-Minister Jose
Ramos-Horta here in the Council. I wish to thank him
for his very informative statement on the situation in
Timor-Leste. My delegation is also grateful to Mr. Atul
Khare for his presentation and for the dedicated efforts
he and his United Nations team, under his leadership,
have made towards the success of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) in such a
short time span.

The recent report of the Secretary-General on
Timor-Leste is a source of both hope and concern. On
one hand, it describes a series of relevant and
innovative reconciliation initiatives, which, together
with the reduction in violent episodes, unveils possible
scenarios of stability and sustainable development. On
the other hand, the report warns that the real causes of
the conflict have not been dissipated - far from it -
as the public security situation remains dangerously
volatile.

For Brazil, Timor-Leste constitutes an important
issue on the agenda of the Security Council. Our
commitment to our sister Portuguese-speaking nation
has been unwavering. This is illustrated by cooperation
projects we are developing with the Timorese
authorities in key sectors, such as defence, education
and justice. We would do more were it not for our
budgetary constraints. Also, the Brazilian contribution
to UNMIT, as to all previous missions, testifies to our
engagement in assisting Timor-Leste to achieve
political stability and a sustainable path to
development, together with democracy, justice and
good governance.

The multidimensional nature of UNMIT's
mandate augurs well for the country. The Timorese
situation requires a mission that is able to perform the
tasks of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well as
fostering development. As my delegation has stated on
many occasions, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
should not be seen as successive steps, but rather as
basic pillars of the same endeavour.

Brazil is pleased with the recent reconciliation
initiatives carried out in the country. We believe that
the Timorese people will find a lasting and sustainable
solution to their problems that can ensure the
sovereignty of the State and the right to the social and
economic development of its people.

Nevertheless, all must be aware that national
reconciliation is an arduous and slow process that will
require strong and continuous support from the
international community in the coming years. In this
process, the restructuring of the security and defence
sectors and the strengthening of the justice system
remain both urgent and indispensable.

In that regard, Brazil pledges to continue its
support for the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) programme for the consolidation
of a justice system as defined by the Constitution: a
civil-law matrix that employs both official languages,
Tetun and Portuguese.

The task of rebuilding the national police, which
is being carried out by the United Nations police,
deserves careful attention. We must avoid any
recurrence of the mistakes that allowed the
disintegration of the police force in the wake of the
turmoil of last April and May. The process of screening
police personnel must be closely monitored, and the
ensuing training at the police academy must be
rigorous and professional.

In that respect, the Brazilian delegation endorses
the request of the Secretary-General for the
deployment of an additional formed police unit.

However, we are concerned at the limited number
of military liaison officers. There are only 33 officers
to liaise on security issues with the international
security forces and the UNMIT police - including
during the electoral period - and to provide the much-
needed capacity to set in motion the Trilateral
Coordination Forum and the military technical
arrangement.

Brazil would like to acknowledge with
satisfaction the conclusion of the trilateral agreement
between the United Nations, the Timorese Government
and the international security forces, as well as the
agreement between the United Nations and Australia.
Those are certainly further steps towards ensuring
stability in the country.

Nonetheless, we continue to believe that the
original option of a small military contingent under
United Nations command and control would be the
most suitable solution, as suggested in paragraph 117
of document S/2006/628.

We hope that all interested stakeholders will
stand in support of another vital institution of the
Timorese State - the armed forces - in a way that
will prevent duplication of functions and ensure close
and productive cooperation. Consistent, professional
training is required, and UNMIT could play an
important role in coordinating such a task.

We welcome the actions led by various
institutions of the Timorese State with a view to
investigating and bringing to justice all those
responsible for the criminal acts perpetrated in April
and May 2006. Brazil's stance is to support the
decision of the Timorese institutions to apply the law
without impunity.
General elections are in the offing. All parties
concerned must strive for free, fair and transparent
elections. Precautions must be taken to ensure the
safety and security of the Timorese voters and the
personnel involved in the process. The international
community should support the elections within the
boundaries and institutions established by the
Government. Brazil is willing to shoulder its share.

In paragraph 57 of his report (S/2007/50), the
Secretary-General correctly stresses that "the
underlying causes of the crisis can be fully addressed
in the longer term". Structural poverty and associated
deprivations, including urban unemployment, must be
tackled with long-term investments in infrastructure
and capacity-building. Investments could bear fruit if it
can be ensured that the revenues stemming from oil
and gas resources are put to good use, in accordance
with the needs and development priorities of the
Timorese people.

The Brazilian delegation encourages the adoption
of the "compact" between Timor-Leste and the
international community for coordinating Government,
United Nations and other multilateral and bilateral
contributors to priority programmes, as set out in
resolution 1704 (2006).

Brazil believes that the presence of the United
Nations in Timor-Leste is essential to address the
central challenges of the present crisis in its political,
institutional and security dimensions.

The international community should pay heed to
the social, political and economic reintegration of
displaced people. Endowing those Timorese with the
necessary means to regain their normal lives is an
essential part of ensuring Timor-Leste's future stability.

In view of the continued need of Timor-Leste to
count on the cooperation of the international
community, in particular the United Nations system, at
this early stage of its nation-building process, Brazil
strongly supports the proposals of the Secretary-
General to extend the mandate of UNMIT for 12
months and to reinforce it during the electoral period.

National reconciliation, humanitarian assistance,
the rule of law and the development of human
resources are key priorities for Timor-Leste as it paves
the way towards greater stability, sovereignty,
sustainable development and democracy.

