El Salvador aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27), of which it is a member. My country emphasizes its commitment to the development, implementation and fulfilment of the women and peace and security agenda, while reaffirming its conviction that women, in all their diversity, are active agents of peace and development, as well as protagonists in the prevention of conflict and in the search for effective and efficient responses to current and future challenges. This year, which marks not only the twentieth anniversary since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), but also the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, a document that focuses on women and armed conflict and recognizes the link between peace and the advancement of women, who are a vital force for community leadership, conflict resolution and the promotion of lasting peace at all levels. El Salvador recognizes the progress made in the implementation of both instruments and the importance of urgently addressing the remaining challenges, particularly in such a complex situation. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has highlighted the importance of fulfilling the commitments set out in resolution 1325 (2000). In addition to its devastating impact on health, the crisis, which has exposed existing inequalities and vulnerabilities, is having profound social, economic and political consequences, with significant challenges to peace and security, as well as the possibility of triggering or intensifying violence, exacerbating gender inequality and reversing the peace gains of recent years. El Salvador expresses its deep concern about the serious impact that the pandemic has had on women and girls. From health to the economy to security and social protection, the effects of the pandemic, like those of conflict, have a differential and disproportionate impact on women and girls. Since gender-based violence has increased considerably in the current context, with many increases of over 25 per cent, El Salvador believes that efforts to achieve the full, equitable and meaningful participation of women in all activities related to the prevention and resolution of conflicts, at all levels, cannot be delayed. Informed by its experience with its own peace process and the challenges it currently faces, El Salvador is convinced that achieving that goal requires ensuring a significant increase in the representation of women in decision-making mechanisms for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts. That requires incorporating a gender perspective into public policies and programmes that contain concrete measures to guarantee that the commitments established in resolution 1325 (2000) are met. In that regard, as a sign of its willingness to comply with the provisions of this resolution, El Salvador has formulated its Women, Peace and Security 2017-2022 national action plan. The plan takes up the historical background of women's participation in the Salvadoran peace process; it reinforces the country's regulatory framework and develops its method of action through the pillars of participation, prevention, protection, reparation measures and measures for the restitution of rights, and a strengthened implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That makes El Salvador one of 85 Member States - 44 per cent of the Organization's membership - that have translated the agenda into a national action plan. My country will initiate the process of updating our plan to incorporate current challenges and ensure that it is a renewed guide that enables all participating bodies to coordinate priority actions for the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. El Salvador calls on the United Nations and its Member States to continue supporting each country in the development and implementation of its national action plan to comply with resolution 1325 (2000). In addition, through its participation in United Nations peace operations, El Salvador has sought to mainstream resolution 1325 (2000) into the training of its troops. One of the main advances in that field is that 35 per cent of the country's currently deployed police personnel is female, compared to 15.1 per cent globally. The implementation of the women and peace and security agenda is a task that concerns everyone and in which political leadership is essential. El Salvador believes that, in future, it will be possible to meet the pending challenges in its implementation only through coordinated and coherent action among the multiple actors. It therefore calls for the strategic incorporation of the agenda into national, regional and global plans, policies and guidelines. With regard to the role of the United Nations in this area, El Salvador considers it extremely important to follow up on the measures to be adopted by the Organization, as reflected in the Secretary-General's 2019 report (S/2019/800), and to take advantage of the processes under way, such as the review of the peacebuilding architecture and the repositioning of the United Nations development system to incorporate concrete actions to implement the operative paragraphs of the resolutions on women and peace and security throughout the Organization's work. It is essential that women and peace and security remain on the agenda of the Security Council so as to ensure the inclusion of language on women, peace and security in its decisions, the sustained increase in Arria Formula meetings on this matter and its mainstreaming in all United Nations peace operations mandates. Likewise, it is important to address the existing gap in financing the agenda and to seek to allocate sustained, predictable and flexible resources. Increasing and diversifying sources of funding will be key to translating political commitments into concrete actions and implementing resolution 1325 (2000), thus serving as a catalyst for progress on other instruments such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Finally, El Salvador believes that in the current context, it will be key for women in all their diversity, who have a critical voice in ensuring a gender perspective in crisis and conflict mitigation, prevention and recovery policies at all levels, to participate in decision-making on the response to and global recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time, we must redouble our efforts to achieve the urgent commitments with regard to the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.
