Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) over the past four
months. I also thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
important briefing in that connection. My delegation
also welcomes the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadic', President of the Republic of Serbia, in
today's meeting of the Security Council. We thank him
for his statement of the situation on the ground. We
also acknowledge the presence of Mr. Skender Hyseni
at this meeting and thank him for his statement.

We have taken note of the overall stable security
situation in and around Kosovo during the reporting
period. We are, however, concerned about the
information provided by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2009/ 149) that, in comparison with previous
years, the number of voluntary minority returns to
Kosovo has declined sharply and that it remains
disappointing. It is imperative to promptly and
adequately address this issue, including in particular
the non-implementation of the reintegration strategy
for forced returnees, as well as to ensure real progress
in safeguarding the rights and security of national
minorities so as to avoid exacerbating inter-ethnic
mistrust and tension, as was the case in the region of
Mitrovica.

With regard to the administration of northern
Kosovo, we commend UNMIK's efforts to engage with
all sides to facilitate the implementation of the
Secretary-General's six-point plan, which covers the
areas of the police, the judiciary, boundary
management, the protection of religious facilities,
transportation and customs. While, as the report
indicates, there have been some positive results with
regard to the six points, others will require greater
political will and good-faith efforts. Given the fragility
of the situation in the region, we are mindful that the
possibility of a collapse of the six-point plan remains
high and that the loss of momentum could leave the
underlying tensions between Serbs and Albanians open
to manipulation by spoilers. We therefore believe that
it is essential for UNMIK to continue its active
presence and for both Belgrade and Pristina to
implement the temporary arrangements in the six areas
until relevant follow-up mechanisms have been put in
place to maintain peace and stability on the ground.

Against that backdrop, and while reiterating Viet
Nam's position in support of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Serbia, my delegation shares and supports the
Secretary-General's view that UNMIK will continue to
work towards the advancement of regional stability and
prosperity, based on its continued mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999), in close coordination with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Kosovo Force and in cooperation with the
authorities in Belgrade and Pristina. Among its main
functions, the facilitation of dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade should be underscored.
With regard to UNMIK's reconfiguration of the
rule of law sector, we recognize its accelerated efforts
in consultation with the main stakeholders on the
ground, as well as the gradual and smooth assumption
of operational responsibility by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in that area,
in line with the Security Council's presidential
statement of 26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44).
We acknowledge EULEX's readiness to participate
alongside UNMIK in the discussions related to rule of
law issues. At the same time, we wish to emphasize
that the reconfiguration of UNMIK should be
conducted with transparency and in accordance with
the United Nations position on strict neutrality with
regard to Kosovo's status.

We would also like to underscore that the
coordinated effort being undertaken by UNMIK and
EULEX at this critical juncture, with the support of
both Belgrade and Pristina and all international
stakeholders, is of great importance to the maintenance
of peace and stability in Kosovo and to the interest of
all communities thereof. For this to become a reality,
EULEX, which works under the general framework of
resolution 1244 (1999), should continue to honour its
commitment to operate under the overall authority and
within the status-neutral framework of the United
Nations and to take into account the specific
circumstances and concerns of all communities.

