Mrs. Gatto (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union and wishes to add a few remarks in its national
capacity.
I thank Lithuania for convening this meeting and
proposing a new resolution (resolution 2222 (2015)) on
the important subject of the protection ofjournalists in
armed conflict.

I will refrain from repeating a basic fact, namely,
that journalists are increasingly subject to all kinds of
hostile acts, including torture and killing. We have all
heard the details. I do wish, however, to remember the
Italianjournalists who have made the ultimate sacrifice
in many theaters of war, most recently in Ukraine, Gaza
and Afghanistan. They shall not be forgotten.

In paying tribute to our own victims, let us not
forget that most of the journalists who have lost their
lives are local.

Journalists are a distinct category by virtue of
the social function they perform. For example, many
issues make it onto the agenda of the Security Council
thanks to brave reporters and their ability to draw the
attention of international public opinion to some of
the grave crises in the world today. When we speak of
armed-conflict scenarios, that unique ability merits
full protection.

Thanks to resolution 1738 (2006) and to resolution
2222 (2015), which we havejust adopted and which Italy
co-sponsored, awareness has been raised thatjournalists
need to be protected just as much as regular civilians,
in accordance with the provisions of humanitarian law.
In conflict situations, journalists are not just civilians;
they are our gateway to the world - to both the good
and the bad of the world. The protection they deserve
as human beings stems also from the precious gift of
information they provide to all of us.

That leads me to a second reflection: what if
journalists have different or even unorthodox views?
We believe that is a good thing. Journalists bring
diverse opinions to their work. That is why we need
many of them, because many eyes and many brains
will provide many different perspectives, leaving
it to readers and listeners to make up their minds on
the basis of a variety of sources. That is the benefit of
pluralism, which depends on freedom ofthe press and of
expression. That is what we call impartial information.
It is a treasure that journalists offer to us every day,
every minute and every second. We have to protect and
encourage pluralism.

My third point stems from the troubling rise in the
number of journalists abducted, killed, blackmailed,
tortured and even raped - a crime to which women
journalists in particular are prey. According to the
Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2013/689),
all too often, impunity seems to be the rule in hostile
situations where journalists are victims. That is
unacceptable. Greater efforts must be made to ensure
that perpetrators of any attack or hostile act towards
them are brought to justice.

My final point is that journalists, especially when
they are reporting on armed-conflict scenarios, render
an invaluable service to all those who work to promote
peace and security. However, the more dangerous
conflict situations become for journalists, the less
people will be willing to choose that career, resulting in
less information and less pluralism. We cannot accept
that the self-censorship implicit in threats to personal
safety might undermine the richness of pluralism.

The protection of journalists in dangerous situations
is a multifaceted question. The answer should be
holistic, starting with the recognition that journalists
deserve full protection. On that basis, we must pursue
an action-oriented strategy.

I would like to end with two proposals. First,
education, which is a key word in many fields, is one
here as well. Most journalist victims of hostile acts are
local. That may be due to a lack of proper training on
how to work in dangerous situations. We should fill
that gap. Secondly, with regard to non-State actors,
specific attention should be given to situations in
which non-State actors are the perpetrators of hostile
acts againstjournalists, which seems to be increasingly
the case. In that context as well, we have to respond by
drafting ad hoc strategies.

I conclude by underscoring the important role that
all countries as well as the bodies of the United Nations
can play in promoting this agenda. We have to act
together. Let us engage collectively.

