Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): It is an honour
to have you chairing this meeting today, Mr. President,
and we also welcome the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to the Council.
I would like to express our thanks to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report on developments
in Iraq over the reporting period and underline our
strong support for the vital role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in helping Iraq's
development as a democratic, inclusive and stable

State. In particular, I would like to pay tribute to
Mr. De Mistura in what will be his final appearance
before the Security Council in his role as the Secretary-
General's Special Representative for Iraq. He will be
greatly missed. His leadership and dedicated hard work
have been central to achieving the progress we have
seen in Iraq over the past 18 months. He's done an
excellent job, and the depth of his commitment was
inspiringly clear in his very moving final remarks just
now. I wish him well in his next posting. In order to
maintain this positive momentum that he has created,
it's going to be imperative to ensure a smooth and
timely handover to his successor.

Mr. President, the Secretary-General's report
illustrates that, despite the security challenges, Iraq
continues to make good progress. We welcome the
election of a new Speaker of Parliament. This will now
enable the Council of Representatives to push forward
with discussion of key legislation vital to the future
stability of the country. We also welcome the
formulation of new provincial councils, which follows
the successful provincial elections in January of this
year. They have an important role to play in delivering
the essential services critical to improving the lives of
the Iraqis who voted for them. And we look forward to
the upcoming parliamentary elections in the Kurdistan
region next month and the national elections that will
take place early next year. We urge the Government of
Iraq to ensure that the Independent High Electoral
Commission has sufficient funding to facilitate
successful national elections. As a further sign of
support, the European Union has again offered to send
independent election observers to both of those
elections.

On the issue of human rights, we acknowledge
the good progress that Iraq has made, but agree with
the Secretary-General's report that more remains to be
done. We strongly urge the Government of Iraq to
ensure that the Independent High Commission for
Human Rights receives adequate funding in the
forthcoming supplementary budget. Mr. President, we
agree with the Secretary-General that fostering
dialogue between all parties on national reconciliation
remains a key priority for Iraq, and welcome the
positive role played by UNAMI in this area. We
encourage all parties to work together in the spirit of
compromise, to make further progress on federalism,
resolving disputed internal boundaries and sharing
natural resources. The international community has
made clear that it stands ready to offer its full support
for this process, including by facilitating talks between
the parties. Recent political tensions in Mosul and
Diyala are a cause for concern. We hope the talks will
soon begin to reduce these.

We'd also like to express our deepest sympathies
to the Iraqi Parliament and the Iraqi people following
the murder last week of Member of Parliament Hareth
Al-Ubaidi. This was a cowardly act and should not be
allowed to disrupt the political process in which Iraq's
leaders are engaged. We're confident the Iraqi people
will continue along the path of democracy and dialogue
in order to overcome violence and sectarianism.

Mr. President, we welcome Mr. De Mistura's
efforts to improve regional dialogue and cooperation
between Iraq and her neighbours. This is a key
requirement for the development of lasting regional
peace and security. We agree with the Secretary-
General's report that the International Compact for Iraq
would benefit from a more streamlined approach,
focused on key socio-economic priorities. To this end,
we encourage greater coordination between the
International Compact and international donors such as
the World Bank and the European Union, to ensure that
all assistance provided is complementary and well
targeted. We look forward to the Secretary-General's
report on Security Council resolutions relating to Iraq.

Mr. President, I'd like to close with a few words
about the future direction of the United Kingdom's
relationship with Iraq. This week, our Prime Minister
reiterated once again to our Parliament that the core of
the new relationship we're building with the Iraqi
people will be based on diplomatic trading and cultural
links. And Ambassador Al Bayati mentioned just now
the joint declaration and convention we concluded
recently with Iraq to that effect. We'll continue to play
a supportive role in the reconstruction of Iraq. As a
further sign of the normalization in Iraq, and improved
security, United Kingdom combat troops have begun to
draw down. This process will be completed on
schedule by the end of July. Meanwhile, we stand
ready to help build the capacity of the Iraqi armed
forces, and, as Ambassador Al Bayati mentioned, his
Council of Ministers has approved an agreement for
the United Kingdom to help with the protection of Iraqi
oil platforms and provision of training and support to
Iraqi naval forces.

The United Kingdom believes a secure,
prosperous and democratic Iraq, at peace with its
neighbours and taking its rightful place in the
international community, remains extremely important
to the strategic and domestic interests of many
countries, in the Middle East and beyond.

