The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

First of all, the delegation of Kuwait aligns itself
to the statement made by the representative of Sweden
on behalf of our two countries as co-penholders on the
issue of Syria. We thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-
Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for their briefings. Four days after the
adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), which demands that
all parties cease hostilities throughout Syrian territory
for 30 days, I would like to make the following points.

We have said from the outset that resolution 2401
(2018) is only the first step towards improving the
humanitarian situation in Syria. However, to date we
have not seen the implementation of the provisions of
the resolution - not even a partial implementation - as
we heard from Mr. Lowcock this morning, in particular
in eastern Ghouta. The Council demonstrated unity
in adopting the resolution and it is up to us now to
ensure that all its provisions are implemented in full
and immediately in order to alleviate the suffering
of our brethren in Syria and to protect civilians. The
resolution is binding on all, in accordance with Article
25 of the Charter of the United Nations.

Secondly, we welcome the fact that the United
Nations is ready to come to eastern Ghouta and other
besieged areas so as to deliver all kinds of aid and
assistance to those that need them. We call on all the
parties to the conflict in Syria to uphold international
humanitarian law and abide by the provisions of the
resolution, which cover all the various aspects that are
causing the daily suffering of the Syrian people.

Thirdly, we underscore the importance of
members of the Council making their contribution
by spurring all the parties to the conflict in Syria to
immediately implement the provisions of resolution
2401 (2018), keeping in mind that, as co-penholders,
we are committed to closely follow its implementation,
including ensuring a briefing by the Secretariat 15 days
after the adoption of the resolution.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

In accordance with to rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to participate in this
meeting.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

