Mr. Motoc (Romania): Madam President, my
delegation feels honoured by your presence at the helm
of the Security Council. I would like to congratulate
you for having arranged a discussion on a theme which
will allow for productive elaboration on the
improvement of United Nations peace-building efforts.
It is very timely.

I wish also to express our satisfaction at the
presence among us this morning of the Secretary-
General and of Ambassador Rasi of Finland, President
of the Economic and Social Council.

We join other members of the Council in
expressing appreciation of the contributions made by
representatives of CARE International and of the
International Center for Transitional Justice (ICTJ).

I should like also to mention that Romania
associates itself with the statement which is to be
delivered by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf of
the European Union.

The approach to peace-building continues to
evolve in response to the changing nature of each
conflict. The term encompasses the full range of
commitments undertaken by the international
community to assist countries in achieving sustainable
peace and development. In its presidential statement of
20 February 2001, the Security Council recognized the
role of peace-building in preventing the outbreak,
recurrence or continuation of armed conflict through
political, developmental, humanitarian and human
rights programmes and mechanisms. However, despite
the mobilization of a peace-building doctrine, realities
on the ground reveal a simultaneous demand for
continued commitments to peace-building and a need
to re-evaluate the normative, policy, operational and
institutional approaches to peace-building.

In that regard, we welcome the topic of our
debate today as a means of fostering discussion on
enhancing the capacity, knowledge, resources and tools
of the United Nations to achieve better outcomes in
future peace-building efforts. The question of how to
ensure a deeper involvement of civil society
organizations in peace-building is a natural component
of that framework. Their value to the work of the
United Nations has been repeatedly affirmed in this
very Chamber, where we recognized that they are
instrumental in all processes associated with the
consolidation of peace after conflict. That is
documented by their active involvement in peace-
building efforts and derives from a number of factors.

In many cases, they have a firsthand
understanding of conflicts, which is always a crucial
element in conflict management. Moreover, in contrast
to the transient nature of peacekeeping efforts, their
continued presence on the ground affords them
opportunities to build long-term relationships, thus
creating a sense of trust among opposing political
groups. The longevity of their presence and the
creation of trust provide civil society organizations
with an accessibility international actors frequently
lack.

In addition, through their contacts with
conflicting parties, civil society actors are in a position
to spot emerging crises, thus becoming invaluable
resources for an early-warning system for any
preventive work. Needless to say, since most conflicts
today have at their core ethnic or religious issues, it is
the neutral actors, such as multi-ethnic or multifaith
civil society organizations, that are able to gain the
trust of opposing parties and mobilize ethnic and
religious dialogue.

Given the potential of civil society actors in terms
of knowledge and intuitive understanding, emphasis
should be placed on promoting improved collaboration
between the United Nations system and civil society
organizations, in order to make peace-building
activities more productive, sustainable and cost-
effective.

Peace-building encompasses phenomena such as
participation, empowerment and national ownership,
aimed at the emergence of a sustainable polity within a
post-conflict environment. We must foster home-grown
political processes in which civil society shares with
the international community and local governmental
actors the ownership of the reconstruction process.
Furthermore, dialogue among civil society actors must
be facilitated to allow for discussions, nurture
transformations, build consensus and translate policy
into practice. Particularly in countries where
communities are distrustful of each other or where
conflict has eroded societal structures, we must explore
all effective models for participatory peace-building
through collaboration between civil society
organizations and the United Nations system and its
mechanisms and partners.

As members of the Council and other
representatives are aware, we will hold, during the
Romanian presidency, a thematic debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in stabilization processes. In that
framework, we will welcome any innovative
approaches to enhancing the regional capacity for
peace-building through the inclusion of civil society
organizations in endeavours towards that goal.
Strategies must be designed, regionally and locally,
that aim to strengthen these private organizations, build
their capability for more effective collaboration and to
develop mechanisms for participation in all stages of,
and processes related to, peace-building.

Yesterday saw the public release of the report of
the Secretary-General's Panel of Eminent Persons on
United Nations-Civil Society Relations. We commend
the recognition therein of the enhancement of the
Council's informal relations with civil society, as we
have often come together at the right time, especially
in such areas as human rights or humanitarian affairs.
Such an understanding of has the potential to create the
most appropriate avenues and mechanisms for
cooperation in order better to implement our tasks.

