Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank Kazakhstan for organizing this
important and timely debate.

Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union. In my national
capacity, and as a member of the Group of Friends
of Afghanistan, I shall focus today on three areas,
namely, economic development, counter-terrorism and
cooperation between the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia (UNRCCA).

First, concerning economic development, as we
all know, among other things, lasting peace depends
upon a country's economic development, which itself
is closely linked to the level and efforts made in the
area of regional cooperation. Afghanistan and Central
Asia are situated at a historical crossroads linking the
East and the West. It is our belief that Afghanistan
and Central Asia have everything to gain from deeper
economic cooperation, better market integration and
increased interconnectivity. That integration should be
open to a broader area, extending from South and East
Asia to the Middle East and all the way to Europe so that
Central Asia can once again serve as such a crossroads.

Secondly, concerning counter-terrorism, regional
cooperation is also necessary for combating smuggling,
transnational crime and the recruitment by, and the
financing of, terrorist organization networks. That is
especially important given that the military advances
against Da'esh in Iraq and Syria are now forcing us to
focus upon the return of foreign terrorist fighters from
those areas. We share that serious concern with Central
Asia and with Afghanistan, and we advocate for a
strong and active role played by the United Nations
in providing cooperation and support in that area. In
addition to its financial support, Belgium is also ready
to contribute to that work by sharing our experience and
best practices. Furthermore, United Nations agencies
must continue to support Central Asia through the joint
plan of action for the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We believe
that adequate attention must be paid to preventing
violent extremism, especially among young people, as
that accounts for one ofthe root causes ofterrorism. The
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and UNRCCA must
continue to play an important role in that area.

Thirdly, concerning the United Nations
contribution, that brings me to the matter of cooperation
between UNAMA and UNRCCA. Providing
cooperation and better coordination on the ground
is particularly urgent in the context of combating
drug trafficking and trafficking in human beings. As
evidenced by the substantial number of participants
from the region in today's debate, I welcome the
commitment of Central Asian countries to stabilizing
and developing Afghanistan.

In conclusion, Iwould be remiss were I not to mention
the recent visit by the Security Council to Afghanistan.
I commend that visit, which sends a message of support
from the international community to the Afghan
Government. Belgium congratulates the Government
for its commitment and renewed energy conducive to
peace talks - something that Council members have
been able to see for themselves. Peace talks must lead to
a lasting solution to the conflict, but can succeed only
ifthey are supported by all the parties in the region and
by the international community as a whole. The success
of those talks would give strong impetus to lasting
stabilization in the country, and, beyond that, to the

economic development of Afghanistan, its immediate
neighbours and the countries of Central Asia.

