We thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his statement, and we welcome the briefings by Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of UN-Women; Ms. Danai Gurira, UN-Women Goodwill Ambassador; Ms. Nataliia Emelianova, Sexual and Gender-Based Violence Adviser in the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei; and Ms. Zarqa Yaftali, Head of the Women and Children Legal Research Foundation. We join others in highlighting that 2020 is a significant year as we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, the tenth anniversary of the establishment of UN-Women and the fifth anniversary of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, among other things. It is also the review year for Silencing the Guns by 2020 on the African continent. All those anniversaries are intertwined and pertinent to the advancement of the women and peace and security agenda. We also wish to take this opportunity to welcome and acknowledge the clear priorities announced by the UN-Women Executive Director that will dominate the decade of action. That will further drive the momentum to fully implement the 10 Security Council resolutions on women and peace and security. We also welcome the progress that has been made in the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), 20 years ago, under the excellent leadership of Namibia (see S/PV.4213), which will also launch its International Women's Peace Centre on 31 October 2020. That will be a valuable regional and international institution towards consolidating our efforts for the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. However, we also recognize the need to accelerate the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, especially by addressing impediments to achieving its objectives. South Africa regrets the negative impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on advancing the women and peace and security agenda, particularly with regard to refugees and internally displaced women. In that context, we take this opportunity to commend the work that has been undertaken by humanitarian and health-care workers, as well as other front-line workers, in mitigating the pandemic, the majority of whom are women. We also recognize that the impact of the pandemic on the women and peace and security agenda has not yet been fully discerned. However, at this stage, it is imperative that we also take note of the fact that the coronavirus disease pandemic has not only presented challenges but also opportunities in terms of how the women and peace and security agenda can be pursued, particularly in advancing the participation and representation pillars. That relates to utilizing virtual means to expand women's participation in the various peace processes. While virtual engagement has illustrated to us that the inclusion of women is possible, it should not be used to exclude women from physical interaction. My country views the women and peace and security agenda as an empowerment tool for women to actively immerse themselves in various peace processes, particularly in prevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding. In that regard, South Africa is committed to contributing to reducing the gap in women's underrepresentation in mediation, negotiations and leadership positions. We will continue to build the capacity of women negotiators and mediators by providing annual training to women mediators and negotiators at the local and continental levels. We are proud that many women who benefited from such training programmes are actively involved in peace processes in their respective countries. They include women from the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan, to name just a few. South Africa also wishes to reiterate its support for the Secretary-General's system-wide strategy on gender parity and the uniformed gender parity strategy 2018-2028 of the Department of Peace Operations, which have had a significant impact on increasing the number of women represented within the United Nations leadership, as well as in peace operations. We are pleased that the recently adopted resolution 2538 (2020), the first-ever Security Council resolution on women in peacekeeping, adds to the growing number of normative frameworks on women in peacekeeping. That is important to us, as South Africa remains the leading female- troop-contributing country in United Nations peacekeeping operations, with 15.1 per cent of South Africa's deployed troops being female. We continue to recognize the pivotal role that civil society actors play in furthering the women and peace and security agenda at the local and national levels, which is why we encourage strengthened collaboration between Governments and civil society in advancing the agenda. In line with resolution 2493 (2019), which was unanimously adopted a year ago, we continue to urge Member States to create safe and enabling environments for civil society, community women leaders, women peacebuilders and human rights defenders to carry out their work in advancing the women and peace and security agenda without threats, intimidation and physical harm. We continue to be alarmed by the persisting sexual violence against women and children in conflict and post-conflict countries. It goes without saying that there is a need for increased accountability for cases of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict societies. In that respect, South Africa reiterates its support for the work of the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. South Africa wishes to underline the pivotal role of regional organizations in advancing the women and peace and security agenda, and therefore requests that future reports of the Secretary-General provide details on the efforts of regional organizations, such as the African Union and its subregional organizations, in promoting the agenda. Let me conclude by reaffirming South Africa's commitment to advancing the women and peace and security agenda. We are pleased to announce that we recently adopted our first national action pan. That is an essential step for us in continuing to ensure the meaningful participation of women at all levels of peace processes in a manner that is structured, monitored and regularly assessed by all relevant stakeholders.
