Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) plays an outstanding role
in the international efforts to combat terrorism, even
more so because progress in related areas such as the
drafting of a comprehensive convention to fight
terrorism is still not forthcoming. I would also like to
thank the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Inocencio Arias, for his very
informative briefing today and to express my
delegation's gratitude for the work undertaken under
his leadership.

Two years after the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) and the subsequent
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Committee finds itself at a crucial juncture. While the
world has witnessed a number of successes in the fight
against terrorism during the past two years, in
particular the arrests and subsequent trials of a number
of terrorist suspects, there have also been a
disconcerting number of setbacks and new attacks,
such as the atrocious bombing of the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad almost two months ago.
Those are some of the most visible and concrete
examples showing that international cooperation in the
area is needed now more than ever. The work of the
CTC, however, cannot simply be measured against
those events. Its task is to prepare the ground for a
common, sustainable approach by all Member States in
the fight against terrorism, with a view to its long-term
success. That is a task of the utmost importance and
delicacy since it involves the constant striking of a
balance between the sometimes conflicting goals of
national and international security and the rights of
individuals.

We remain convinced that human rights, which
rank among the greatest achievements of this
Organization, must not fall victim to the fight against
terrorism. This requires a clear commitment by the
United Nations and its Member States to the
maintenance of human rights and the rule of law while
countering terrorism, as expressed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 57/219, but also a
considerable amount of expertise. We commend the
CTC's increasing efforts to coordinate the provision of
technical assistance, and we would like to express our
view that such technical assistance should also be
tailored to meet the needs of human rights and the rule
of law.

The CTC's reporting system is another pillar of
its work aimed at promoting the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). While the reporting procedure
has so far been a clear success in quantitative terms,
further thought needs to go into its strengthening in
qualitative terms. Every Member State has reported at
least once to the Committee; many have done so twice,
and a number of States - among them
Liechtenstein - even three times. However, it also
remains clear that the number of reports submitted by a
State is not a reliable indicator of its willingness and
ability to implement resolution 1373 (2001).

It will be one of the most pressing challenges for
the CTC in the near future to address this issue in a
manner that takes into account the specific situations in
which States find themselves, while at the same time
establishing uniform benchmarks for all States. Those
benchmarks do not end with the issue of the ratification
of international conventions relating to the fight against
terrorism - and Liechtenstein has ratified all 12 of
them - or with ensuring that the necessary legislation
is in place. Legislation is only the basis for action, and
cannot replace concrete action and practical measures.
We therefore encourage the CTC to continue its work
in all relevant areas, including in the increasingly
important field of implementation.

We believe that the debate today has brought
forth useful new ideas. I would like to refer in
particular to the statement made by the representative
of Germany earlier today.

Finally, let me reiterate Liechtenstein's
unequivocal condemnation of all acts of terrorism,
whatever the justifications and motives invoked. We
remain committed to the international fight against
terrorism, and to cooperation with the CTC in
particular.

