Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank Ambassador Jones Parry and Ambassador
Negroponte for their extremely useful briefings to us on
developments in Iraq. We also welcome the practical
approach taken by the Secretary-General in terms of the
United Nations role in the normalization process in
Iraq. We welcome in particular the sending of a fact-
finding mission to clarify the issue of holding elections.
The results of the Brahimi mission reaffirm our idea of a
rational management of the normalization process in
the post-conflict period and of the formulas that should
be applied to ensure a democratic transition in Iraq.

As we stated during the discussions on post-
conflict national reconciliation, holding post-conflict
elections is often problematic. This is even more true
when there are no political parties to lead the political
process or when a consensus on the societal structure
to be established has not yet been reached. For Iraq, we
need, however, to establish a structure that is as
inclusive as possible and that leads to a normalization
of the situation. In this connection, we believe that the
approach proposed by the Secretary-General is extremely
rational and should help to forge a consensus.

Meeting the 30 June 2004 date set for the transfer
of sovereignty to the Iraqi people is also essential. To do
this, it is indispensable that a representative Government
be established, as proposed by the Secretary-General,
before the end of June 2004. It is also important that a
United Nations mission be created as soon as possible
to support this process and to help to draft the
fundamental texts, as well as to establish a legal
framework for holding elections on the agreed date.

The formula to be used in establishing a
representative transition Government can only come
from the Iraqi people themselves. Whether this is in the
form of a national conference, a round-table discussion
or any other format, a number of principles do need to
be taken into account and complied with. In particular,
we need to identify a process for forging a societal
consensus, to define the rules of conduct for the
transition period and to elect the person able to lead
this transition. This mechanism can only be flexible if
all of the institutions in Iraq are established with a View
to managing this transition period.

Frequently, in the management of a transition
period, it so happens that the person appointed to
manage this period cannot run for office or head up the
institutions in question after the transitional period.
Such a candidacy often creates tension, since the
political class may find that this person occupies a
privileged place with respect to other potential
competitors. This is true unless, of course, the parties
can maintain a consensus to the end around that person.

Promoting human rights is also a key element in
ensuring the completion of the normalization process.
As such, the prevailing situation of insecurity, and
particularly the news of a surge in crime and
retributions, is particularly disturbing. The discussion
initiated between the United Nations, the different
components of Iraqi society and the Coalition
Provisional Authority do give us hope.

The deteriorating security situation could,
however, undermine the normalization and restoration
process. In particular, the fact that the Iraqi security
forces - which are in the process of being
reorganized - too frequently seem not to enjoy the
protection of the Coalition Provisional Authority forces
could pose a number of problems. This kind of
situation, if it does continue, may undermine the
morale of the Iraqi forces and, in the end, slow the
restoration of order and the rule of law that is
necessary for the establishment of democracy.

