Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for the information he has given us on
the recent events that have led to the convening of this
emergency meeting.

Bolivia firmly and energetically condemns the
underground nuclear test conducted by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea on 3 September. According
to press reports, it was 10 times more powerful than that
conducted in 2016, and 100 times more powerful than
the country's first nuclear test, in 2006. Based on its
pacifist status, Bolivia rejects all nuclear tests, as well
as the proliferation of nuclear weapons, in accordance
with the various international treaties on the subject.
We also reject the manufacture of such arms, in line
with the ban on nuclear weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, better known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
under which Latin America and the Caribbean became
the world's first nuclear-weapon-free zone, and we call
for that example to be followed in other regions.

We would like to echo the words of the Secretary-
General on the subject when he said that

"[t]his act is yet another serious breach of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
international obligations and undermines international
non-proliferation and disarmament efforts."

We therefore urge the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to abandon its nuclear and ballistic-missile
programmes fully, verifiably and irreversibly, and to
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

We also urge all the parties involved to avoid the
increasing tensions and escalating rhetoric that are
putting international peace and security in jeopardy,
especially on the Korean peninsula, and especially to
avoid any provocative or unilateral acts and any act
that infringes international law or the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We urge them to halt this
spiral into confrontation and threats of military force,
including a nuclear response, which can only lead to a
major catastrophe.

Once again, we reiterate our welcome of, and
support for, the Chinese initiative of dual restraint,
which seeks to enable a simultaneous freeze on
actions on the peninsula. We also support the efforts
to revive a path to the resumption of negotiations. We
emphasize the importance of compliance with the
Charter's provision that the Security Council is the
sole body legally empowered to take measures needed
to maintain or restore international peace and security
and that any unilateral action is to be eschewed. In that
regard, we reject unilateral sanctions, which not only
constitute a flagrant violation of international law but
also undermine the work of multilateral organizations
such as ours and seek to impose one State's jurisdiction
and domestic legislation on another, in violation of the
principles of the equality, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States.

Sanctions are not an end in themselves, and there
can be no military solution to the situation on the
Korean peninsula. In that regard, we remind the parties
involved of their duty to comply with paragraph 5
of General Assembly resolution 71/86, adopted on
5 December 2016, which reaffirms support for the Six-
Party Talks, and in accordance with paragraph 27 of
Security Council resolution 2371 (2017), which calls for
the resumption of the Talks with the goal of achieving
the peaceful and verifiable denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.

Lastly, Bolivia reiterates its call to all the parties
involved to reject the possibility of any kind of military
solution or threat of the use of force and to resume a
dialogue and negotiations aimed at apeaceful, diplomatic
and political settlement that, we repeat, can ultimately
lead to the Korean peninsula's denuclearization.

