Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I too would like to thank
Mr. Bildt for his informative and thought-provoking
briefing.

The current situation in the Balkans gives us cause
for mixed feelings of both cautious optimism and grave
concern. Our optimism is based on the undeniable
progress achieved through post-conflict peace-building
efforts in Croatia and in Bosnia, while the cause of our
concern is the progressive deterioration of the situation in
Kosovo.

We share the conviction of Mr. Bildt, which he
expressed some time ago, that any long-term strategy for
stability and peace in the region was dependent on a so-
called three R's policy: comprehensive reform of all
conflict-devastated societies, reintegration of the region
with the European and global infrastructure, and
reconciliation between all the States and all the nations of
the region.

My delegation is convinced that the issues of
security, the return of refugees and economic
reconstruction are among the key pillars of the overall
settlement of the Balkan conflict. Needless to say,

 

adequate security conditions are a prerequisite for any
peace process. In the context of the Balkans, first and
foremost, this relates to the current situation in Kosovo,
which continues to challenge European security as a whole
and undermine peace-building achievements in other parts
of the region.

The recent disturbances in Mitrovica showed that more
resolute measures should be undertaken to break the cycle
of ethnic hatred, distrust and revenge and to stop terrorist
and criminal activities against international peacekeeping
and humanitarian personnel.

The return of refugees and displaced persons is one of
the core problems in ensuring political stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Yugoslavia. It is clear that
this problem can be addressed only in a regional
framework, provided that there is a close cooperation
between the countries of the region in securing a voluntary
return of the national minorities and in ensuring their
legitimate claims for safety and equal social rights,
including property rights.

In this context, we are satisfied by the reports of an
increase in the positive trend of the return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The recent statements by the new leadership
of Croatia give us hope for further progress in resolving the
existing problem of refugee return in this country.

We remain deeply alarmed, however, by the growing
large-scale campaign of intimidation aimed at turning the
Kosovo province of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
into an ethnically monolithic area. The economic
reconstruction of the entire region and all of its countries
individually is at the heart of the eventual settlement of
every constituent part of the Balkan conflict.

In this connection, the significance of the Stability
Pact for South-Eastern Europe cannot be overestimated. It
provides a chance for all countries of the region to speed
up its economic recovery and the overall process of
transformation in order to integrate more closely into the
European family of nations. In addition, this document
provides a solid regional framework for the economic
reconstruction of the Balkans as a whole.

Ukraine welcomes the recent adoption of the
Bucharest Declaration of the Third Meeting of Heads of
State and Government of South-East European Countries on
12 February this year, and reiterates its interest in becoming
more closely associated with the joint efforts of the
international community as facilitator of the process of
the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe. My country
believes that, as a Danube riparian State that suffered
losses because of economic sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo crisis, it should
be involved in this ongoing process of regional economic
reconstruction. Undoubtedly, there is a clear linkage
between the developments in different parts of that
region. Therefore, a regional approach should be applied
in settling all the interrelated disputes in the Balkans.
There is a clear need for closer coordination of efforts
between the international players on the ground, including
all the United Nations missions. In this regard, we are
certain that the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Balkans can play a more active role to that end.

At the same time, we have to note the absence of an
established dialogue between the Special Envoy and the
Security Council. I have to confess, Mr. Bildt, that when
we learned about your coming to brief the Council, our
delegation, like many others, tried to figure out the
concrete subject of the discussion in the context of your
activities, simply because the Council has very little
information about this.
We are aware of Mr. Bildt's broad mandate,
entrusted to him by the Secretary-General. My delegation
believes that this mandate allows him to address some
Balkan issues which, due to different reasons, fall outside
the focus of the Security Council. My country believes
that Mr. Bildt's role and his efforts in the Balkans are
indeed a valuable contribution to our common cause of
establishing sustainable peace and stability in the Balkans.
Therefore, it seems to me that these common efforts
could be much more effective if the two-way
communication between the Security Council and the
Special Envoy for the Balkans were established on a
permanent basis.

Against this background, we welcome today's
briefing. My delegation deems it necessary to have such
Council briefings regularly. On the one hand, the practice
of such briefings will enable the Council to be better
apprised of the Special Envoy's activities in the Balkans.
On the other hand, it will allow the Council, when
necessary, to extend more actively its political support to
him or to use his good offices. At the same time, the
introduction of the practice of briefings should not
preclude the use of a feasible communication channel
between Mr. Bildt and the Security Council, as well as in
the reverse direction, through the Secretary-General.

 

We would also like to have more information about
the activities of the second Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Balkans, Mr. Eduard Kukan, who might
also wish to participate in the relevant Council briefings.

Finally, let me wish Mr. Bildt every success in his
activities in the Balkans in his present capacity. My country
stands ready to further contribute to our joint endeavours in
pursuit of the restoration of peace and security in that
region.

Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian)
I associate myself with the words of welcome to Carl Bildt,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Balkans,
and I thank him for his clear and thorough statement of his
views on what is happening in the Balkans. I agree with his
conviction that the problem of the Balkans can be resolved
only in a comprehensive way, and that indeed a regional
approach is essential, both in view of the number of
participants and in view of the objective to which we
should all aspire. I particularly wish to emphasize his view
of the necessity to have the agreement both of the Security
Council and, in a broader context, of the international
community on what path we should follow in order to
move towards a settlement of all aspects of the Balkan
crisis. This is extremely important so that we can all work
in one direction and not try to use this or that conflicts for
the advancement of our own national agendas, as that
approach would not lead us to any results. The only way to
achieve results is to follow the agreed approach of the
international community, as reflected specifically in
decisions of the Security Council and the various European
structures.

I entirely agree with Mr. Bildt that one of the tasks
that is enshrined in many United Nations resolutions is that
of putting an end to extremism from all sides and to exert
very strong pressure on the forces of disintegration. Without
this, we cannot count on a sustainable resolution of the
Balkan problem.

We support the call for a regional approach, a
comprehensive approach. In particular I would like to
emphasize what Mr. Bildt said about the role of Yugoslavia
in the Balkans, and I can only agree with his conclusion
that without the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, there will
be no peace or long-lasting, stable development in the
region. That topic has already been discussed in the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. A lot is
being said about it now, and we consider that the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General could play a positive role
in helping coordinate the various efforts of the international
community, which are being undertaken in the framework
in the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe, by the
European Agency for the Reconstruction of Kosovo, by
the South-East European Cooperation Initiative, by the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation and others. In any case,
there are many regional initiatives that in one way or
another concern the Balkans, and at this stage there is a
need for these initiatives to be coordinated, ideally, or at
least for some summarized information on how these
initiatives are being carried out. Incidentally, the United
Nations Development Programme is doing this, while the
Economic and Social Council adopted a special resolution
and at its last session the General Assembly adopted a
consensus resolution on economic assistance to the
countries of Eastern Europe, as well as a consensus
resolution on humanitarian assistance to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. So we would urge Mr. Bildt and
all of his colleagues to consider what they could do to
ensure that all of these different efforts are coordinated
and are helped to achieve the common goal of
development of the entire region, without any
discrimination.

The only point with which I find it difficult to agree
in what Mr. Bildt said is his reference to the Belgrade
regime as virtually an obstacle to the development of the
entire region, or at least an obstacle to the resolution of
various problems, including the problem of Kosovo. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was a participant in the
settlement of the Kosovo crisis, the principles of which
are described in resolution 1244 (1999).

In our view, many of the problems that UNMIK
now faces with respect to the implementation of that
resolution derive from the fact that UNMIK is, to put it
mildly, not interacting sufficiently with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities, without whom it will
simply be impossible to implement the decisions set out
in resolution 1244 (1999). The present approach has to
change, both in the political sphere - as I believe we
shall be discussing in detail with Mr. Kouchner and
General Reinhardt - and in the economic, social and
humanitarian areas.

In the economic sphere, I have already mentioned
United Nations resolutions on the reconstruction of the
region and on assistance to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. In the humanitarian sphere, we should not
forget that the largest group of refugees in Europe is are
now in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. They are
mainly refugees from Bosnia and from Croatia; as Mrs.
Ogata has confirmed here on several occasions, that group

 

of refugees is simply being ignored by donors, or at best is
being given scant attention. This cannot fail to create the
feeling that members of the international community
continue to politicize the Balkans, as seen especially in
discrimination against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
in a wide variety of areas. Incidentally, I must observe with
all due respect for the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia that the trend to politicize matters applies also
to the activities of that body. The politicization is almost
palpable. Specific examples of it have been cited, and
questions have been asked. But the answers we received did
not dispel our doubts.

Let me cite another example of where bias has made
it impossible to make progress in an area relating to the
attempt to resolve the crisis in the Balkans. We know that
there is a problem in Prevlaka. Recently, we have been told
by the Secretariat that on the whole the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of Montenegro are
implementing the regime in the United-Nations-designated
zones in Prevlaka. But at the same time, the number of
violations is on the rise. We hope that the new Government
in Croatia will take measures to ensure that it too respects
the United-Nations-designated zones there.

But my main point relating to Prevlaka is the
following. We have heard that for nearly seven months the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has been requesting the
resumption of bilateral talks with Croatia on the question of
Prevlaka. So far, Zagreb has not responded to those
requests; according to some information, Zagreb's position
can be explained by the fact that the Croatian side does not
wish to deal with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
authorities, inter alia because of indictments by the Hague
Tribunal.

That indicates that we must all consider where we
are to go if some parties continue to refuse to talk to
Belgrade at all. What do we wish to achieve in this way?
There are regular elections in Yugoslavia, but will we all
respect the outcomes and the choices voiced by the
people of Yugoslavia? This is no empty question; it
involves policies of individual countries that in many
respects run counter to the wishes of the international
community. I might recall that United Nations decisions
reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia indicate that such matters,
whether in Kosovo or in Prevlaka, must be resolved with
the direct participation of the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

There is significant politicization present in the
policies of a number of countries. We have United
Nations decisions, but we must implement them. It is
becoming increasingly difficult to implement such
decisions because of opposition from certain States to the
participation of Belgrade in the implementation of binding
commitments under the resolutions.

I really do not know the answer to this question. But
I appeal to all involved to review their positions and to
consider their own particular tasks and how we can all
truly implement our decisions. In any event, I believe that
the path towards an answer lies in the mandate held by
Mr. Bildt. He has vast experience, enormous energy and
great creativity. The approach he has taken reflects those
qualities, and we trust that the same qualities will help us
all move further ahead in the right direction.

