Mr. Obhrai (Canada): On behalf ofthe Government
of Canada, I would like to thank the Colombian
presidency for convening today's open debate on the
Middle East.

There are dark clouds gathering over the Middle
East. The region is more volatile and unstable than
it has been in years. We face multiple and serious
challenges to regional and global peace and security.
From barbaric acts of terrorism aimed at Israel, as
we witnessed in Bulgaria last week, to the senseless
slaughter of civilians perpetrated by extremists in Iraq;
from the violence in Syria, which has the potential
to spin the region into turmoil, to Iran's continued
unwillingness to respond with real action to address our
concerns about its nuclear activities - it is time for the
Security Council to overcome its paralysis and act with
determination to protect peace and stability on behalf
of all nations.

The Al-Assad regime has lost legitimacy by waging
a campaign of terror on the Syrian people, who began
their campaign for freedom, dignity and democracy
with peaceful demonstrations. There is no future for
Al-Assad in Syria. His regime is creating sectarian
strife and regional instability. There are growing
tensions in Lebanon and a massive outflow of refugees
to Jordan, Turkey, Iraq and Lebanon. Democracy based
on the rule of law and respect for human rights is the
best way for disparate voices to live together in peace.
The Action Group on Syria in Geneva has conceived
a pragmatic transition plan, building on Joint Special
Envoy Annan's six-point plan. But it will not work unless
those who continue to support the Al-Assad regime
with arms and resources stop doing so immediately. It
is past time for the Security Council to stand up for
peace with universal and binding sanctions to pressure
Al-Assad to honour commitments he has already made.
The failure to do so during the recent debate on the
renewal of the United Nations Supervision Mission in
Syria demonstrates the tragic unwillingness of some
Council members to live up to their international
responsibilities.

The International Atomic Energy Agency's reports
of Iranian non-compliance with its international
obligations and on that country's nuclear-weapons
development effort reinforce our deep concern about
Iran's ambitions and the resulting consequences for
regional and global security. While we acknowledge
that Iran has come without preconditions to the table
with the five permanent members of the Security
Council plus, those talks cannot drag on forever while
centrifuges continue to spin at Natanz and Fordow.

Iran needs to understand that the international
community is serious, and that it is expected to take
real and concrete steps to halt its nuclear-weapons
development programme before any sanctions are
eased. For years, Canada has implemented some of
the toughest sanctions against Iran. Now, the full
impact of the European Union oil embargo that began
on 1 July is beginning to bite. Only through that kind
of concerted action will we be able to impress on the
Iranian authorities that the game is up and that the time
has come to stop enrichment and comply with their
international obligations.

The target of our sanctions is not the Iranian
people, but rather the regime, which continues its
nuclear programme in violation of international law.
It is a regime that stifles free speech and access to
information and religious freedom, and that denies the
Iranian people a democratic voice. On behalf of those
voices that are silenced inside Iran, we will continue to
speak out.

Amid this strife and instability, the peace process
between Israel and the Palestinians is languishing.
We wholly support the Quartet's efforts based on its
statement of last September (see SG/2178), as well
as Jordan's efforts to bring the parties together. But
the parties themselves need to resume direct peace
negotiations without delay or preconditions. Unilateral
actions by either side are not helpful to a resumption of
negotiations, since they prejudge the outcome. I must
be clear that Canada cannot accept any renewed effort
by the Palestinian Authority to change its status in the
United Nations. The stakes are too high for the peace
process itself, but also for the Organization, as we
saw with the funding situation concerning UNESCO.
Rather, both parties need to stop talking about talking,
and instead roll up their sleeves, sit down and start
serious negotiations towards a two-State solution.
Concerted action to combat violence and incitement to
violence would help to create an atmosphere conducive
to negotiating peace.

Against that very dark backdrop, Egypt's first
democratic presidential elections were a glimmer of
light and a historic moment. My Government celebrates
that tremendous achievement of the Egyptian people
as a demonstration of what can happen when people
are allowed to exercise their basic democratic rights.
But an election is only a beginning. President Morsy
faces many challenges. It will be a long road towards
inclusive governance that fulfils the aspirations of all
Egyptians for greater freedom, democracy and respect
for the rule of law. We stand ready to support President
Morsy in that regard. Indeed, one of the pressing
challenges he faces is the precarious security situation
in the Sinai peninsula, which has profound implications
for Israel. In that regard, we welcome President Morsy's
commitment to honour Egypt's international obligations
and responsibilities to protect religious minorities.

The sky is indeed dark over the region, but this
body can choose to exercise its power and authority and
can act to support them. It is time.

