Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
would like to begin by welcoming the President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Judge Agius, and to welcome and congratulate
both Judge Meron on his reappointment in March as
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals and Prosecutor Brammertz, who has
assumed the role of Chief Prosecutor of the Mechanism
while continued to serve as Chief Prosecutor of the
ICTY.

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and, now, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals have been and are
essential components in advancing peace and justice
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, and in the
development of international law. Most recently, in
March this year, Radovan KaradZic', a person whom
Ambassador Power recently described as "a man who
believed he could do what he wanted when he wanted,
consequences to others be damned", was found guilty
and sentenced to 40 years in prison for genocide,
crimes against humanity and violations of the laws
and customs of war. More specifically, the underlying
crimes attributed to KaradZie included persecution,
extermination, murder, deportation, forcible transfer,
terror and unlawful attacks on civilians, among others.

While legalisms and legal definitions can never
adequately convey the inhumanity what happened,
what was experienced and what was done to human
beings, the pursuit of sober justice and the obedience
to facts inherent in the process is essential if we are
ever to stop these crimes from occurring again. In
the 1995 order confirming the Srebrenica indictment
against Karadzic', Judge Riad wrote that events of
Srebrenica were "truly scenes from hell written on
the darkest pages of human history". There were, he
wrote "thousands of men executed and buried in mass
graves; hundreds of men buried alive; men and women
mutilated and slaughtered; children killed before their
mother's eyes; a grandfather forced to eat the liver of
his own grandson".

The establishment of facts as part of the process
of advancing justice is critical to counter those who
seek to distort facts, revise history or rewrite reality.
That genocide occurred in Srebrenica was firmly
established by both the ICTY and the International
Court of Justice. There is no fact-based debate; this
is our history. These well-established facts render all
the more sad and shameful the Council's failure to be
able to adopt a simple resolution commemorating the
twentieth anniversary of Srebrenica. The facts are well
established, and, as one speaker said following the veto
last year of a draft resolution recognizing these facts,
denial is the final insult to the victims. Denial is of
course dangerous, but the challenge posed by denial
also highlights one of the most important contributions
ofinternational justice in the process of establishing the
facts and identifying individual responsibility. It is that
it helps us understand what happened, how it happened,
who is responsible - facts that, hopefully, allow us
learn how to prevent such events from happening again.

Although some leaders, including in other contexts
today, understandably fear trials and accountability,
justice and, indeed, peace require our zealous pursuit
of them. The Karadzie conviction and the December
arrest by Congolese authorities of Ladislas Ntaganzwa
are an important reminder of the fact that although time
may pass, this imperative will not subside.

It is to that end that we must remain persistent in
our pursuit of the eight remaining fugitives indicted
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
The Mechanism needs to re-energize its efforts to
apprehend these men, and the States Members of our
Organization, especially in the Great Lakes region
of Africa, must proactively contribute to our shared
efforts to hold these men accountable.

The United States of America will continue to
its part, and we reiterate our offer of up to $5 million
in rewards for information leading to the arrest of
Fulgence Kayishema, Charles Sikubwabo, Aloys
Ndimbati, Augustin Bizimana, Charles Ryandikayo,
Pheneas Munyarugarama, Felicien Kabuga and Protais
Mpiranya.

The United States asks that President Meron and
Prosecutor Brammertz make tracking and apprehending
these remaining fugitives the primary focus of the
Mechanism's work going forward. It has been too long.

Before concluding, I would like to commend the
ICTY, under the solid leadership of President Agius, on
the progress made in completing its work over the past
reporting period and for ensuring that justice is served
expeditiously while respecting the rights of the accused.
The Tribunal has not completed almost all of its cases,
with only two defendants remaining at the trial stage
and two appeals ongoing. We have confidence that the
ICTY can meet its commitment of completing its work
by the end of 2017.

In this regard, and in the light of President Agius's
briefing, the United States would like to reiterate
the importance of the full cooperation of all States
concerned with the ICTY, including with respect to the
execution of the arrest warrants issued by the ICTY for
three individuals in a contempt case.

We should be circumspect of leaders who suggest
that justice comes at the expense of reconciliation or
unity. Trials may be inconvenient to those who bear
responsibility for grave crimes, be they Milosevic or
Karadzie, Akayesu or Nahimana. But as our experience
here has demonstrated, it is simply not true that
pursuing justice frustrates reconciliation or upsets
unity. It does the opposite. The pursuit ofjustice is vital
to understanding the events of the dark past, to proving
facts and disproving fictions. That some leaders in other
contexts may prefer a course other than accountability
suggests that they are interested in advancing objectives
unrelated to our collective pursuit of sustainable peace.

