Mr. Rosenthal: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me in my capacity as Chair of one of the three
major 2015 reviews on how the United Nations deals
with its remit on peace and security. I thank you, also,
for the concept paper prepared by you (S/2017/692, annex), which offers guidance for today's deliberations.

All three ofthe reviews, and perhaps most of all the
review on the UnitedNationspeacebuilding architecture,
struggled with a fundamental contradiction rooted in
the Charter of the United Nations. That contradiction
takes on at least three different expressions.

First, while we were arguing that sustaining peace
requires a coherent and comprehensive United Nations
approach, the segmentation of responsibilities assigned
to each of the principal intergovernmental organs
in the Charter has led instead to a fragmented and
muddled approach. As we all know, while the Security
Council's purpose is to maintain international peace
and security, it is the Economic and Social Council and,
of course, the General Assembly, that deal with human
rights, development and governance issues. While
there is considerable overlap in the execution of those
functions, the traditional pillars of peace, human rights
and development generally do operate in the proverbial
silos that, sadly, we have all become accustomed to.

Secondly, while we were arguing that sustaining
peace requires that interventions be made during all the
various phases of a potential conflict - before, during
and after-the Council has continued to act on the broad
assumption that there is some unalterable sequencing
in the dynamics that lead to violent conflicts, referring
to peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding as
if they are part of a natural continuum. Indeed, the
Council still attaches the adjective "post-conflict" to
the word "peacebuilding", subliminally relegating the
whole concept - and the issue of addressing many of
the root causes of conflict - to a relatively peripheral
role, because ending a war always takes priority over
other matters.

Thirdly, and picking up on my previous point, what
really deserves priority is preventing violent conflicts
in the first place by addressing the grievances that lead
to such outcomes. The fact is that while we have all
argued that sustaining peace requires putting the accent
on conflict prevention rather than acting when the train
has already left the station, a review of the Council's
activities over the years reveals that, in practice, the
opposite has usually been the case. Those, then, were
the contradictions or dilemmas we faced.

Much has transpired in the two years since the 2015
reviews were presented. The five major developments
that I would like to highlight are, first, the high priority
that Secretary-General Guterres assigned to conflict
prevention and sustaining peace even before he assumed

office and that he has pursued very decisively since. The
second was the adoption, on 25 September 2015, of the
landmark 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which not only offers a strategic framework for the
work of the United Nations moving forward but
incorporates into the Sustainable Development Goals
a specific commitment to promoting peaceful and
inclusive societies. The third was the Security Council's
adoption of resolution 2282 (2016) on 27 April 2016,
simultaneously with the General Assembly's adoption
of its resolution 70/262, completing the review of
United Nations peacebuilding activities. The fourth
was the General Assembly's adoption on 21 December
2016 of resolution 71/243, which contains the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review mandates,
along with the subsequent Secretary-General's report
(A/72/124), in June 2017, on repositioning the United
Nations development system; and the last is the
Secretary-General's imminent proposal regarding the
restructuring of the Organization's peace and security
pillar, based on the preliminary documents already
circulated as part of a broader internal review on
restructuring the Secretariat.

Building on those five major developments has
promising prospects for improving the performance of
the United Nations in its overarching goal of sustaining
peace. Still, the fundamental contradiction thatI referred

to earlier - the fragmentation of responsibilities
assigned to each of the principal intergovernmental
organs - persists. Furthermore, even the reform

proposals whose outlines have already been announced
put the accent on coherence within each of the main
pillars - peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights - rather than fully addressing cross-
pillar coherence.

However, a practical, albeit partial, solution to

this dilemma appears in resolution 2282 (2016). As the
Deputy Secretary-General has already pointed out in
her remarks, it consists in fully embracing the potential
represented by the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and its subsidiary bodies to propose a bridging of the
inputs required by all three intergovernmental principal
organs in order to address the root causes of violent
conflict and promote sustainable peace. In that regard,
we should recall that the PBC is an advisory body to the
three principal intergovernmental organs, and that two
thirds of its 31 members derive from those organs, with
seven members coming from each of the three. Based
on the proposals of the Peacebuilding Support Office,
and with the full involvement of the members elected
by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council, this mechanism
could go a long way to fostering cooperation and
coherence in the way each of these principal organs
contributes to sustaining peace in targeted countries.
At the same time, the mechanism would respect the
Charter-mandated purview of each.

In conclusion, as a result of recent developments,
the United Nations appears much better equipped than
it was two years ago to do justice to the purposes and
principles of the Charter, adapted, of course, to the
needs of the twenty-first century. Hopefully, with a
clear road map to guide them, both the Secretariat and
the Member States will rise to the challenge.

