Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2372 (2017), which renews the
mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). It is a Mission that has been playing a very
vital and, so far, indispensable role in support of peace
and reconciliation in Somalia. We thank the United
Kingdom for its efforts, as penholder, in facilitating
negotiations on today's resolution, and all members of
the Security Council for their support.
The positive prospects that we see so vividly
in Somalia today and its relative stability would
hardly have been possible without the contribution of
AMISOM. If that point is missed, as it sometimes is, it
is possible that any opinions we have about the state of
peace in the Horn of Africa would have very little value.
We are pleased that we have not encountered that in the
course of the difficult negotiations on the resolutions.
No doubt, the African Union Mission in Somalia is
currently operating in a different environment and the
proposed configuration of the Mission is indicative of
the operational success and gains made over the past
10 years.

Somalia is passing through an important phase
in consolidating its State institutions, including the
building of its national security forces, which will pave
the way for the gradual and conditions-based drawdown
of AMISOM. That is a historic achievement for the
people of Somalia. That does not mean that the security
challenges the country faces have all been addressed.
In spite of the political and security gains made in
recent years, Somalia still has a long way to go in its
post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding endeavours.

In that regard, the role of AMISOM. will continue
to be very critical in providing support to the political
process, reconciliation, peacebuilding and capacity-
building, security sector reform and to humanitarian
assistance efforts in the country. Its mandate needs
to be pursued in three components and be gradually
shrunk and transitioned to one entity, which Somalia
must take responsibility for. The three components must
complement and reinforce each other in the delivery of
the mandated tasks. As envisaged in the African Union
Peace and Security Council communique of 12 July,
the civilian component has not been reflected in the
current resolution, which, in our view, is a serious
omission. We hope that that will be rectified in the
future. Nonetheless, we appreciate what the penholder
has achieved.

We would like to draw the attention of the Council
to the following key points.

First, both the joint review and the Secretary-
General's letter (S/2017/653) recognize the need
to secure predictable and sustainable funding for
AMISOM, possibly including United Nations assessed
contributions to address the resourcing gap to the
Mission and to Somalia. We look forward to the
Secretary-General's report on the future funding of
AMISOM. by November. We hope that we will be able
to look at the bigger picture in Somalia so that the
gains made in recent years, through enormous efforts
and great sacrifice will not be in vain. That would be
burden-sharing in practice.

Secondly, the transition, based on a coherent
national security architecture, requires an expedited
operational readiness assessment of the Somali
security forces, which, inter alia, will identify critical
gaps and priorities in support of the Somali national
security forces. Nonetheless, the lack of coordination
and mutual reinforcing support on the part of partners
is a cause for concern, as it might delay or negatively
affect the envisaged AMISOM. transition. Equally,
cooperation and coordination will be important among
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia, AMISOM
and the Somali national security forces at all levels,
including through the senior leadership coordination
forum to enhance coordination efforts on the ground,
based on the outcome of the joint review.

Finally, we believe that decisions on the course of
the transition in Somalia should be informed by taking
a closer look at the situation on the ground in Somalia.
That is why it was important that the resolution that
we adopted today recognize the need for a continuous
and comprehensive assessment of AMISOM, in close
cooperation with the Africa Union and the Federal
Government of Somalia to evaluate the process and
make recommendations on the progressive transition
from AMISOM. to Somali security responsibility,
taking into account the need for an objective evaluation
of capacities.

