I thank you, Sir, for organizing this important open debate. Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statements delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan and of the United Arab Emirates, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (annex 19) and of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 48), respectively. We recently commemorated the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, in September this year. Two days ago, on 24 October, we celebrated United Nations Day. These two historic occasions should serve as strong reminders to Member States to act on their commitments under the Charter of the United Nations, as well as our shared values and ideals of freedom, accountability, and prosperity for everyone, including for our Palestinian brothers and sisters. Malaysia's position on the question of Palestine remains clear. We will continue to advocate the resolution of the question of Palestine on the basis of an international framework, and against annexation and in support of the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination. We will continue to support the realization of the State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. For there to be lasting peace in the Middle East, the established international consensus, in unison with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and relevant resolutions, must be respected and complied by the occupying Power. First, Israel must end its occupation of Palestinian lands and withdraw its troops from the occupied Palestinian territory and surrounding Arab States. Secondly, Israel must cease all of its illegal settlement activities, as demanded by resolution 2334 (2016). The acquisition of any territory by war or force is inadmissible and illegal. Malaysia also would like to recall that, on 16 June 2020, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967 and 47 other independent experts of the United Nations human rights system issued a statement expressing that the annexation of the occupied territory was a serious violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and contrary to fundamental rules affirmed by the Security Council and General Assembly. Thirdly, Israel must allow Palestinian refugees their right to return to their land and property. Fourthly, Israel must restore the original status of Jerusalem. Last but certainly not least, Israel must restore its credibility and return to the negotiating table with Palestine. Malaysia believes that the only viable way forward is a negotiated two-State solution. In this context, Malaysia supports the international community's call, including by the Secretary-General, for the Middle East Quartet to find a mutually agreeable path for the parties to re-engage towards a negotiated, peaceful settlement. These are not new preconditions but rather a reflection of years of diplomatic effort and the consensus reached over decades of negotiations. These are certainly not narratives of the Palestine alone, but a genuine, worldwide call to address the root causes of the conflict and put an end to the longest occupation in the history of the world. Israel can no longer be in denial and must act responsibly. In this regard, Malaysia calls on the Council to act urgently to ensure the full implementation of all applicable Council resolutions and defend the rules-based order so as to ensure the maintenance of regional and international peace and security.
