Mrs. Vives Balmafia (Andorra) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank you, Madam President, as well as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who joined us earlier
today, for convening this open debate and making the
fate of children in armed conflict one of the priorities
of your presidency.

I would also like to thank the speakers:
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF;
and, in particular, Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for their
poignant and inspiring testimonies.

Andorra also endorses the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Children and Armed Conflict.

To read the report of the Secretary-General is to
be alarmed by the figures, the extent of the conflicts
that involve children and how they have been exposed
"to the highest degrees of violence and exploitation"
(5/2019/509, para. 12). We have heard direct testimony
of that here today. It is paradoxical to see that in this
year, which marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1882 (1999) in this very Chamber, the
thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the sixtieth anniversary of the Declaration
of the Rights of the Child, the figures for the six
violations, especially children killed and wounded,
continue to increase.

The resolutions adopted by the Security Council
and the work of the Working Group on Children in
Armed Conflict, chaired by Belgium, have broadened
the areas of focus and the response to the needs of child
victims of armed conflicts. To ensure that child victims
of conflict have the best conditions for reintegration,
it is crucial to raise awareness among all stakeholders
and actors. In addition to carrying out her mandate,
the initiatives of the Office of Special Representative
Gamba, such as ACT to Protect Children Affected by
Conflict campaign, will bring global attention to the
fight against the six violations, and the reintegration
initiative, managed jointly with UNICEF, will assist in
this multidimensional challenge that multilateralism
can help to overcome.

Andorra is committed to leaving no one behind.
For that, and especially for the protection of children,
education 4 as Ms. Kamara also mentioned 4 which
has proved to be one of the most cross-cutting aspects,
ifI may say, of the Sustainable Development Goals, is
essential. Thanks to education, a three-tiered approach
is possible. The first is effective prevention efforts aimed
at reducing inequalities, poverty and marginalization.
The second is the flourishing of girls and boys, without
exception, and of persons with disabilities or mental
illness. All aspects must be taken into consideration.
The third tier is the fight against the stigmatization of
survivors, which is one of the biggest problems facing
young victims when they are reintegrated into society.
Quality education can bring about the right conditions
to prevent crimes against children in armed conflict
zones, both upstream and downstream of the problem.

With the growing number of schools
attacked - as we learned from the report - or used
for military purposes, the Safe Schools Declaration is
indispensable. We invite those countries that have not
yet done so to join, as well as the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Among
the major texts, the Paris Principles and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers establish the
framework that ought to ensure the implementation of
peacekeeping operations and prevent recruitment. The
International Criminal Court, charged with combating
impunity, is the body that ensures recourse, if need be,
to restorative justice.

Andorra supports the rights of children in armed
conflict zones as well as the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF.
However, I would not like to conclude without expressing
our gratitude to all the people and organizations on the
ground. Let us help their workers ensure that all girls
and boys grow up fully enjoying their rights.

