Ms. Lobato (Timor-Leste): It is indeed an honour
for me to represent my Government and my beloved
country in this important debate and to present our
Timorese experience in recovering from conflict over
the past 10 years. I will keep my statement within the
time limit, but I have circulated a more detailed text to
representatives for the record.

As Minister of Justice, I am able to present a
perspective on the development of peace through the
legal institutions and the rule of law in my country. But
I also wish to discuss some broader aspects of
reconciliation, economic development, security and
political stability, which are essential. I intend to focus
more on the solutions we are providing to our problems
than on the problems themselves. Let me share our
experience.

This debate is particularly timely for us, as we
have just hosted the Dili International Dialogue
conference, which served as an opportunity to
exchange experiences and find common ground among
the so-called g7 Plus - the "small g seven plus" of
fragile States. There was strong consensus among
fragile countries and development partners to move
from fragility to agility and seek greater and more
focused engagement with development partners.

We have found that Timor-Leste has much to
offer and to gain in the discussions about
peacebuilding strategies. While eight years is but a
short time since our national independence, we have
made many achievements. We addressed some burning
issues in the short term that were indeed critical to our
recovery. Important social security measures were
introduced, including recognition for the heroes of our
nation who made sacrifices so that we could be free.
Our relationship with Indonesia has been strengthened
through initiatives such as the Truth and Friendship
Commission and the ongoing dialogue between our
leaders. Camps for internally displaced person were

gradually and sensitively decommissioned and people
were assisted in relocation and rebuilding. The
Government intervened to ensure food security when
rising rice prices threatened to limit supply.

The police and defence forces began to define
their peacetime mandates and work together on joint
operations when the internal security of the nation was
threatened. The success of this was evident following
the 2008 attacks on the Prime Minister and the
President of the Republic. Thanks to sound leadership,
this crisis inspired our security forces and provided a
platform to pursue further security sector reform,
greater professionalism and independence from
political interference. The police are now adopting a
community policing ethos, an approach by which the
police serve and work together with the community to
identify potential conflicts and to solve problems
before they escalate to violence.

Timor-Leste is fortunate to be blessed with
income from natural resources managed by the
Petroleum Fund, a success story in transparency and
good governance. Our Government believes that we
need to invest the income we make back into our own
country to improve the lives of our citizens. It is hard
to explain the sense of keeping money in the bank
while our people suffer. We need to create a dividend
for peace and stability.

Yes, we have come a long way, but we have also
learned many lessons, including some painful ones. We
have learned that, without exception, countries can
recover from conflict only if they can create a window
of time in which they are free from further conflict. In
Timor-Leste, we at last have that window, but we are
not taking peace for granted. As our Prime Minister,
Xanana Gusmao, has recently said,

"It can be easy to breathe a sigh of relief when
you begin to show signs of progress, when you
achieve a level of apparent stability, because in
times of peace we can forget the hardships of
conflict".

We were not only emerging from a violent
conflict; we were also, for the first time in our history,
creating a new, independent State. In this spirit, I
would like to share three observations on
peacebuilding from our perspective, grounded in the
recent history of Timor-Leste and enriched by pertinent
themes from the Dili International Dialogue
Conference.
In regard to the need for an inclusive political
dialogue, in Timor-Leste we are aiming for a new
maturity in political relations. Following independence,
the Government set about addressing the roots of
conflict. The world will remember that, at the birth of
our new nation, our country lay in ruins. We were
building our new country on a destroyed infrastructure,
a limited economic sector and problematic social
cohesion between ourselves and our neighbours. Our
people had independence, but its benefits of it were as
yet unfelt by many in their daily lives.

Not surprisingly, we faced conflict again in 2006.
This conflict set back our development, but also
presented valuable lessons. Our political actors learned
that the way to our future was not through violence but
through positive and active leadership, professionalism
and commitment to development. From the 2006
conflict, we arose stronger as a nation, less afraid of
expressing political differences, in a process enriching
our political maturity without the need to revert to
violent conflict. We confront each other every day, but
we do so in our national Parliament. In addition, the
parliamentary opposition is regularly included in
public debates to forge a truly national consensus about
issues of common interest to all Timorese, such as the
package of major security laws that was approved last
month.

As to setting the right national priorities within a
flexible and long-term Vision, in 2006 Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmao and the fourth constitutional
Government set about changing the course of Timor-
Leste's future. Continued stability depends on our
success not only in managing crises but also in forming
respected State institutions that address all the needs of
our society, from ensuring basic services to reducing
poverty. In 2008, we realized that the only way to
achieve sustainable development was to coordinate all
our efforts. That same year, we presented a set of
national priorities for the country.

Those priorities are consistent with the five areas
identified as recurrent peacebuilding objectives in the
Secretary-General's 2009 report on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). In
addition, we include a specific national priority area
dedicated to access to justice and another to good
governance and accountability, as well as one that
deals with human resource development. A focus on
youth and gender is mainstreamed into all our priority
areas because we have a rapidly growing population
which we want to be productive members of society,
not alienated or frustrated over a lack of jobs.

We have reviewed our national priorities on an
annual basis to ensure that we are adaptable to the
changing situation. With the improvement in the
security situation since 2008, we have been able to
shift our priorities for 2010 to infrastructure and rural
development. To provide an umbrella for this and
prepare us for the long term, the Prime Minister is
finalizing a strategic development plan for 2011-2030
that will ensure the coordination of all development
activities in the country for the next 20 years.

Concerning justice and the rule of law, we know
that one of the foundations of a stable and secure
society operating within the rule of law is a respected
justice system, whereby the rights and obligations of
the State and its citizens are understood by citizens and
are enforceable. We aim to give particular attention to
the voices of vulnerable groups, especially women and
children. Timor-Leste has also consistently prioritized
the building of strong institutions of justice that
complement the work done in policing and security
sector reform. Justice cannot be neglected in our
progress towards long-term security, peace and
economic development.

A fortnight ago, the Council of Ministers
endorsed a strategic plan for the justice sector,
following a highly participatory process. This process
informed and subsequently took account of the
recommendations of the 2009 independent
comprehensive needs assessment, facilitated by the
United Nations. The justice sector strategic plan can be
explained by its motto, "Bringing justice to the
people", and in order to achieve that we have addressed
five thematic areas, which are covered in more detail in
the written version of this statement: institutional
development; the completion of Timor-Leste's legal
framework; the development of human resources;
creating an infrastructure and applying information and
communication technology; and providing access to
justice.

We see justice as a fundamental part of this
debate on peacebuilding and the prevention of conflict.
Let me quote Pope John Paul II, in his address for the
2002 World Day of Peace, when he said that there is
"no peace without justice, no justice without
forgiveness". Forgiveness is not the opposite ofjustice.
In fact, true peace is the work of justice. We are
working on a justice system that safeguards the rights
of all citizens, including by providing legal remedies
where their rights have been violated. We also
acknowledge that there is no justice without
forgiveness. While our country ensures the rule of law,
we want to tell the Council that we suffered for many
years, and in some cases the wounds are still fresh. We
need to help heal these wounds, and we need to do so
in our own way and in our own time.

As there is no peace without justice, there is also
no peace without development. To conclude, I would
like to share some important points.

Concerning the question of quality over
expedience in capacity-building, in Timor-Leste we
were criticized many years ago for choosing quality
over expedience in preparing judicial actors, but we
can now show results, and we encourage this principle
to be applied as the only way of achieving confidence
in State institutions.

On the alignment of all foreign development
support to our development plans, in order to reach a
lasting peace we still need support. Initiatives such as
the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund could help us
enormously. We highly appreciate the assistance of our
development partners, including the United Nations
Development Programme, all of which are now
working with us as close associates rather than as far-
away donors. We know that we are not alone. In order
to achieve development, we cannot allow the existence
of uncoordinated or competing implementation
mechanisms. The only way to create confidence among
our people and sustainable progress is to ensure that
the development agenda is led by the Timorese
leadership, taking the national dialogue to all parts of
the country. Peacebuilding must be a genuinely
national process if it is to be a productive element for
stability and reconciliation. A process of national
consultation led by the Prime Minister will begin in
rural areas next month.

Concerning the adoption of modern, user-friendly
technology, we need to automate Government services
and make them more accessible to the public, more
transparent and more accountable. Developing
countries may at times be offered clumsy, outdated
solutions, as we were in Timor-Leste, because people
think we are not ready for modern technology. We do
not agree with that thinking. We need to jump into the
future. Recent advances in technology have resulted in

systems that are more intuitive and easy to use, and we
need to go straight to these solutions. Many of our
people are already comfortable with technology, and
we are working with our partners to ensure that they
are trained to develop, support and adapt systems
owned by Timor-Leste. In addition, we need to use
environmentally friendly technology. Here, we can
learn from the mistakes of our development partners.
We can keep the beauty and the resources of our
countries while advancing towards peace and stability.

With regard to strengthening the partnership
between Government and civil society, the growth and
progressive impact of our civil society organizations
have demonstrated the engagement of the people of
Timor-Leste. Timorese civil society has evolved from
providing humanitarian support to representing the
voices of the most vulnerable. It is inspiring to see
more and more young people volunteer to serve their
communities and join the fight for peace and justice.

To achieve peace, we must fight not conflict, but
the causes that might lead us to conflict. While some
States have taken centuries to build their State
institutions and achieve social and economic
development, we must do it in decades. As our Prime
Minister has stated,

"To unite an entire people who have been scarred
from conflict in the struggle for peace is more
difficult than to achieve unity in times of conflict.
As we know, there are so many legitimate
expectations from people who have fought for so
many years for the ideals of freedom, equality
and development that we can say that achieving
true peace also means freeing people from
poverty."

In Timor-Leste we believe that peacebuilding and
development are not abstract words or theories, but as
tangible and real as a hand to hold. My friends and
colleagues in the Security Council took my country's
hand when we reached out to them at the start of our
journey and helped pull us out of war. Our famous
Timorese spirit survives and grows, and I now offer
our hand again and ask for theirs as true partners in
development, so that we can walk together along the
road to a lasting peace and a brighter future in Timor-
Leste.

