Mr. Begec (Turkey): We have repeatedly underlined
at the Security Council that the Israeli-Palestine
conflict remains the core challenge to lasting and
regional peace. The recent developments in Jerusalem
should remind all of us that we should never lose sight
of that fact. In that regard, we regret all loss of life and
condemn all violence.

The immediate priority must be a rapid
de-escalation and exercise of restraint by all parties.
We should not see this as another perennial round of
skirmishes and stand idle until the situation calms
down. At the same time, we all should acknowledge the
importance of the preservation of the historic status and
sanctity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif for the Islamic world.
Attempts to change the status quo jeopardize peaceful
coexistence. Jerusalem, a city sacred to Islam, Judaism
and Christianity, should be treated with the utmost
respect. The closure of Al-Haram Al-Sharif for days
and the subsequent decision to place metal detectors at
its entrances along with other restrictions on Muslims's
entry there are unacceptable. Those mistakes, as well
as the disproportionate use of force against Palestinians
who were on the streets for prayers, cannot be justified
by any means.

We expect Israel to listen to the calls of the
international community, fulfil its legal obligations as
the occupying Power in East Jerusalem and lift all the
restrictions that limit access to Al-Haram Al Sharif.
In that regard, Israel's decision to remove the metal
detectors was a step in the right direction. Return to
the status quo in its full letter and spirit is essential for
the restoration of calm. This is a matter of freedom of
religion and worship.

The grim situation reflects the far-reaching effects
of the absence of real hope for peace. Only a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace, which would lead to
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine
within the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its
capital can ensure peace and security for both sides. In
that regard, measures in contravention of international
law, in particular settlement activities, which are an
obstacle to the two-State solution, must be discontinued.

To reach a lasting peace, it is also important for the
Palestinians to voice their legitimate demands in unity.
Turkey is determined to continue to carry out its efforts
to that end and supports the initiatives that respect the
established parameters, including the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Fully aware of the dire humanitarian situation in
Palestine, especially in Gaza, Turkey also continues
its efforts to improve the living conditions of the
Palestinians through development assistance and
reconstruction projects. The third Turkish shipment of
10.000 tons of humanitarian aid reached Gaza in June.
While working on possible ways to remedy the grave
scarcity of water and electricity in Gaza, Turkey has
allocated $500,000 to the occupied Palestinian territory
Humanitarian Fund for the purchase of emergency
fuel to maintain the delivery of essential services
in response to the appeal of the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process. Furthermore, we continue to support the work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East given its essential
role in the lives of Palestine refugees.

Since the very beginning of the Syrian conflict,
Turkey has undertaken intensive efforts to end the
violence in Syria and reach a political solution based
on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), as
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). While a genuine
political transition is the only way to end the Syrian
conflict, negotiations to that end cannot bear fruit if
the fighting continues. For that reason, we facilitated
and became the guarantors of a nationwide ceasefire
with the Russian Federation and Iran. The Astana
meetings, which are complementary and supportive
to the United Nations-led Geneva political process,
aim at strengthening the ceasefire and adopting
confidence-building measures.

At the fourth round of high-level meetings held
in Astana on 3 and 4 May, a memorandum on the
establishment of de-escalation areas in certain parts of
Syria was adopted. Issues related to the delineation of
the de-escalation areas, as well as to their administration
will be finalized by the joint working group formed
among the three guarantors. The significant reduction
of violence achieved on the ground has established
an environment conducive to holding the last three
rounds of the Geneva talks. The opposition once again
demonstrated political maturity and demonstrated its
credibility by engaging in real talks, as well as increased
the interaction among various groups. The regime's
representatives should not be allowed to continue their
intransigent stance and poison the upcoming talks with
both violations on the ground and harmful rhetoric at
the table.

Only a multidimensional strategy can achieve
the dual objectives of eliminating terrorism and
stabilizing Syria. Turkey's resolve to fight Da'esh and
other terrorist organizations such as the Democratic
Union Party and the Kurdish People's Protection Units
remains firm. Unilateral steps threatening the unity,
the territorial integrity and the demographic structure
of Syria and efforts to seek territorial expansion for
political leverage are unacceptable. We cannot afford to
repeat the mistakes that were made in Manbij, only this
time, in Raqqa. Together with its partners, Turkey will
continue its efforts to address the plight of the Syrian
people and find a solution to the conflict that will meet
their legitimate aspirations.

We would like to congratulate the Iraqi security
forces for their success in liberating Mosul from
Da'esh. We are confident that permanent peace and
stability in Iraq will be achieved through inclusive
national reconciliation. Unilateral moves that
challenge Iraq's territorial integrity and political unity
will only additionally lead to instability and entail
negative consequences.

In the near future, Turkey is ready to contribute
to the reconstruction efforts of Mosul and to the
elimination of the conditions that led to the emergence
of Da'esh and other radical organizations.
