Ms. Nasiwa: On behalf of the Centre for Inclusive
Governance, Peace and Justice, allow me to sincerely
express my appreciation to Poland for inviting me to
brief the Security Council. I am honoured to speak to
the Council today on the situation in South Sudan as a
civil society leader and on behalf of the suffering South
Sudanese people, who have not known peace.

The 2011 referendum brought new hope of liberty,
prosperity and unity to the people of South Sudan. But
that hope was shattered by fighting among the political
leadership of the country from 2013 to date. As women,
we witness and experience gross violations of human
rights and humanitarian law, as well as death, mass
displacement, sexual abuse and rape. Although we
are resilient, we are frustrated as our leaders fail to
deliver a lasting political settlement to the crisis. We
have watched our young children recruited to fight a
senseless war. Our homes and our communities have
become unsafe due to increased insecurity, continued
fighting by the warring parties, increased rebellions
by estranged groups, militia and unknown gunmen,
inter-ethnic and communal cattle disputes. We are
deeply worried about the future as the transitional
period comes to an end amid the continued fighting.

We urge all the parties and the Government to
commit to the High-level Revitalization Forum process
as a priority and prerequisite for a peaceful transition
and inclusive, fair and free elections. We applaud
the efforts by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the Security Council, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), faith-
based leaders and civil society in working to secure
peace and stability in South Sudan. However, the
Council should note that, although the revitalization
of the peace agreement is a premise for a stable,
prosperous and peaceful South Sudan, the continued
violation of its provisions undermines any stabilization
efforts within the country. The IGAD High-level
Revitalization Forum, which has been inclusive to date,
is an opportunity for the parties and other estranged
groups to make compromises for the sake of peace.

My organization recommends an enforcement
mechanism, monitoring, reporting and strict adherence
to declared ceasefires. We call upon IGAD, the
African Union and the Security Council to expedite
the establishment of transitional justice institutions.
Chapter V of the peace agreement, on transitional
justice, with a special focus on sexual violence against
women, must be preserved. A gender-sensitive approach
to the monitoring and reporting of ceasefire violations
is also essential, as is the need to reform governance,
justice, security institutions and for a comprehensive
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation programme. The competing geopolitical
and regional interests within IGAD countries and the
unlimited IGAD mandate further erodes the prospects
for peace. I call on the Security Council to remain united
and put more time and resources into ensuring that
an inclusive IGAD process, supported by the African
Union, reaches a final settlement without further delay
The Council should provide support to women leaders
and civil society groups during the transitional period
through funding and capacity-building for a gendered
and inclusive political process.

UNMISS remains critical and relevant to South
Sudan, especially with regard to the protection of
civilians, internally displaced persons and others in
conflict-affected areas, as military and para-military
groups and individuals continue to target women at
water, firewood collection and food-gathering points.
Women and children are frequently raped, sexually
abused, tortured or killed. Victims suffer stigma,
trauma, mental disorders, unwanted pregnancies
and rejection by their husbands, as well as diseases,
including HIV/AIDS. UNMISS should consult and
work with civil society organizations, women and
community leaders on conflict sensitivity and early-
warning to develop and adopt a gender-sensitive
approach to civilian protection.

I furthermore call for a speedy recruitment and full
deployment of the Regional Protection Force, through
the African Union, to Juba and other areas. It should be
noted that, as the capital, Juba has experienced relative
peace and calm owing to the presence and patrols by
the Regional Protection Force. With the presence of
UNMISS in Yei, civilians have begun to return, and the
Lutaya market and shops, for example, have reopened.

We are disturbed by allegations of sexual
harassment and abuse by UNMISS peacekeepers in
Wau and in other sites. However, we welcome the strong
stance by the Secretary-General with regard to his zero
tolerance towards sexual abuse. We call upon UNMISS
to expedite the investigations of its peacekeepers and
make the reports public. We call for a United Nations
policy and action on mainstreaming orientation
and enforcing training on sexual harassment for its
peacekeepers and United Nations police, as a critical
element for disciplined peacekeeping missions.

Civil society is not an enemy. Civil society
organizations play an important role in monitoring and
bridging the gap between the Government and citizens
through the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
peacekeeping, the protection of human rights and
the promotion of good governance. However, civil
society representatives are often arrested, threatened
intimidated or killed owing to their work. The
diminishing space for civil society operations has
forced some of the leaders to leave the country. For
example, members of civil society are required to get
permission by all sides to a conflict before carrying out
their activities. The Security Council needs to express
support for the important role civil society plays by
speaking out against those actions.

I once more thank and commend the Security
Council for allowing me to discuss the current situation
in my country and the unbearable suffering of my
fellow citizens. I believe that this Council meeting will
bring peace to South Sudan and our suffering will come
to an end. I conclude by saying ana taban - the people
are tired. We need peace now.

