The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Brazil, Chile, Egypt,
Fiji, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Spain, Thailand and
Ukraine in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Stuart
(Australia), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Maquieira
(Chile), Mr. Ahoul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Naidu
(Fiji), Mr. Widodo (Indonesia), Mr. Motomura
(Japan), Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia), Mr. MacKay
(New Zealand), Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal),
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic ofKorea), Mr. Arias
(Spain), Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand), Mr.
Kuchinsky (Ukraine) took the seats reserved for
them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Xanana Gusmao,
President-elect of East Timor, and His Excellency Mr.
Mari Bin Amude Alkatiri, Chief Minister of East
Timor.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the President-elect of East Timor, Mr.
Xanana Gusmao and to the Chief Minister of East
Timor, Mr. Mari Bin Amude Alkatiri. I request the
Associate Chief of Protocol to escort them to their
seats at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2002/432 and Add], which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor.

I should like to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, to
whom I give the floor.


