Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to thank Prime Minister
Bellerive of Haiti for having addressed the Council
today.

We welcome the efforts of the Government of
Haiti to address the many challenges posed by the
earthquake, despite the very difficult circumstances.
The Action Plan for the Reconstruction and the
Development of Haiti presented by the Government is
the basis for the country's reconstruction and a guide
for the international community's efforts.

I should also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti,
Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his introduction to the Security
Council today of the semi-annual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/200) on the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and for having agreed
to continue his work as head of MINUSTAH, which he
has so conscientiously pursued since the tragic events
of 12 January.

I wish to thank all United Nations personnel in
Haiti for their excellent work in difficult conditions.
We owe them every possible support.

We also express our administration for the
exceptional tenacity of the people of Haiti in the face
of the terrible catastrophe of 12 January, and assure
them that we will continue to help them to overcome
this challenge.

We further thank Mr. Bill Clinton, United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti, for the dynamic and proactive
way in which he has discharged his mandate to
coordinate reconstruction activities in that country.

Austria associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union later in
this debate. Allow me to make the following comments
on behalf of my delegation.

MINUSTAH's role in response to the tragic
events of 12 January has been exemplary. Even as it
suffered its own losses in the earthquake, it was able to
fulfil its mandate and to make a decisive contribution
to managing the crisis, ensuring security and stability,
and facilitating humanitarian assistance, in support of
the Haitian authorities. Austria recognizes in particular
the Mission's efforts in the promotion of human rights
and the rule of law and the protection of civilians,
especially women and children. Austria shares the
Secretary-General's assessment that the coming 12 to
18 months will be a period of high risk for Haiti,
during which security and protection objectives will
need to be pursued as vigorously as the organization of
the presidential, municipal and legislative elections and
the reconstruction and development of the country.

In the coming months, the coordination of
humanitarian assistance will be of primary importance.
Austria believes that the United Nations must continue
to play a key role in that regard, in close cooperation
with the Haitian authorities. Issues requiring
MINUSTAH's special attention in this critical phase
will include the rule of law, good governance and the
protection of internally displaced persons (IDPs). In
that context, we welcome the various proposals made
by the Secretary-General in his semi-annual report on
the future role of MINUSTAH. It will be essential to
preserve the United Nations integrated approach in the
five fields identified as critical.

Austria supports the recommendation that
MINUSTAH lead the international community's efforts
in the area of electoral assistance. We also support the
role of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in coordinating and supervising the activities
of the United Nations system as a whole. We note the
Secretary-General's request for an increase of 680 in
the ceiling of police personnel, which would ensure a
visible police presence in IDP camps. That measure
will help to protect the civilian population and to
maintain a safe and stable environment conducive to
the conduct of free and fair elections. Austria therefore
supports that request.

The police component of MINUSTAH plays a
key role in the protection of civilians and the
promotion of human rights. It is Austria's view that
special attention will have to be paid to the needs of
the most vulnerable, including women and children,
and to measures to prevent sexual violence. With
respect to the promotion of the rule of law and the fight
against impunity, we back the Secretary-General's
proposal to make MINUSTAH staff and seconded
experts available to assist the Government of Haiti in
its policing, judicial and correctional functions. It is
essential that we pursue our efforts in this critical area,
despite the losses and difficulties resulting from the
earthquake. The approach advocated by the Secretary-
General will allow us to strengthen the rule of law and
to guarantee the successful provision of State services,
despite the current challenges.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
proposal to renew and step up MINUSTAH's
commitment to mainstreaming. This will involve, inter
alia, the establishment of a social security network, the
protection of human rights, gender equality and the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009).

With respect to reconstruction efforts, I pay
tribute to the generosity of donor countries extended at
the conference held on 31 March to cover the financing
requirements of the Haitian Government's Action Plan.
Austria has provided $8 million in financial and
humanitarian contributions, while Austrian citizens
have donated $45 million to Haiti.

I conclude by expressing my conviction that the
people and Government of Haiti will be able to
overcome the terrible tragedy that struck them on
12 January and to build the new Haiti for which we all
yearn. I assure them that the international community
will stand with them and help them in that very
important work.

