Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to begin by
congratulating His Excellency Mr. Dacie, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, on his assumption of the position of
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2015. We are
indeed grateful for his briefing today on the priorities
of the OSCE under his chairmanship. We commend
his predecessor, Mr. Didier Burkhalter of Switzerland,
who led the OSCE in 2014 with clear priorities for the
advancement of the Organization.

The OSCE is a key component of Europe's security
architecture. Its importance for building strong and
generally cooperative relationships among its member
States is evident from the briefing we have just heard.
The OSCE is making noteworthy progress as an
regional organization and is cooperating closely with
the United Nations in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Nigeria welcomes the high priority that the
Chairperson-in-Office has placed on the agreements
reached between the parties in pursuit of a peaceful
settlement to the crisis in Ukraine. We believe that
the implementation process of the current ceasefire
under the Minsk Agreement can be strengthened with
the support and expertise of the OSCE. We therefore
encourage all parties to cooperate with the OSCE
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. Nigeria would like
to see mediation, dialogue and cooperation accorded
priority in the search for an enduring solution to the
crisis in Ukraine.
Nigeria commends the OSCE for its efforts in
assisting Azerbaijan and Armenia to find a peaceful
solution to the Nagorno Karabakh and South Ossetia
conflicts. We also applaud the Organization's support
to European Union-led dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. We urge the OSCE to intensify efforts within
its capacities to assist the United Nations in putting an
end to armed conflicts in the region.

Nigeria supports the OSCE's work in preventing
terrorism and countering violent extremism and
radicalization. The changing nature of terrorism and
that fact that it is more diffuse, with groups intend of
taking advantage of social, economic and governance
vulnerabilities have propelled the Security Council and
the United Nations to recognize that countering violent
extremism is essential for preventing the spread of
terrorism. The OSCE's community-policing approach
is vital to this end. We take positive note on the outcome
of the two-day workshop sponsored by the OSCE and
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, held in Vienna
in October 2014, which focused on the promotion of
a gender-sensitive and human rights-based approach
to fighting terrorism. Nigeria strongly supports any
strategy that empowers women to contribute to efforts
that counter violent extremism and radicalization. We
are firmly committed to the protection of human rights
and civil liberties while fighting terrorism.

Finally, Nigeria commends the OSCE for its
multidimensional approach to security, which underpins
its adaptability and has allowed it to make significant
contributions to peace, security and progress in Europe.

