Mr. Patriota: I thank the Rwandan presidency of
the Security Council for its continuing commitment to
advancing the Council's consideration of post-conflict
peacebuilding, including by drawing on the advice of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in a considered
and meaningful way.

My predecessor's presentation of the Commission's
report on its seventh session (S/2014/67) shed light on
its country-specific engagements, its ongoing efforts in
the area of policy development, and the progress made
in strengthening its advisory function to the Council.
The Commission believes, however, that the annual
briefings and follow-up informal interactive dialogue
present the two bodies with a valuable opportunity to
reflect on the critical challenges that continue to affect
the United Nations contribution to sustaining peace in
countries emerging from conflict.

The recent crises in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan are painful reminders that our efforts
to prevent a relapse into conflict remain insufficient
and that our tools are not fully adequate. Those crises
have also reminded us that the consequences of relapse
can cause untold human tragedy and create instability
across State boundaries. The Security Council has been
mandated to respond and seek to bring end to Violent
conflicts using a variety of strategies and tools. The
Peacebuilding Commission was established, in 2005, to
help the United Nations to strengthen those strategies
and find complementary avenues to bring long-lasting
stability to countries emerging from conflict.

The Peacebuilding Commission, along with the
Peacebuilding Fund, has continued to work intensively
in a variety of scenarios. In the case of the PBC, a
particular focus has been placed on supporting the
countries on our agenda. The nature of our support
and engagement varies according to the nature of the
challenges in each situation. Despite the re-emergence
of conflict in the Central African Repblic, the PBC
has continued to support the United Nations and
African Union missions, in order to seek to strengthen
collaboration in the region and to ensure backing
for early efforts at institution-building. In Burundi,
the Commission has worked closely with the United
Nations leadership and the World Bank to intensify
and sustain regional and international engagement in
support of national attempts to address the country's
political and socioeconomic challenges. In Guinea, the
Commission leveraged its political weight in support
of United Nations mediation efforts to help resolve the
political stand-off prior to this year's parliamentary
elections. The Commission is now involved in efforts
for strengthening the capacity of the new Parliament
so that it can play its role as a key part of the country's
institutions and fully participate in the definition
of Guinea's political and economic development.
Similarly in Guinea-Bissau, the Commission threw its
political weight behind the efforts of the United Nations
leadership to ensure a smooth return to constitutional
order and more inclusive political arrangements in
the wake of the 2012 unconstitutional change of
Government. As Sierra Leone has approached the
milestone of transitioning from a Security Council-
mandated mission, the Commission continues to provide
an inter-governmental platform that the Government
can rely upon to support its political and developmental
gains and to address outstanding issues and challenges.
In each of those situations, the political nature of the
Commission's engagement was effectively reinforced
by the timely and strategic programmatic interventions
of the Peacebuilding Fund.

The PBC's varied context-specific engagements have
highlighted areas in which broader intergovernmental
policy development is necessary to help countries
reduce the risk ofconflict. For example, there is a need to
consider the development of international frameworks
that can help countries mobilize domestic resources to
fund development efforts and build key institutions.
During its first annual session convened on 23 June,
the Peacebuilding Commission examined mechanisms
for supporting domestic revenue-generation and
combating illicit financial flows out of countries
emerging from conflict. Those included, among other
things, combating trade mis-invoicing and developing
capacity and expertise to negotiate fair contracts with
companies responsible for the extraction of national
resources. Most States emerging from conflict struggle
to develop the domestic revenue-generation systems
necessary to sustain effective institutions and fully
re-establish the legitimacy and authority of the State.
The necessary political, technical and financial support
required for critical institution-building in this area is
slow to arrive. Support sustained over time is seen as
a requirement for new institutions to become resilient
and act as an effective brake against renewed conflict.
At the same time, illicit financial flows deprive post-
conflict countries of vital resources needed or basic
services and recovery, often exceeding development
assistance in volume.

Drawing on the experience gained from its
engagement with the countries on its agenda, the
Commission is able to highlight three elements that
should underpin a new generation of political strategies
to reinforce our collective efforts to prevent a relapse
into conflict.

First, with regard to national ownership, national
leadership and national political commitment are
indispensable ingredients for durable peace. There is
a need for political strategies to include measures and
incentives that allow for broad inclusion in political
life, thereby ensuring that key national stakeholders
remain engaged and committed to the peacebuilding
process. As Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
underscored in his statement at the opening of the PBC
annual session, let us not forget that

"international aid is of course necessary in many
situations, but it rarely helps build a new social
contract. It can also weaken national ownership.
The best way to assist countries going through
post-conflict transition is to help them generate
their own resources and capacities."

In that regard, we would emphasize as well the
importance of efforts towards national capacity
building.

Secondly, regional engagement and commitment
are potentially extremely valuable for stable and
sustainable peace. There is a need to ensure that the
perspectives, interests and concerns of regional actors
and neighbouring countries are factored into a broader
political strategy in support of countries emerging from
conflict. There is also the need to ensure that regional
coherence is attained through active engagement by
regional and subregional mechanisms and support from
the United Nations and other partners. In that regard,
one should highlight the positive dynamic that can
be now observed between and among the four West-
African countries on the PBC agenda - namely,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone and Liberia - and
the role played by the Economic Community of West
African States and the Mario River Union, regional
organizations of which they are part.

Thirdly, a political strategy must be reinforced
by programmatic interventions with particular focus
on support to institution-building, involving bilateral
partners, regional development banks and international
financial institutions. There is also a need to prioritize
support to those institutions and mechanisms that
strengthen the capacity of societies to manage tensions,
and the capacity of Governments to deliver basic
services, protect human rights and facilitate access to
justice.

Those strategies should naturally be adapted to
country-specific contexts. At the same time, they need
to be pursued through long term, sustained and mutual
commitments between the country concerned and its
partners, regional and international organizations.

I also wish to highlight the importance of developing
improved interaction between the PBC and the Security
Council. As Chair ofthe country-specific configuration
on Guinea-Bissau, I have been encouraged by my
experiencing of a high degree of attention on the part
of the Council with respect to briefings I have made.
The diplomatic expertise demonstrated by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ramos-Horta
should inspire us to attribute greater value to mutually
reinforcing strategies between the Security Council
and the PBC. We can further refine our procedures in
future in order to maximize the potential gains from
enhanced interaction.

The Commission looks forward to further
exchanging views with members of the Council on
those and other elements in the course of the informal
interactive dialogue to be convened by the Council's
presidency this afternoon.

Next year, the Security Council and the General
Assembly will embark upon the 10-year comprehensive
review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. Our collective approach to preventing
a relapse into conflict, as well as our successes and
failures, must be a central aspect of the review. There
is a need for deepening the analysis, supported by
country examples, of how multifaceted United Nations
efforts contribute to long-term and sustainable peace.
There is also a need to analyse how United Nations
political mandates and evolving operational practice
have made a real difference in the countries affected
by, or emerging from, conflict. The Commission will
benefit from that analysis and from the outcome of the
2015 review as it seeks to further strengthen, deepen
and focus its advisory function to the Council and its
support to the United Nations leadership in the field as
we collectively tackle the complexity of post-conflict
situations and try to prevent the recurrence of conflict.

Finally, before concluding, allow me to express
my gratitude and acknowledge the highly professional
and wise counsel that I have received from Assistant
Secretary-General Judy Cheng Hopkins, as she prepares
to assume new responsibilities. Let me also thank her
team for its support to the Commission's work and
activities.

