Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank you, Sir,
for personally presiding over this meeting to consider ways
and means of enhancing the security of those personnel
who are working in conflict zones. The importance of this
issue cannot be overemphasized, as the safety of personnel
is a precondition for the success of every United Nations
political and humanitarian operation.

Although the need to improve the safety of United
Nations personnel working in the field has been discussed
at length in this Council before and in other forums of the
United Nations, it is very clear that more needs to be
done. As the number of those killed and who have
suffered in the line of duty continues to increase, there is
no clear sign of improvement in the security situation
surrounding those personnel. It is imperative, therefore,
that we mobilize our collective political will and start
taking concrete and practical steps to protect those
personnel and prevent further casualties.

First and foremost, what can the Security Council
do to improve the safety of personnel? The Security
Council, as the principal organ for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should attach higher
priority in its work to the safety of personnel in the field.
We expect the Council to continue to monitor closely the
situation in the field and, if necessary, to adopt specific
measures to protect personnel in conflict zones and take
a public stand against those who endanger the lives of
such personnel. The strong and consistent interest of the
Security Council in the safety of personnel engaged in
United Nations operations under dangerous circumstances
will demonstrate that the international community will not
tolerate a culture of impunity and will hold responsible
the organizations and individuals who violate the safety
of personnel.

While a wide range of specific measures are called
for, today I would like to focus my comments on two
areas where I believe further efforts are especially needed.
The first area is the international legal framework.

In January 1999 we finally welcomed the entry into
force of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. The fact that, as
previous speakers have noted, only 29 countries have thus
far ratified this Convention is a source of great
disappointment to my delegation. Moreover, these 29
countries do not include a single country in which United
Nations peacekeeping forces are deployed. As the second
country to have ratified this Convention, Japan would like
to call upon those States that have not yet done so to
become parties to it as soon as possible. It is especially
important that all members of the Security Council do so;
so far only four have. By ratifying the Convention,
Security Council members would be setting an example
for the rest of the membership of the Organization.

In this regard, I hope that the Security Council will
urge those Member States hosting United Nations

 

operations in their own territories to sign and ratify the
Convention, thereby - along with welcoming and
receiving United Nations operations in their own
territories - clearly demonstrating their political and legal
commitment to uphold their responsibility of protecting the
safety of United Nations and associated personnel who are
working in their area.

In addition, as regards the legal framework, it is also
necessary to extend the scope of the Convention to include
United Nations and associated personnel who are not yet
under its umbrella. Japan heartily supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General, contained in his
report of 8 September 1999, calling upon the Security
Council to

"Invite the General Assembly to urgently
pursue the development of a protocol to the 1994
Convention, which would extend the scope of legal
protection to all United Nations and associated
personnel." (S/1999/957, recommendation II)

To this end, we welcome the General Assembly resolution
on this question, resolution 54/ 192 of 17 December 1999.

At the same time, while awaiting the protocol to the
1994 Convention, it should be recalled that the Convention
itself contains a provision that the Security Council may
extend the scope of legal protection on a case-by-case basis.
Perhaps the Security Council might utilize this mechanism.

Another important area is the need for concrete and
practical steps to enhance safety. Training in safety and
security is of paramount importance. Since the end of 1998,
the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator has
organized a series of training missions and workshops in
many regions of the world, including Afghanistan, Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Kenya, and we understand that
additional workshops are scheduled to take place this year,
all financed from the Trust Fund for Security of United
Nations personnel.

We have been gratified to learn that quite a few staff
members have credited the lessons they received in those
workshops with saving their lives. The workshops are very
important. I would therefore like to express Japan's
appreciation to the Office of the United Nations Security
Coordinator for its dedicated efforts in carrying out those
training activities.

The need for security training is growing, and the
Trust Fund requires continued support. We find it deeply
distressing that to date only five Member States, including
Japan, have contributed to this Trust Fund. My delegation
would like to invite the entire membership of the United
Nations to support the Trust Fund.

As a way of encouraging a more positive response
from Member States, it might be worthwhile for the
Secretariat to organize regular briefings to apprise them
of concrete measures that have been taken so far and to
discuss with them possible additional measures and
support. In this connection, we hope that the general and
comprehensive review of security requirements for
peacekeepers, which has been planned by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, will be completed as soon as
possible. A working group or a seminar on the safety and
security of United Nations personnel, with the
participation of Member States, which the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations proposed last
year, would serve as a useful forum to facilitate this
review. Japan is ready to extend its support for such a
meeting.

In closing, let me emphasize that all of us gathered
here today must recommit ourselves to translating words
into concrete actions for the improved security of the
dedicated men and women who are working for the cause
of global peace.

