Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset I must express my appreciation
to my neighbour, Ambassador Greenstock. I wish to
add my voice to the President's observations at the start
of this meeting on his role in strengthening the Security
Council. Let me stress to him that we shall miss his
constructive role and deep experience.

It is a pleasure to warmly welcome His
Excellency the Prime Minister of the Reconciliation
Government in Cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Diarra. Let me
express our appreciation to him for his personal efforts
and those of his Government to attain peace in that
friendly country. Let me also welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We fully
appreciate his efforts to achieve peace and national
reconciliation in Cote d'Ivoire.

The Security Council mission recently returned
from C6te d'Ivoire. Our main objective was to promote
the peace process there and to ensure respect by all
parties of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. We shall
support all steps by the Prime Minister to implement
that Agreement.

We and Cote d'Ivoire, that friendly country, have
recently witnessed much pain and suffering. We
believe the time has come for the friendly people of
Cote d'Ivoire to enjoy security and national
reconciliation. We believe the peace process must
move forward. In that context, we welcome the 4 July
joint statement of the Forces nationales and the Forces
nouvelles in Cote d'Ivoire declaring an end to
hostilities, support for the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra
Agreements and loyalty to President Gbagbo and to the
Government of National Reconciliation, headed by
Prime Minister Diarra. The statement also expressed
the resolve to implement the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme in
the country. The Syrian delegation calls on all the
parties to fully and expeditiously implement all
provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreements in
order to ensure full participation and transparency in
the country. We welcome the fact that Prime Minister
Diarra stressed that very concept in his statement a
short while ago.

My delegation appreciates the efforts being made
by countries members of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), by ECOWAS forces
and by France on behalf of peace. We also call on
donor countries and on international financial
institutions to provide the material financial and
logistical assistance needed to enable the ECOWAS
forces to continue to carry out their mission of ensuring
peace and security in the region.

My delegation reaffirms its support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
C6te d'Ivoire and for all the specialized agencies and
programmes working in the region. We support their
efforts to assist C6te d'Ivoire in overcoming the
exceptional circumstances that have befallen it in the
past few months. My delegation also supports the draft
presidential statement on Cote d'Ivoire now before the
Security Council that the representative of France was
kind enough to introduce.

