Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I wish first
to welcome to the Council Chamber the Vice-Minister of
External Relations of Angola, who gave us a clear and
persuasive briefing this morning. I am also grateful for the
report of the Secretary-General, on which the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Kieran Prendergast, briefed the
Council; this too was most instructive and useful for our
debate.

We take the view that the sanctions regime against
UNITA is a very important factor in the Angolan crisis.
The effectiveness of that regime is directly dependent on
political and military developments, and on the Angolan
Government's confidence in United Nations action, which
we believe needs to be strengthened. In that connection, we
wish to highlight the work of Ambassador Robert Fowler.
Since becoming Chairman of the sanctions Committee a
year ago, he has undertaken intensive activities to enhance
the effectiveness of the sanctions, as confirmed in his clear
and accurate briefing this morning on his trip to the region,
for which we thank him.

We want to express our concern about the military
situation, in particular about the risk of the conflict spilling
over beyond Angola's borders. We reiterate what we have
said on previous occasions: there is no viable, long-term
military solution. The solution has to be a political one,
achieved through dialogue with the participation of all
sectors, especially civil society.

Turning to the humanitarian situation, the difficult
conditions endured by a large part of the civilian
population - there are almost 2 million internally displaced
persons, most of them in remote areas - must be
addressed. We are particularly disturbed by the data on
victims of anti-personnel landmines, many of whom are
women and children.
All of this means that humanitarian assistance must be
a priority for the international community. Here, there
should be a generous response to the 2000 United Nations
Consolidated Inter-agency Appeal for Angola.

We support a multifaceted United Nations presence in
Angola, and we hope that the United Nations Office in
Angola can become operational as soon as possible. In
our view, one of the Office's priorities should be to
continue programmes intended to strengthen the
administration of justice and to be vigilant with regard to
the effective enjoyment of human rights.

Finally, we lend our full support to Ambassador
Gambari of Nigeria, whom the Secretary-General recently
appointed as his Special Adviser on Africa, with special
focus on Angola among other issues.

