Lord Ashdown: I am very pleased indeed to be
here again to brief the Council on developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and, if I may say so,
especially pleased to be here with my colleague
Mladen Ivanie, the Foreign Minister and Deputy
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Last year, Prime Minister Terzie
attended, and it seems to me very appropriate that there
should be a senior minister in the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina present when I deliver my
briefing. I am grateful for the chance to address the
Council.

These days Bosnia and Herzegovina features,
thank goodness, rather rarely as a stand-alone item on
the Council's agenda. That is a sign, thank heavens, of
how much things have changed for the better in the last
nine or 10 years.
A decade ago, of course, things were very
different. In preparing for this morning, I thought I
would just remind myself how things looked in Bosnia
and Herzegovina exactly 10 years ago, in November
1994. Then, the Council's agenda was dominated by
Bosnia and Herzegovina: it was daily denouncing
bombings, even the apparent use of napalm and cluster
bombs in the Bihac pocket, and demanding access for
humanitarian convoys. In all, during that year of 1994,
the Council issued 14 statements on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as the war raged.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a very different
country now, in a very different region. Whatever our
occasional frustrations - and they come as part of the
job - about the pace of progress, it is worth reminding
ourselves of that simple fact. To be sure, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has a long way to go before it becomes a
member State of the European Union - its declared
ambition - or a paid-up ally in NATO - which is,
again, a goal it wishes to achieve. But if one wonders
sometimes whether it will ever reach those goals -
and, incidentally, I am convinced that it will - then
one should look, not at how far there is to go, but at
how far Bosnia and Herzegovina has already come.

Bosnia and Herzegovina today, like its
neighbours in the Balkan region, is very firmly focused
on its twin strategic goals as a country: qualifying to
begin negotiations with the European Union on a
stabilization and association agreement, and gaining
admission to the Partnership for Peace (PfP)
programme of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO). There is, quite simply, no other game in town.
That is the only secure future Bosnia and Herzegovina
has and I think everyone, across all the political parties
and the wide spectrum of the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, recognizes and understands that.

Getting through those initial gates, embarking on
stabilization and association agreement negotiations
and entering PfP will move Bosnia and Herzegovina
decisively forward. It will lock the country into a
different framework that will pull the reform process
and make possible the steady transformation of the
international community's role in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including the eventual phasing out of my
position and my Office. Bosnia is now moving
decisively from the era of Dayton into the era of
Brussels. The pull of Brussels is starting to be as, if not
more, effective than the push of the Bonn Powers when
it comes to driving the reform process.

Since I last spoke to the Council in March, we
have notched up some further significant steps forward
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which have moved it
closer to meeting the requirements set out by the EU
and NATO. This year has seen steady progress in
adopting reform legislation and providing for new
state-level institutions, even if implementation of those
laws has often lagged behind.

The process of unifying Mostar has proceeded on
track and broadly on time. That most intractable of all
Bosnia and Herzegovina's problems is now moving, I
think, towards a successful conclusion. We have had a
small international team in Mostar which has been
working very closely with the authorities there to
implement the new statute. The challenge now will be
to ensure that the new unified administration of Mostar
city, reflecting the results of the recent October
municipal elections, beds down successfully as we go
into the new year and starts delivering Government
services in the interests of its citizens.

We have also continued, I think, to make good
progress in the judicial field. The single High Judicial
and Prosecutorial Council, covering the whole State,
was established on I May and we are on course for
Bosnia and Herzegovina to start processing its own war
crimes cases in its own domestic war crimes chamber
from January 2005 - a crucial step towards statehood.

In the economic area, we have seen the passage
of a new Bosnia and Herzegovina public procurement
law; crucial reforms in the energy sector that have
enabled the reconnection through Bosnia and
Herzegovina of the entire South-East European
electricity grid; the initiation of the third phase of the
Bulldozer Initiative, designed to do away with
bureaucratic barriers to honest trade and business; and,
perhaps most significantly of all - and I pay tribute to
the tough decisions that have been taken by the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities in this matter - the
resolution of the painful and difficult issue of the
mountain of post-war internal debt, which otherwise
could very easily have derailed the whole economy and
the State's economic future.

Meanwhile, on the municipal front, legislation
providing for the direct election of mayors was adopted
in time for the 2 October municipal elections. Those
elections were conducted by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities, funded exclusively by Bosnia
and Herzegovina and held on an entirely peaceful
basis. The first Brcko district elections were held - a
precondition for normalizing the district's autonomous
status and paving the way, in the relatively near future,
I hope, to winding up the Brcko supervisory regime.

Within the Office of the High Representative, we
continue to be guided by our Mission Implementation
Plan and the four core tasks it contains: establishing
the rule of law, economic reform, institution building,
and defence/security reform. This year we have
downsized the Office, handed over those areas where
we have finished our task to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities, and reduced our size by no
less than 25 per cent. That will continue.

Within that overall umbrella of the Mission
Implementation Plan, we have now identified six key
priorities for implementation in the coming year. Those
all relate to strengthening key institutions that are
essential for the effective functioning of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina within the Euro-Atlantic
institutions.

One of those priorities is the State Court, which is
already starting to deliver real results. Indictments and,
now, trials of the once untouchable, the high and the
mighty, are beginning, I hope, to convince the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina that there will be no
immunity for the rich and powerful from whatever
national community they come.

Another of our priorities is to strengthen the
functionality of the Council of Ministers. That is much
needed. We need to establish properly functioning
ministries, properly staffed and properly located.
Meanwhile, the entity intelligence agencies have been
abolished and the State-level agency formally
commenced operations on 1 June, following the merger
of its predecessors - a huge and delicate task which is
proceeding, I believe, relatively smoothly.

With the help of the European police mission, we
are now making progress in reforming the police and
creating in Bosnia and Herzegovina an effective
policing structure. The State Investigation and
Protection Agency - if you like, the State's Federal
Bureau of Investigation - is now established in its
own premises and becoming an increasingly credible
body in the law enforcement community, though that
has much further to go before I am fully satisfied. And,
crucially, a Police Restructuring Commission, chaired
by former Belgian Prime Minister Martins, was
established on the initiative of Prime Minister Terzic
on 2 July. It will report at the end of the year and is
charged with devising a single policing structure for
the country in order to enable it to fight crime
effectively.

On policing, let me just touch for a moment, ifI
may, on an important - and perhaps, some may think,
delicate - issue: the question of police certification.
This was an issue which was unresolved after the
closure of the International Police Task Force.
Following the presidential statement issued by the
Security Council in June, the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina requested all competent national
authorities to harmonize their laws in order to give full
effect to the United Nations certification decisions. I
welcome that. We now expect the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to adopt such amendments
shortly. We will monitor the situation closely and
report back to the Council. Although we are making
significant progress on the issue of implementation, we
still need to find a solution with respect to the
problematic cases that are left over - a matter which
is, I regret, still under discussion with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and yet to be resolved. Let
me explain.

It was agreed in May this year with the United
Nations Under-Secretary General for Peacekeeping
Operations that efforts to ensure full implementation of
United Nations decisions would be delinked from those
alleged problematic cases. The Human Rights
Commission within the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina rendered a decision this summer
making it clear that the implementation of the United
Nations certification decisions by domestic authorities
did not, as claimed, Violate the rights of police officers
under the European Convention on Human Rights. We
welcome that judgment. We believe that the need to
review all United Nations decisions on questions of
law and fact can now be measured against that
decision. That is good.

However, we are still facing daily allegations of
procedural shortcomings. I do not know whether or not
those are justified. Many examples were sent to my
Office by the representative of another United Nations
agency in Bosnia and Herzegovina, claiming that there
have been deficiencies of procedure. The United
Nations in New York has been so far unable to provide
us with evidence that would contradict such
allegations. We consider that the capacity of the United
Nations to do so is key to the determination of whether

a review mechanism is necessary in those cases.
Finally, we are of course conscious that a review of
decisions rendered pursuant to a mandate from the
United Nations would require the authorization of the
Organization and we remain at the Council's disposal
to find an adequate solution that will preserve the huge
and invaluable legacy of the United Nations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina through the International Police Task
Force and its other agencies. This is an important issue,
but it must not distract us from the implementation
priorities that I described earlier. Allow me now to
return briefly to those priorities.

Another one of our priorities is the establishment
in good time and in good order of the Indirect Taxation
Authority covering the whole State. I am glad to report
that that is now up and running, and we are in the
process of merging the entity customs administrations
into a single State body and preparing for the
introduction of a value-added tax (VAT) on 1 January
2006. That is a difficult deadline, but I still believe we
will meet it.

On defence reform, we have continued to move
forward in meeting the 14 benchmarks set by NATO,
with the appointment of the first post-war Bosnia and
Herzegovina Defence Minister and key general staff
officers, as well as the significant downsizing of entity
armed forces. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Defence
Minister, Minister Radovanovie, has served extremely
competently since May as co-chair of the Defence
Reform Commission. In December, NATO will take on
the leadership of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Defence
Reform Commission and of defence reform in general.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay a warm
public tribute to James Locher from the United States
Department of Defense, who was seconded to us. His
tenacity, patience and sure touch have been the keys to
the huge progress made on defence reform, and we all
owe Mr. Locher a great debt of thanks.

Taken together, all of these developments mean
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is, I think, now moving
decisively down that road to membership of the
European Union and of NATO and to a life as a
normal, peaceful European country. I think that this is
a very significant achievement, only nine years after
Dayton.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is changing, and it is
therefore appropriate that the international community
should start to adjust its presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina also, to reflect changing times and
changing challenges.

We have done that continuously, of course, since
Dayton. The Office of the High Representative has
steadily evolved in its role, acquiring the Bonn powers
two years into its mandate and using them in different
ways to promote peace implementation since then. We
are now reducing very substantially the use of these
powers, and this should - and I believe will -
continue.

The same has been true of the NATO-led
international military presence. It has been reduced in
size as stability has grown - from 65,000 after Dayton
to only 7,000 today.

On 2 December, we will see the next logical
evolution, when the Stabilization Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (SFOR) will terminate and NATO will
hand over leadership of the military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the European Union (EU). That
will be a difficult transition, but I am happy to report to
the Council that I am confident it will go smoothly and
well.

I also hope that most Bosnians will frankly not
notice the difference. Eighty per cent of the troops on
the ground within SFOR are already European troops,
and while shoulder flashes and flags will undoubtedly
change, the commitment to a safe and secure
environment will not. The new force will look very
much like SFOR, will operate along the same lines and
provide the same level of security. It will be militarily
robust and it will brook no challenges to peace and
order in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

However, this also unmistakably signals Bosnia
and Herzegovina's European destiny. The commitment
of the European Union to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
potential future membership is now clear.

This process will allow the European Union to
bring together all its assets in Bosnia and Herzegovina
under my coordination. These assets are the European
Union-led force (EUFOR), the European Union Police
Mission, the European Union Monitoring Mission and
the European Commission delegation with its
€65 million a year assistance programme, in addition to
the work of the European Union member States. We
will now be able to coordinate those so that they bear
more effectively, as Bosnia and Herzegovina moves
into a qualitatively new stage in its relations with the
European Union.

I say this not just in my capacity as High
Representative, but also wearing my second hat as
European Union Special Representative, which is a
role that will grow in importance in the months and
years ahead.

This is not to say - and I would like to
emphasize this point - that the European Union's
growing role in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be at
the expense of others - far from it. I think there is a
broad rule about international peace stabilization: the
broader the coalition, the greater the chance of success.
It is therefore essential we preserve that unity of effort
and breadth of endeavour through the Peace
Implementation Council, which I believe should
continue operating in order to incorporate, as it does,
the contributions made by the Russian Federation,
Turkey, Japan, Canada and the United States of
America, as well as other European Union member
States. Those are extremely important contributions,
and it would be wrong of us to create or to abandon the
framework that allows those to continue to be made.

The fact that we are able to make this transition
from SFOR to EUFOR is, allow me to say, a
formidable tribute to NATO and to all it has achieved
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the last nine years.
Allow me to take this opportunity to pay a warm
tribute to the alliance, whose Secretary-General, of
course, will address the Council today, and to all those
soldiers who have served under the NATO flag as part
of, first, the Implementation Force (IFOR) and then
SFOR. They have done a truly outstanding job. They
have not only ended a war, they have helped to build a
peace, and they are handing on a situation
immeasurably and unbelievably better than the one
they found in 1995.

The fact that NATO will continue to play a
vital - but different - role in Bosnia after EUFOR
takes over, with a United States general at the helm of
a new NATO headquarters, is hugely welcome. This
role will concentrate on defence reform, but it will also
work on counter-terrorism and a continued effort in the
hunt for indicted war criminals.

The message that I therefore bring the Council is
a good one, I think, but there are some points of
concern. Allow me to touch on three of them as we
move into the next phase of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
transition to a fully-fledged State and to membership of
Euro-Atlantic institutions.

The first point is economic. Bosnia and
Herzegovina's economy is still not growing fast
enough to relieve the pain of its suffering people, and
that is an area on which we need to concentrate in the
year ahead.

The second, which worries me, is the financial
viability of the State in its present shape. I should
emphasize that this may make it necessary to consider
before too long, not now, but before too long, the
pressing need to make the State's constitutional
structure more functional.

The third point is the subject that gives me most
immediate concern and which poses the biggest threat
to the entire country, but most especially to Republika
Srpska's prospects.

When I spoke to the Council in March, I made
clear that there was a very real risk that, despite Bosnia
and Herzegovina's remarkable progress on defence
reform, Republika Srpska's complete failure to meet its
obligations to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) could well scupper the
country's chances of gaining entry into the Partnership
for Peace at NATO's Istanbul summit in June.

As we know, that is, regrettably, exactly what
happened. The record speaks for itself and makes
dismal reading. In nine years, the Republika Srpska has
not handed over a single person indicted for war
crimes - not one - at any level, senior, junior or
middle-ranking. In nine years, they have failed to give
the ICTY the information it needs to track down
indictees or to provide cooperation in the arrest of
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic. In nine years, it
has failed to take any significant action to do so itself,
either.

I must say that there have been some more
hopeful signs in recent months. A speech by President
Cavic of Republika Srpska in June, acknowledging the
scale of the crime committed at Srebrenica, was a
brave and important speech.

The work of the Srebrenica Commission itself,
created entirely by the Republika Srpska Government,
has elicited from Carla Del Ponte the statement that the
Srebrenica Commission has provided a significant
milestone on the road to truth and justice. We also saw
only two days ago a formal apology offered by the
Republika Srpska Government to the victims of that
blackest of pages in European history. I hope that that
will lead to a wider process of truth. I hope that that
will incorporate other peoples in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as well. Srebrenica is the worst of the
crimes, but it is not the only one, and I hope that
people will seize the opportunity offered by that
statement by Republika Srpska to ensure that Bosnia's
future can be built on a recognition and an
understanding of its past.

Nevertheless, the plain fact remains that, nine
years on, not a single indictee has been handed over to
the ICTY by the Republika Srpska authorities, and that
Karadzic and Mladic remain at large. That is an affront
to justice, and it is an affront to the values of the
institutions which the Republika Srpska leaders claim
they wish to join. They should be in no doubt that,
when NATO and the European Union say that if they
want Bosnia and Herzegovina to join those institutions,
they must cooperate with the ICTY, those are not
empty words: they are deadly serious ones. They
should be in no doubt that they cannot treat this solemn
obligation - which they signed on to in Dayton - as
if it were written in invisible ink, when it is there in
black and white. And they need to be clear that the
international community - and, I hope, the Security
Council - will not permit them to remain, with
impunity, in fundamental breach of a cardinal
requirement of the Dayton Agreement.

Justice has a long memory, and Srebrenica has
made an indelible impression on it. Nine years is
already too long - far too long. Time is running out to
take action to comply with international law. Time is
running out for Republika Srpska to continue to block
Bosnia and Herzegovina's path to the European Union
and to NATO. Time is running out for those who think
they can abuse the protections offered by Dayton.

So I hope that the message will go out
unambiguously and firmly from the Council to the
leaders of Republika Srpska that the time has come
when this must be done, and the time for excuses for
not doing it is over. Because this is now - I have no
doubt - the biggest stumbling block on the path
towards a brighter future, and the longer it remains
unresolved, the longer it will take for Bosnia and
Herzegovina finally to make that crucial break with the
past and embrace a brighter future as a modern
European nation. That is what the citizens across
Bosnia and Herzegovina so desperately want to see,
and it is what they so manifestly deserve.

I began this statement by looking back to 1994, to
recall how far Bosnia and Herzegovina has come since
the horrors of that war. Perhaps I could end it by
inviting members to cast their minds forward 10 years
and to imagine what Bosnia and Herzegovina could be
like then. I believe there is now a real prospect that, if
this crucial issue of cooperation with The Hague can be
resolved, if Bosnia and Herzegovina can maintain its
remarkable reform efforts and if the international
community can maintain its interest and support,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will, by then, be a country
transformed in a region that has been transformed. That
would be a huge prize, not just for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but for the entire international
community, which the Council represents.
So my final word is: let us resolve to stick at it
until that job is done. We are nearly there.

