Mr. Inzko: At the outset, let me take this
opportunity to thank those members of the Security
Council whose terms are concluding at the end of this
year - Columbia, Germany, India, Portugal and South
Africa - for their support. It has been an especially
challenging year for the Security Council, and I would
like to thank members for their readiness to encourage
and support efforts to take Bosnia and Herzegovina
forward towards our common objective of lasting
peace and stability. Let me also use this opportunity
to wish the recently elected incoming members of the
Security Council every success during their time on the
Council. Those of us working on the ground in Bosnia
and Herzegovina know we can continue to rely on the
Council's support in the future. We will draw strength
from that knowledge in what remains a challenging
environment.

Ours is a just and important objective, namely,
lasting peace and stability for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
irreversibly on track towards integration into the
European Union (EU) and NATO. It is an objective
to which the international community remains
firmly committed over 20 years after Bosnia and
Herzegovina's international recognition, in April 1992.
That commitment to our common cause with Bosnia and
Herzegovina's citizens was yet again made abundantly
clear during the course ofa series of high-profile visits
to Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period.
This month, United States Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton and the EU High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton visited
Sarajevo together, as did United Kingdom Foreign
Secretary William Hague a few days earlier.

It has been a full year since we completed the
transition and reconfiguration of the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the decoupling
of the EU Special Representative from the Office of
the High Representative and its incorporation into the
stand-alone EU delegation. I am pleased to report that
the EU delegation and my Office have established a very
close working relationship on the ground. Ambassador
Peter Sarensen has made an excellent start, and his
presence has indeed been a breath of fresh air. We are
coordinating our efforts while seeking synergies and
win-win situations wherever possible.

However, no matter how good our cooperation
within the international community, that alone cannot
deliver progress. We are now very deep into a phase
where the degree and speed of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
progress will be determined by the ability or inability
of the authorities in the country to deliver concrete
results. Regrettably, on that subject I must turn to less
welcome developments, because political leaders are
failing to produce what they should 17 years after the
Peace Agreement was signed.

When I addressed the Council six months ago
(see S/PV.677l), I was cautiously optimistic about the
direction in which the country was heading. After
15 months of waiting for political leaders to reach
agreement, we had finally witnessed the appointment
of State-level executive authorities in February. On
31 May, the State budget was finally adopted. It was
logical to expect that, with a Government and a budget
in place, the new coalition would immediately make up
for lost time and get down to addressing the pressing
needs of citizens and delivering the requirements to
open up the next phase of the EU and NATO accession
processes.

To the disappointment of many in the international
community, that is not what happened. Instead, a
protracted effort to reconfigure the governing coalition
began in early June - a process that will hopefully be
resolved by the end of the year, following some six more
months of time lost. That dispute diverted attention
from pressing challenges. While other countries in
the region move forward, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been left behind. The situation was also reflected in
the recent European Commission's progress report. In
addition to the administrative and legislative gridlock,
at times in the Federation we saw political parties
disregard constitutional and legal provisions in their
haste to effect changes to governing coalitions.

The question of which parties form the governing
coalition is not a matter for the international community
to decide. However, when the rule of law is disregarded
we should be concerned. While the dispute continues
at the Federation entity level, in the last two weeks we
have seen signs of a rapprochement on the formation
of a new State-level coalition between the two parties
from the Republika Srpska and the Federation that
secured the most votes in the 2010 general elections. The
readiness of the two parties to start talking seriously
about substantial issues is a welcome development.
Without dialogue and a readiness to work towards
healthy compromises there can be no progress.

At the same time, it is critically important that, as
the parties proceed with their agenda, they do not take
steps to roll back reforms undertaken with great care
over many years to further the Peace Agreement. The
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board has been
consistently firm on that point.

Another issue of even greater concern to me
has been the marked rise in challenges to the Peace
Agreement, in particular the challenges to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity that
we saw during the reporting period. I have reported
to the Council many times in the past about the
anti-State, secessionist rhetoric emanating from the
current Republika Srpska leadership. Unfortunately,
that rhetoric has intensified and worsened considerably
during the past six months. My written report
(see S/2012/8l3) contains many examples of the types
of inflammatory statements that have been uttered by
very senior officials in the Republika Srpska. How does
one respond when a leading politician says that Bosnia
and Herzegovina makes him feel sick and that he hopes
to God it will fall apart soon? How would any of us
react if someone were to say about our own beloved
country, that it makes them sick and should fall apart?
I think we would be concerned, shocked and certainly
deeply saddened.

It would be a mistake to dismiss those words
as empty or election-driven rhetoric. They have
been supplemented over the past several years by a
comprehensive effort to erode, and in some cases
eliminate, the functionality of the State and its
institutions. The latest of many State institutions that the
Republika Srpska has sought to abolish or emasculate
is the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
is a multinational structure that has earned praise for
its contributions to peacekeeping operations around the
world, including operations authorized by the Security
Council itself.

In the light of the mandate I have been given by
the international community, a mandate which has
been repeatedly reaffirmed by the Security Council,
I regretfully conclude that these challenges are
worrisome enough to warrant the particular attention
of this body. There is probably no issue more central to
the Peace Agreement than the preservation of the unity
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Continued challenges to the State - including
the Republika Srpska's regular advocacy for its
dissolution - must be taken seriously, especially

considering the history of the conflicts of the 19905.

The United Kingdom's Foreign Secretary, William
Hague, made quite Clear during his recent Visit to
Bosnia and Herzegovina that:

"Bosnia can only be a member of the European
Union as a single, sovereign State. Those who think
that there is another way for Bosnia are simply
wrong, and those who undermine the Bosnian State
will not be our partners".

That is a view we fully share.

In the context of the developments that I have
just described, I was perhaps not surprised, but I was
disappointed, to see the authorities deliver very little
progress on the five objectives and two conditions for
the closing of the Office of the High Representative.

Nevertheless, there have been positive developments
on the objective related to the Brcko district through
actions undertaken by the international community. On
23 May, the Steering Board endorsed my decision to
close the Office of the High Representative in Brcko.
Accordingly, I closed that Office on 31 August. The
Steering Board also supported the decision of the Brcko
Supervisor, Rod Moore, to suspend his functions as of
the same date.

As a result of those actions by my Office and the
Brcko Supervisor, we have entered a new phase in
Brcko district where the local authorities have taken
full responsibility for day-to-day affairs in the district.
Given our responsibilities under the Final Award, both
the Supervisor and I will be keeping a close eye on
developments in that district.

In addition, a landmark ruling by the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the issue of State
property has significant implications for the resolution
of this issue, which is the second of the five objectives
for the closing of the Office ofthe High Representative.
In layman's terms, the Court's decision affirms the
primacy of the State's ownership of public property.

After a campaign that rarely touched on local
issues, the 7 October local elections passed largely
without incident. Once again, Srebrenica was an area
of focus for the international community, and rightly
so given the genocide that was committed there. One
of the high-level Visitors was the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

Despite some controversy surrounding the
registration and counting in Srebrenica, the elections,
thankfully, passed without major incident. They
resulted in a Bosniak Mayor and an equal distribution
of seats between Serbs and Bosniaks in the Municipal
Assembly. The parties must now come together to work
in a spirit of reconciliation in the interests of all of
Srebrenica's residents. A life of dignity and coexistence
must be returned to Srebrenica. It should live up once
again to the etymology of its name, "the silver city".

In the still heavily scarred and divided city of
Mostar, the prospect of delivering change through the
ballot box remains on hold. Due to the ongoing failure
of the parties to implement the Constitutional Court's
ruling on Mostar's electoral system, the town was the
only community in the country that did not hold local
elections on 7 October. With no agreement in sight close
to two years after the Court made its ruling, my Office
is currently engaged in a facilitation effort that aims
to help the local parties to deliver a domestic solution
to implement the Court's ruling without further delay.
The discussions are in a crucial phase, and it is time
for all the parties to compromise and to implement the
Court's ruling.

I very much hope that by the next time I report to
the Council we will have seen elections held in Mostar
and that the country as a whole will be catching up with
its neighbours in the region.

Allow me to conclude by making the following two
points.

First, Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot afford to
continue falling further and further behind other
countries in the region. The consequences ofthis would
be dire, economically, socially and politically.

Secondly, challenges to the Peace Agreement have
become so frequent and direct during the reporting
period that they deserve special attention. The
questioning of Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty
and its future as a State must stop. The international
community must not tolerate such challenges, and we
must ensure that we are equipped with the will and
capacity to manage them. In doing so, we will also be
supporting the efforts of those willing to work for the
collective good of delivering lasting peace and stability
within the Euro-Atlantic framework.

We are in a critical phase, and we must express
more clearly than ever what is expected of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's political leaders and what will not
be tolerated. They must stop their divisive behaviour
and finally start leading the way to the country's full
reintegration, in the interests of all its citizens. In so
doing, they can look to the example of how post-war
Europe was built, with tolerance, dialogue and sound
compromise. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, Guido Westerwelle, put it recently, the word
"confrontation" has been replaced in Europe by the
word "cooperation".

Allow me to conclude with the inspirational
thoughts expressed by the Secretary-General when he
concluded his recent visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina:

"In a fast-moving region, no one can afford to be
left behind. That will take collective leadership.
That will take unity. That will take a commitment
to work and move forward together".

