Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to welcome Foreign Minister Kamara
to the Security Council this morning. I also thank
Executive Representative Jens Toyberg-Frandzen and
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski for their briefings.
I pay particular tribute to Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen for
his personal contribution over the past two and a half
years to the work of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL).

The United Kingdom welcomes the presidential
statement to be adopted later this morning on the
completion of the UNIPSIL mandate. Today marks
a watershed in the history of Sierra Leone and is a
moment of celebration for the people of Sierra Leone,
the United Nations and the Security Council. Today, I
will reflect on three points: Sierra Leone's success, the
work ahead to consolidate peace, and the key lessons
we can learn from Sierra Leone as we address conflicts
elsewhere in Africa and around the world.

First, with respect to Sierra Leone's success,
since Sierra Leone came on to the Security Council
agenda 15 years ago it has undergone a remarkable
transformation from civil war to landmark presidential
elections in November 2012. Today is another milestone
in Sierra Leone'sjourney from fragile State to a country
that now supports conflict-resolution efforts around
Africa. In 2002, Sierra Leone hosted the world's largest
peacekeeping mission in the aftermath of a brutal
war. In 2014, Sierra Leone contributes its own troops
to other peacekeeping missions in Africa, helping to
provide stability in countries such as Somalia and Mali.

The United Nations played a central role in helping
Sierra Leone to recover from its devastating civil war.
Effective, tailored and well-planned United Nations
peacebuilding interventions can improve people's
lives. The United Kingdom welcomes the closure of the
United Nations peacebuilding mission in Sierra Leone,
and I commend the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jens Toyberg-Frandzen, and all
other UNIPSIL staff for their dedicated work in Sierra
Leone. I also welcome David McLachlan-Karr as the
new United Nations Resident Coordinator.

Second is the work ahead in Sierra Leone. While
today we celebrate the departure of UNIPSIL, we
must remember the long road ahead for Sierra Leone
as it seeks to become a middle-income country. As the
Secretary-General recognized during his visit earlier
this month, there is still much to be done if we are
to consolidate the gains of the past decade. President
Koroma's ambitious five-year development plan, the
Agenda for Prosperity, sets out the development and
social tasks ahead. Tackling corruption will be essential
to attracting investment and insuring that economic
growth benefits all citizens.

The recently agreed mutual accountability
framework will underpin the Agenda for Prosperity
by bringing together the Government of Sierra Leone
and donor partners. The United Nations, the United
Kingdom and other members of the international
community will continue to work with the Government
of Sierra Leone. In that regard, we are delighted that
Sierra Leone will be one of seven new markets to
receive United Kingdom Department of Trade and
Industry resources.

Finally, I would like to touch on the lessons we can
learn from Sierra Leone.

Sierra Leone's experience teaches us that it is
possible to build peace in the aftermath ofbrutal conflict
and that the United Nations can play a central role in that
process. Strong national ownership of peacebuilding
processes and a focus on building national institutions
are essential to securing sustainable peace. Political
will is required at both the national and international
levels. Political engagement from the international
community, such as through the Security Council,
is needed to provide checks and balances to national
decisions. The different instruments of the United
Nations must work in a complementary fashion, such
as between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. If we are to replicate the success of Sierra
Leone, we must take those lessons and apply them to
our discussions elsewhere in Africa and beyond, while
drawing on the experiences and reflections of our
colleagues and friends from Sierra Leone.

In conclusion, I would like to extend the United
Kingdom's best wishes to the Government and the
people of Sierra Leone and to the new United Nations
country team in their work in the years to come.
The United Kingdom will continue to be one of the
country's closest friends. We look forward to many
years of fruitful partnership ahead.

