Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I too would like to thank the Special Envoy and the Deputy Special Envoy, who is here today, for their work and the report. I would like to begin my statement where the Deputy Special Envoy began - with the Constitutional Committee. For us, it is no surprise that, starting with the second round of talks, the Syrian regime decided to obstruct and delay its work. We must recognize that no agreement has been reached. I am not as complacent as my Russian colleague, who said that this was to be expected. I disagree; this should not have been expected. The conflict should have a political rather than a military solution. I have said before that if our Russian friends would stop providing military support to the Syrian regime for only two or three weeks, the Syrians would run to the Constitutional Committee, be constructive and come to a political solution. The real reason is that there is still the belief that peace, security, stability and the well-being of the people in Syria can be achieved by military means. That is why we see the military advance by the Syrian and Russian forces in the north-west of the country, where the city of Maarat Al-Numan was taken - very triumphantly, we hear. What does that mean in practice? It means that since the conflict in Idlib started, more than 1,500 civilians - including 430 women and 290 children - have died. Over the past two months, an additional 400,000 have been displaced. The head of the International Committee of the Red Cross said that we are just taking this for granted and that the international community no longer raises its voice in protest. We must look at the fate of the Syrian children, who have suffered immeasurably. The latest report of the Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic shows that their lives have been cut short by bombs and torture. They have suffered the consequences of detention and schools have been destroyed. Some children in Syria have never had any formal education. An entire generation threatens to be lost. At this very moment, children in Idlib are dying and being displaced and, in some cases, recruited to join armed groups. The Russian Ambassador just spoke about provocations from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which may be true, but that does not warrant the indiscriminate attacks that we have been witnessing. A look at the area shows hospitals attacked and destroyed, markets destroyed and many civilians killed. That is why, in our view, the only solution is a political solution. We need to focus on one aspect that my colleague from Estonia just mentioned - the question of detainees. The Syrian regime has arbitrarily detained tens of thousands of innocent Syrians merely because they dared to make use of their freedom of expression. It has tortured thousands of innocent Syrians to death - and we have seen horrible pictures - merely because they dared to ask for political reforms and freedom in Syria. The Syrian regime has called ordinary citizens terrorists in order to create a pretext for their arrest and torture. Since last August, when we dedicated a Council meeting to the issue of detainees and missing persons (see S/PV.8593), there has, unfortunately, been no progress on ending those gravest of human rights violations. To the contrary, those violations continue throughout Syria, even in so-called reconciled areas. We must therefore push the Syrian regime to release the prisoners and ensure that families are informed of the fate of the tens of thousands of missing persons and that the United Nations or the International Committee of the Red Cross has unconditional access to all detention facilities under the control of the regime. Lastly, I wish to reiterate a point that I make here regularly and one which it still does not seem that our Russian friends understand. If we want to have lasting peace and reconciliation in the country, we need accountability. We need to establish responsibilities for the horrendous crimes that have been committed and we need accountability. Only that can serve as a basis for reconciliation in Syria. By the way, with regard to allegations of Germany applying double standards on the humanitarian front, my country is among the largest humanitarian aid donors to Syria. All efforts related to the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Commission of Inquiry haveto be supported to ensure that none of the crimes and atrocities committed during the Syrian conflict goes unpunished and that all perpetrators are held accountable. That is what we need if we are to achieve national reconciliation and sustainable peace in Syria.
