Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Zannier and Mr. De Kermabon for the
details that they have provided on the incident that
occurred in Kosovo at the end of last week. I welcome
the President of the Republic of Serbia. I also welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kosovo and thank him for his statement.

The explosion that happened on Friday morning
in Mitrovica took one person's life and injured several
others. France condemns that act. We ask that the
authorities do everything necessary to find those who
were responsible and ensure that they are brought to
justice. As General De Kermabon explained to us, an
inquiry is under way and it is still too early to draw
conclusions about what happened. I welcome the
professionalism and the efficiency shown by the
Kosovo police and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) at the time of such
events. We call on all those who can respond in some
way to cooperate with the Kosovo police and EULEX
to enable them to successfully carry out their inquiry.

As serious and condemnable as that event may
be, it is an isolated one. The situation in Kosovo
remains stable, thanks in particular to the presence of
EULEX and the efforts being made for several months
by local authorities to engage the various communities
in a constructive dialogue. In that regard, we welcome
the fact that EULEX, acting strictly in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), can continue to fully play its
role.

The vast majority of the population wants to live
in peace, including in Mitrovica. The role of the
international community and the parties directly
involved must be to ensure that such incidents do not
recur and that they are dealt with calmly and
professionally so that the inhabitants of Kosovo can
live the normal life to which they all aspire. We believe
that using such events politically should be avoided.
That does not contribute to the peace.

As we regularly do, we call on Serbs and
Kosovars to renew dialogue and to focus their efforts
on finding pragmatic solutions to the population's real
problems. The European Mission plays a key role in
facilitating that dialogue, which I welcome. We hope
that one day Serbia and Kosovo will both be part of the
European Union. That future is being prepared today.
We call on politicians to strive towards that goal on the
basis of the realities, because only by acknowledging
the realities will accession to the European Union be
possible. Denial leads nowhere. We call on the parties
to avoid that impasse.

