Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
thank the Kuwaiti presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this briefing on missing persons in
armed conflict. I also have the pleasure of welcoming
your presence among us, Mr. President, which
demonstrates that, as with many countries that have
witnessed the horrors of war, the question of missing
persons in armed conflict remains at the heart of your
country's priorities. Ijoin my voice to those who spoke
before me in thanking Ms. Reena Ghelani and Mr. Peter
Maurer for their informative briefings on how acute
this phenomenon is.

The stories of thousands of missing men, women
and children in armed conflict engages the entire
international community and more specifically the
entities that seek to defend human rights law and
humanitarian law. The International Committee of the
Red Cross is currently looking for more than a 100,000
missing persons around the world. In that regard, I
recall that the number of reported cases represents only
a minute portion of the people who are actually missing.

The respective reports of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians of May 2019 (S/2019/373),
the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary
Disappearances and the International Committee of the
Red Cross agree as to the scale and complexity of the
phenomenon of missing persons in armed conflict. That
requires us more than ever to take coordinated action to
understand the profound trends of this phenomenon and
identify collective effective solutions. That is why Cote
d'Ivoire supported resolution 2474 (2019), which was
adopted today by Council members. The resolution is
distinguished by the relevance of the measures that are
proposed for the prevention of disappearances, support
for families, ways to fight impunity and support for the
pursuit of truth.

cote d'Ivoire is of the view that the appeal of the
international community for the respect of international
humanitarian law and the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance during hostilities must transcend
partisan positions to reflect our common commitment
to the principle of the protection of civilians.

Similarly, the international community's
firm stance against the proven challenges to the
international legal framework must be demonstrated
in the commitment of all States to cooperating fully
with accountability mechanisms provided for that
purpose for impartial investigations and prosecutions
against the perpetrators of crimes related to the
disappearance of persons. That is why my delegation
believes that capacity-building in States emerging from
conflict is absolutely vital. It should provide them with
the necessary legal and institutional mechanisms to
conduct national and international investigations that
allow for the prosecution of individuals or groups guilty
of enforced disappearances. In addition, the promotion
of and respect for normative frameworks for the
protection of civilians and to combat the phenomenon
of enforced disappearances during conflict could be
more effective if our collective action were part of a
preventive approach. That is the View of my delegation.

In that respect, the upstream registration of
detainees and the sharing of information pertaining
to detention cases could allow for the mapping of
detention facilities and the identification of detainees,
thereby facilitating the work of agencies specialized in
protecting their rights and physical well-being. That
approach would also force parties to conflict to face
up to their responsibilities under international law and
allow for the proper prosecution to be conducted if
detainees were to go missing.

Similarly, the creation of databases, which foster
information-sharing among detainees and their
families, could prevent people from going missing
and assist in the processing of human remains,
according to established standards, so as to allow for
the identification of missing persons. To that end, we
are of the view that the establishment of a centralized
tracing agency as a reference point for the creation of
databases, which can serve as a neutral intermediary
tool between parties to a conflict, is equally relevant.

Preventing the disappearance ofpersons in conflict
would be in vain if political will and national, regional
and international ownership did not support it. Indeed,
although it is true that, under international humanitarian
law, the responsibility for preventing disappearances
and the search for missing persons lie first and foremost
with local authorities, it is also true that it must be built
upon as part of collective responsibility and sustained
cooperation at the regional level. It is by combining our
resources and sharing experiences and good practices
that we will be able to fill the capacity gaps that exist
in preventing the disappearance of persons during
armed conflicts.

That is why C6te d'Ivoire encourages cooperation
between the Iraqi and Kuwaiti authorities in order to
provide a definitive answer to the issue of missing
Kuwaiti nationals and facilitate the return of property,
including Kuwaiti national archives. It is also why we
intend to support the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh, which
is responsible for collecting, storing and preserving
evidence of crimes committed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in Iraq.

The issue that brought use here today is inextricably
linked to the persistence of armed conflicts. Working
together to prevent conflict throughout the world by
combating their root causes is, as far as my delegation
is concerned, the first step towards a definitive solution
to the issue of missing persons. All of our energies
should be invested to that end.

