Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
of course like to thank Mr. Le Roy for his introduction
to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/470). I
should also like to welcome the presence among us of
President Prodi.

My delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement to be delivered shortly on behalf of the
presidency of the European Union. For my part, I
would like to highlight the following points.

First of all, everyone is aware of, and shares, the
considerations upon which our discussion today is
based. The increase in peacekeeping operations in
recent years poses a significant challenge. The United
Nations has had to act continuously, putting eight times
as many Blue Helmets on the ground as it had a decade
ago. In order to better enable the Organization to
overcome those challenges, early this year France and
the United Kingdom began an exercise in thinking
about and modernizing United Nations peacekeeping.

Africa has a unique place in this process. On the
one hand, it is the number-one recipient of
peacekeepers. On the other, it is taking on increasing
responsibilities in these peacekeeping efforts. These
African efforts are being undertaken under the aegis of
the United Nations, as one third of Blue Helmets are
currently provided by African countries. This African
effort is also taking place through the work of the
African Union, including the gradual implementation
of the African Peace and Security Architecture.
This stepping up of African endeavours in the
field of crisis prevention and management is in line
with the spirit of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter and thus merits the full support of the
international community. It merits this support all the
more because the African Union faces peacekeeping

challenges that are unique to Africa and that relate to
the fact that its institutional capacity is so recently
acquired.

France, like its European Union partners, will
assume its full role in supporting peacekeeping by
African regional and subregional organizations. This
support must have two facets, namely capacity-
building and support for operations.

The European Union has developed a plan of
action for African Union capacity-building. The
Renforcement des capacites africaines de maintien de
la paix (RECAMP) programme, in particular, is aimed
at helping the African Union to put the African Standby
Force in place in 2010. France also contributes to
capacity-building in Africa through numerous training
activities that are aimed at building regional,
subregional and national peacekeeping capacities.

France and its partners in the European Union
also support the operations undertaken by African
organizations. This support is well known, but what I
wish to underscore today is that it is taking
increasingly varied forms. In the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), for example, we see a
very clear case of this. France has contributed to the
preparation and deployment of the Burundi contingent;
the European Union naval operation, Operation
Atalanta, is helping to secure AMISOM's provisioning
routes; European countries are among the primary
financial supporters of AMISOM; and France provided
health care support to the Mission during the mid-
September attacks.

As the Secretary-General's report shows,
international support for peacekeeping in Africa should
be maintained and stepped up. The United Nations has
a role to play in this. France agrees with the Secretary-
General's opinion that our objective should be African
Union ownership of its peacekeeping instruments, with
full respect for the United Nations Charter. In this
respect I would highlight in particular Article 24 of the
Charter on the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security, and Chapter VIII on the role of regional
organizations.

Along these lines, we agree with the importance
of strengthening the strategic partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations. In this respect,
we thank the Secretary-General for his evaluation of
the various possible modalities for the financing of
African Union peacekeeping operations. Indeed, as we
build African capacities, we must improve the ways to
finance these operations.

In this context, we must draw lessons from the
support modules established previously in Darfur and
more recently in Somalia. These are exceptional cases
both for financial reasons - namely, the current crisis
and substantial increase in United Nations needs -
and for reasons having to do with governance. Every
organization, first and foremost the United Nations, has
the primary responsibility for financing its activities.

This is why the United Nations practice of
financing from assessed contributions leads to
political, legal and financial problems which we
believe to be serious. There are other modalities that
are effective and realistic. They must be used. The
European Union played a pioneering role in this
respect by establishing in 2004 the African Peace
Facility and allocating €740 million to it since then.
We also welcome the Secretary-General's thoughts on
ways to galvanize potential donors for the African
Union and harmonizing their procedures, in particular
by helping the African Union establish a trust fund.

Finally, we recognize the importance of enabling
the African Union to benefit from United Nations
institutional experience, that is to say as regards the
capacity of the African Union headquarters to plan,
deploy, support and manage peacekeeping operations.
We must of course not forget the responsibility of the
African States themselves when it comes to
strengthening their capacity as troop-contributing
countries.

Allow me to therefore conclude by underscoring
that building African peacekeeping capacity is a matter
not solely for the United Nations, but also for Africa
and all of Africa's international partners. France is
among them and will remain committed to this
objective.

