The President: I would like to make a further
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United States.

The representatives of Cuba and of Venezuela
made reference to Luis Posada and his presence in the
United States. I want to describe the actions that the
United States has taken with regard to Luis Posada. In
taking the steps that I will describe, the United States
has acted consistent with international law, as well as
with our domestic legal framework that provides for
due process and various constitutional safeguards.

Posada entered the United States illegally in early
2005. He was detained by immigration authorities in
the United States on 17 May 2005, and he was, in
accordance with United States law, placed in removal
proceedings. The immigration judge who handled the
removal proceedings ordered that Posada be removed
from the United States on 27 September 2005. That
order remains in effect. The United States has been
seeking, and continues to seek, ways to implement it
consistent with the terms of the order and United States
regulations.

Specifically, at the time that the immigration
judge ordered Posada removed, the judge also
determined that he could not be removed to either
Cuba or Venezuela. As a matter of United States
immigration law, the United States is not in a position
to remove Posada to either country. The United States,
however, would be prepared to transfer Posada, in
accordance with United States law, to another country,
with terrorism-related charges against him.

Moreover, the United States sought and obtained
a criminal indictment charging Posada with Violations
of our immigration laws. The Federal District Court, a
part of the United States independent judiciary
handling that case, issued a decision on 8 May 2007
dismissing the indictment. The United States is
currently reviewing that decision and its options for
challenging it.

Posada also remains under investigation for past
activities. In the meantime, Posada remains subject to
the order of removal issued by the immigration judge
and is without legal status in the United States. He is
also subject to an order of supervision from the
Department of Homeland Security, Immigration and
Customs Enforcement, which imposes certain
restrictions on Posada, including reporting and
monitoring requirements. In sum, the United States
continues to be engaged in an ongoing series of actions
consistent with our legal requirements and due process
with respect to Posada.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The representative of Cuba has asked for the
floor to make a further statement. I now give him the
floor.

