Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Mr. President, thank
you for organizing this essential debate. It is
commendable that the Security Council has continued
the practice of holding open debates on the protection
of civilians, featuring presentations from the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that
offer analyses of the Council's action as compared with
previous years and also touch upon important
developments.

We would like to join previous speakers in
thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, for his
active involvement in addressing this important
subject.

The frequency with which the Council addresses
this issue signifies the urgency of the matter and the
need for the international community to fulfil its
commitment to protecting civilians through the

implementation of the provisions of international
humanitarian law. We therefore share the views
expressed by the Council members and other speakers
calling for more systematic attention to protection. We
believe that that should be completely reflected in the
deliberations of this body. We also believe that
increased efforts to fighting impunity at the national
and international levels are essential.

Armenia therefore welcomes the initiative of
Portugal to hold this open debate. We see this as an
opportunity to recap and reflect on the Council's past
year of experience in addressing matters that involve
the protection of civilians, as well as to highlight the
priority aspects for united practical action. In a lessons
learned process, this debate should also enable the
Council to more effectively address specific concerns
related to the protection of civil populations. The
Council needs to send a clear message to all parties in
armed conflicts, reminding them of their obligations
and condemning violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.

We welcome the fact that in the past the Security
Council made several important decisions regarding
the protection needs of vulnerable groups during armed
conflicts. Unfortunately, despite the existence of
international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, innocent civilians - including women
and children, refugees and internally displaced
persons- and international humanitarian personnel,
continue to suffer in conflict situations.

Armenia believes that the Security Council
should further contribute to strengthening the rule of
law and to upholding international law also by
supporting criminal justice mechanisms. We align
ourselves with the statement made earlier in this
Chamber that the best way to promote the protection of
civilians is to promote the rule of law. The notion of
the rule of law represents a concept that is
diametrically opposed to the rule by force or the use of
force. This principle stipulates a framework of peaceful
conflict resolution and democratic governance.
Strengthening the rule of law based on justice and
accountability therefore requires a deeper commitment
and a broader vision of the future. Ensuring such
accountability and enhancing compliance with
international legal obligations by the parties to a
conflict should be viewed as a key element of the
Council's responsibility to maintain international peace
and security.

11-5866]

It is also important for the Council to focus on the
protection of civilians within the overall process of the
peaceful resolution of disputes. Our approach must be
built on the understanding that any comprehensive
resolution should impartially and fully address the root
causes of the conflict under discussion in order to
prevent recurrence in the future. It should also provide
reliable and adequate security protection guarantees to
11-58661
the populations concerned, thus ensuring their
sustainable development.

