Mr. Skau (Sweden): I, too, should like to begin
by thanking today's briefers for their very insightful
remarks. Like Matthew Rycroft, I would like to begin
my statement by paying tribute to the brave men and
women serving with the United Nations, who, on a daily
basis, place themselves in some of the most difficult
and dangerous contexts in the world. We appreciate
their commitment, which over the past 70 years has
saved countless lives.

Today's briefing provides a timely opportunity to
discuss operational challenges across the peacekeeping
realm, not least in the light of the ongoing review of
the United Nations peace and security architecture.
We welcome the Secretary-General's efforts to
implementing a more holistic approach to sustaining
peace. That work deserves our full support. We
encourage the Secretary-General to be bold in
his recommendations.

The broader concept of the primacy of politics
is key to ensuring effective peace operations and the
successful implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
As sustainable peace can only be delivered based
on political solutions, political strategies must be
built across all pillars of the United Nations system.
Military components represent a crucial part of those
integrated strategies. Clear and measurable objectives
accompanied by benchmarks for follow-up and
reporting back to the Security Council should provide
those integrated missions planning and leadership.

Today's briefings highlighted the diverse challenges
facing various missions and also indicated the need for
a context-specific approach to the configuration of all
missions. That work needs to be supported with high-
quality conflict analysis, including through intelligence
and analysis jointly prepared by the whole of the United
Nations system.

Experience shows that agreeing more realistic,
context-tailored and flexible mandates will increase the
potential for successful outcomes. Within mandates,
tasks need to be prioritized, sequenced and adjusted
over time, and we encourage efforts to enhance the
flexibility and the ability to correct course, including
through frank input from across the system and
enhanced capacity to engage with local communities.
To achieve that, we also need to empower the field,
including by simplifying administrative procedures
and achieving greater delegation of authority, but
also by ensuring that the highest calibre candidates
be appointed to lead those United Nations missions in
the field.

Support for capacity-building needs and better
reporting of caveats by troop- and police-contributing
countries are essential. All peacekeepers, as well as
contributing countries, need to be properly prepared,
trained and equipped so as to meet the challenges that
they will face in the field.

There is an inherent link between security and
human rights. Human-rights components should be
standard in peace operations so as to enhance their
quality and effectiveness, not least in the promotion of
the rights of and protection of civilians. The protection
and promotion of human rights must constitute a
whole-of-mission approach. Furthermore, when a
gender perspective is implemented from the beginning
of a mission, it leads to more operational effectiveness,
better situational awareness and more security for our
troops. All missions should continually report on how
gender considerations are included across operations.

Let me turn now to some of the points raised by
today's briefers.

First, with regard to drawdowns, the type of cross-
pillar, political strategies, which were mentioned,
should lay the groundwork for successful drawdowns.
Experience shows us that there is room for improvement
in how the United Nations deals with transitions. Exit
strategies and transitional phases of peacekeeping
operations need to be analysed and planned at an early
stage in cooperation with all relevant actors. Realistic
expectations of what can be achieved in the immediate
aftermath of the drawdown must be coupled with
clear commitments from the Government to further
key structural reforms. We wonder, for example,
if, through the United Nations country team, the
United Nations is equipped and resourced to deliver
on the ambitious peacebuilding plan in Liberia. As
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, we feel
that the Commission has an important role to play in
monitoring and following up so that the international
community can provide the support needed to deliver
that peacebuilding plan at this important transition
phase for Liberia.

Secondly, ifpeacekeeping is to be robust, mandates
must be matched with adequate capabilities for missions
to fulfil their objectives. A robust stance will also
require flexibility to adjust to changed circumstances.
Helicopters, intelligence and quick reaction forces, as
well as the proper training of troops, are key in that
regard. In addition to military and police resources, that
is an area in which human rights expertise is essential.
We need to consider short-term objectives in relation to
longer-term consequences when developing strategies
for the protection of civilians. Local engagement is
also essential for understanding conflict dynamics and
allowing the mission to carefully weigh its options.

In conclusion, peacekeeping is an essential, unique
and, according to many assessments, successful
instrument within the United Nations peace and security
toolbox. It is nonetheless essential that it evolves in
response to the changing nature of the challenges that
we face today. In supporting that evolution, we must
not waiver in our commitment to those who serve and
those whom we seek to protect.

