The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States of America.

I want to thank again Mr. Kobler, as well as
Ambassador Skoog, for their briefings and their insight.

The stakes for achieving stability in Libya are
high. Heavily armed factions are fighting each other
to control land and resources. Thousands of desperate
migrants die every year after setting sail from Libya's
shores. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other
violent extremist groups are looking for safe havens in
places that are beyond the Government's authority. The
Libyan people are suffering. For too many Libyans,
the promise of throwing off a brutal dictator has been
replaced by the reality of harsh conditions and life under
militias. The effects of that instability are spreading
throughout North Africa and across the Mediterranean.

It does not have to be that way. If Libya's leaders
can work together, Libya can, with the support of the
United Nations and the international community, start
to rebuild. That path starts with a national political
reconciliation among Libya's parties. The status quo,
with various officials all claiming to speak for the
Libyan people, is not sustainable. It does nothing to
re-establish the institutions and the security that the
Libyan people crave.

The United States believes that the best way to
resolve differences is through a Libyan-led dialogue with
the support of the United Nations and the international
community. All parties should immediately commit to
that process. If the parties do not come together soon,
Libya will only grow more dangerous and difficult to
govern. That is an outcome that no party should want.

The Libyan Political Agreement remains the
framework that Libyans have agreed on for their
country's transition. It is the road map towards a
democratic Libyan State - one in which all Libyans
can have a say. Implementing the Agreement is vital
to restoring stability. The United States welcomes
indications of support from many parties for the
Agreement. At the same time, we call on those who
have not yet dedicated themselves to engaging in the
process and ask them to do so immediately. There may
need to be certain amendments to the Agreement, but
the important point is that every Libyan faction needs to
come together in a national dialogue and agree on how
to carry out its terms. Dialogue and compromise - that
is what the United States urges the parties to engage in.

But some actors have pursued destabilizing
military operations, while refusing to fully commit to
finding political agreement. Violence on the ground
has escalated in recent weeks. Conflict now looms
at Tamehint airfield, where forces aligned with the
United Nations-recognized Government were recently
attacked by a rival group. Such destabilizing attacks
are unacceptable. They must stop now. When Libya's
factions keep fighting instead of talking, the biggest
winners are the terrorist groups.

Libya's security cannot rest in the hands of
various separate factions. The country deserves a
national, unified military under civilian oversight.
Moving forward in Libya requires building up such a
force - one that is capable of securing the country. That
is an extremely tough task. Libya's international parties
need to be clear in pushing for a single Government
security force.

Finally, the Libyan Government of National
Accord must deliver for the country's people, but the
Government cannot function unless it has control
over the resources that provide its budget. Libya's oil
wealth can help fund the restoration of public services,
including policing and other security measures. The
United Nations and Libya's international partners must
help the Government of National Accord manage the
country's resources, so that the Government can help
ordinary Libyans with their everyday needs. That
is why Libya's oil and petroleum industry must be
safeguarded for the benefit of the country's people.
When groups try to smuggle Libyan oil out of the
country, they are smuggling away Libya's future. Those
are funds that would otherwise help rebuild Libya's
shattered economy. So, we in the Council need to take
an unequivocal stand against oil smuggling from Libya
in all of its forms. The international community must
work closely with the Government of National Accord
and the National Oil Corporation, which is based in the
capital, to shut those rogue operations down. That is
what the resolutions of the Security Council demand.

None ofthat will be easy. Libya faces an immensely
challenging road ahead to rebuild its institutions and
recover from years of civil war. The first step, though, is
clear. Libya's leaders need to come together in support
ofa single Government and a single military. They need
to talk through their differences, not fight them out,
and they need to compromise. That is the message that
each of us on the Council needs to bring to the parties.
That is how we can one day stop talking about Libya as
a threat to peace and security, and instead focus on the
opportunities that Libya has to thrive.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to representative of Libya.

