Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): We wish to thank High
Representative Inzko for his briefing, and in particular
for introducing the forty-eighth report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2015/84l, annex). We have studied the
report carefully.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2247 (2015), renewing the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea for one
year.

Nigeria is concerned about the challenges to the
General Framework Agreement for Peace. Threats
of secession and the dissolution of the country by
political leaders are in contradistinction to the spirit of
the Dayton Peace Accords. We urge public figures to
refrain from inflammatory rhetoric that could threaten
the peace and security of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We reiterate our position that the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina does not allow for secession
by any Entity. All Entities must therefore pursue their
legitimate interests exclusively within the framework
of the united and indivisible Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The decision of the National Assembly of the
Republika Srpska to hold a referendum on the validity
of the decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina represents a major challenge to the
integrity of the country's judicial system and, indeed,
to the rule of law. The planned referendum is clearly not
in consonance with the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, and we support the High Representative's
call for justice to be set aside.

On a more positive note, the signing of the
cooperation agreementbetweenBosnia andHerzegovina
and Serbia on 4 November is a significant development.
We note that the focus of the agreement is on matters
of sustainable development, the location of missing
persons and the protection of cultural heritage. That,
in our view signals, the commitment of both parties to
improve their bilateral relations. We encourage them to
implement the agreement in good faith.

The entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement on 1 June and the adoption of
the new Federation Labour Law in July are notable and
milestone achievements. We expect that they will serve
to engender an improvement in the performance of State
institutions going forward We urge all stakeholders to
build on the existing framework for peace to consolidate
stability in the country.

We note that only limited progress has been
recorded in the outstanding five objectives and two
conditions pertaining to the closure of the Office
of the High Representative. The authorities must
demonstrate greater commitment to the reform process
in order to facilitate its full implementation. We also
urge the authorities of the Republika Srpska to work
towards the fulfilment of their obligations to provide
the High Representative with timely access to official
information, institutions and documents required to
accomplish his mandate.

Nigeria shares the concern of High Representative
Inzko over the challenges to the peace and security
of Bosnia and Herzegovina linked to the increased
interethnic tensions among Bosniaks, Croats and
Serbs. We believe that the trend can be curbed through
determined efforts to promote reconciliation. Political
and community leaders have a significant role to play
in that regard. On the return of refugees and displaced
persons to their pre-war homes, we note efforts made so
far in their resettlement and education. An environment
conducive to their sustained return is critical to the full
implementation of the return strategy adopted in 2012.

Twenty years after the Dayton Peace Accords,
the international community's support to Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains crucial. This support is needed
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement, the
reconstruction of a civil society, the attainment of
economic progress and the return of refugees. We
encourage all stakeholders to remain engaged in
building a peaceful, stable and united country. We
pay tribute to High Representative Inzko for his astute
leadership, and support his call for the adequate funding
and staffing of his Office.

