Mr. Mufloz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
resolution just adopted is of historic importance for the
future of Iraq. It marks the end of the occupation of
that country and the beginning of a stage during which
the Iraqis can once again take control of their political
destiny, their natural resources and their sovereignty.

No negotiation can produce perfect results. This
is the best possible resolution given current
circumstances. I should like to express appreciation to
the sponsors for the transparency that characterized the
negotiating process, as well as for the continued
openness to dialogue on the part of the delegations of
the United States and the United Kingdom and for the
constructive attitude taken by all members of the
Council. My delegation is particularly pleased with the
joint work done with the delegations of Brazil and
Spain on certain proposed amendments that were
jointly formulated and that were included in the text of
the resolution.

The position of the Government of Chile with
respect to the Iraq crisis has been coherent and
pragmatic. The primary objective of our action in the
Council following the military action has been, first, to
help meet the humanitarian assistance needs of the
people and, secondly, to put a speedy end to the
military occupation and to establish a democratic and
representative Government in a climate of stability and
security that is conducive to the development and well-
being of the Iraqi people.

This resolution is the theoretical and normative
foundation of a new phase in Iraq. We will have to wait
to see how that is translated, in practice, into a
sovereign Government that can build a future based on
the well-being of its people.

Violence will not automatically end in Iraq with
this resolution or when the interim Government of Iraq
takes power on 30 June. The peace-building process,
which will be difficult, will be strengthened by the
democratic election of its authorities in January 2005
and the full implementation of the timetable of the
political process.

In the draft resolution that we have adopted we
have tried to reflect as well as possible the full and
effective transfer of sovereignty and authority to the
interim Government of Iraq. At the same time, we
support the institutional timetable, which will enable
the holding of free, open and informed elections in
order to have a fully legitimate and representative
Government.

We welcome the incorporation of meaningful
reference to international humanitarian law in the
resolution, a subject on which my delegation has
always insisted. We are satisfied with the agreement
achieved to establish a security partnership between the
Government of Iraq and the multinational force, with
appropriate consultations on sensitive military
operations and through which the Iraqi authorities will
have effective control over their armed forces and
security forces, which was a substantive item of my
delegation's position.

We are aware of the limitations of the security
situation prevailing on the ground and therefore of the
need to authorize, for a limited period and at the
request of the sovereign Government of Iraq, the
presence of a multinational force, which, with the Iraqi
armed forces and security forces, will enable the
establishment of a secure and stable environment.

Because we believe in the international
multilateral system, we have also advocated that the
United Nations have, in the resolution, a leadership
role in the process of Iraqi political and institutional
reconstruction, as well as in other areas as the situation
allows. We believe that this resolution establishes with
the necessary clarity the central responsibilities that the
United Nations will have to assume in Iraq. Some of
those responsibilities have already begun to be fulfilled
on the ground through the excellent work of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, and the Director of the Electoral Assistance
Division, Ms. Carina Perelli. The United Nations is
once again at the focal point of assistance to Iraq,
following a period of lack of understanding and
division.

I would like to conclude by referring to a
remarkably important fact - the unity of the Security
Council. As the Secretary-General said yesterday in
this Chamber, the Iraqi crisis represented for the
international system one of the greatest conflicts since
the end of the cold war, causing diverging opinions and
varying views on how to resolve the problems being
analysed. However, today, with the adoption of this
resolution through the unanimous vote of the members
of the Security Council, there is palpable evidence of
the existing unity to achieve the best efforts that, we
hope, will contribute to establishing a free, prosperous
and democratic Iraq at peace with its neighbours and
itself.

