Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): It is a great honour for me
to address you here today, Madam President. First and
foremost, I would like to thank the Argentine presidency
for having convened this timely meeting, which, in
our view, strikes at the core of the Security Council's
primary mandate regarding threats to international
peace and security. I would also like to thank the
opening speakers for their important contributions to
the debate.

The Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union (EU) has already spoken on this matter, and,
as an EU member, Croatia stands by that statement.
Nevertheless, I would like to add a few points, keeping
in mind Croatia's extensive and unfortunate experience
in the field and our particular interest in all of us
drawing valuable lessons from that troubled history
and implement them for the sake of improved lifesaving
assistance and greatly improved protection of those
who are in dire need of it.

At this point, I would also like to commend the
Governments of Argentina, Austria, Indonesia and
Uganda for the excellent work they have done in hosting
a series of regional workshops. The results of those
workshops were discussed at the outstanding Global
Conference on Reclaiming the Protection of Civilians
under International Humanitarian Law, hosted in
Oslo by the Government of Norway. Having been an
active participant at the Vienna and Oslo meetings,
Croatia strongly supports all measures that can lead to
improving the situation of civilians in armed conflict,
and we would like to firmly support the Oslo Conference
recommendations in that regard.

Although international humanitarian law has
established a comprehensive legal framework to protect
civilians from the effects of military operations, that
framework stands in stark contrast to the situation faced
by civilians on the ground in conflict-affected areas.
Nowadays, in the conduct ofarmed conflict, it is civilians
who often become the main target of armed attacks and
atrocities - murder, deportation and ethnic cleansing,
as well as rape and sexual violence and violence against
health care facilities. That often happens not only as
a consequence of war operations, but as a result of
the methods and means used in conducting war. In
that respect, resolution 1894 (2009) - with its strong
condemnation of attacks directed against civilians
as flagrant violations of international humanitarian
law - stands out as an indispensable instrument to be
used as much as possible.

In current times, which are still plagued by many
armed conflicts, a strong need exists for an appropriate
understanding of international humanitarian law.
For its part, Croatia has invested serious efforts in
strengthening the role of international humanitarian
law and paving the way for the application of criminal
justice against violators. The 1949 Geneva Conventions
and their 1977 Additional Protocols occupy a special
place in Croatia's international commitments, as they
were the first international treaties to which Croatia
became party. Today, Croatia is party to almost all
international humanitarian law treaties and is widely
recognized as a country with national legislation that is
complementary to international humanitarian law.

Furthermore, Croatia continues to implement
modern international standards through domestic
legislation and to familiarize the general public with
international humanitarian law. It goes without saying
that civilians are the most vulnerable and unprotected
group in any armed conflict - women and children
in particular. But women can also play a specific and
unique role in the prevention and resolution of armed
conflicts, as well as in post-conflict reconstruction and
peace consolidation.

With that in mind, Croatia has been actively
engaged in the Friends of Women, Peace and Security
group of countries in promoting the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. In cooperation with civil society, a national
action plan on the topic was created and adopted by the
Croatian Government two years ago.

Furthermore, Croatia adopted the Paris
Commitments and Principles - documents that
strengthen global efforts against impunity for crimes
against children. It is our view that continued attention
to the specific needs of women and children, as well as
to their vulnerabilities during and after armed conflict,
must form part of any effective policy for the protection
of civilians and of every significant peacemaking or
peacekeeping effort, including relief operations. Failure
in that field involves much more than a lack of political
success: such failure is measured in human lives and
misery.

Individual States bear the responsibility to protect
their populations from such appalling atrocities. At
the same time, the international community has a
responsibility to help protect populations and to take
collective action through the Security Council - if
and when national authorities manifestly fail to protect
their population.

Furthermore, the fight against impunity and
the establishment of the rule of law are of crucial
significance in ensuring that the most severe crimes do
not go unpunished. Croatia firmly believes that those
who violate human rights in armed conflicts today
should know that they will face justice tomorrow.

Finally, I would also like to take this opportunity to
call attention to the fact that Croatia, in its capacity as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, will organize,
together with UN-Women, a special meeting, on the
margins of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, dedicated to the economic empowerment
of women for peacebuilding. It will take place on
26 September.

