Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom, led by the Right Honourable William Hague,
for convening this meeting, and the other members of
the Council for their participation at a very high level.

It is my pleasure to speak on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, striving to give our contribution to this
timely and important debate. I sincerely hope this
meeting, as a collective effort of the Security Council,
will bring positive energy and encouragement for the
people of the Sudan and help them overcome
challenges at this critical juncture. I also commend the
comprehensive statement of the Secretary-General and
his creative involvement and leadership in this process.

The parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) have implemented many of its
provisions, and now the time has come for the final
phase that will chart the future of the Sudanese people.
Therefore it is of crucial importance that the final CPA
provisions, including the referendums on the self-
determination of the people of the Southern Sudan and
on the status of Abyei, are timely and fully
implemented.

Time and again, we have supported
comprehensive implementation of the CPA. We
consider that at this critical stage, it is of utmost
importance for the CPA parties to redouble their efforts
to address outstanding issues, in view of the fact that
full responsibility for implementation of the CPA rests
squarely with them.

For all the processes within the Sudan to succeed,
open and extensive negotiations between the parties to
the CPA on the post-referendum arrangements -
including border management, citizenship, migration
and security - are essential. Reaching an agreement
on those important issues will create an environment
conducive to the implementation of the final stage of
the CPA, primarily for the successful conduct of the
referendum and the implementation of its outcome. In
that context, I express our appreciation to the African
Union High-Level Panel on Darfur for the facilitation
of negotiations between the parties.

We are concerned over the fact that referendum
preparations are behind schedule. Our particular
concern is the delay in fulfilling the Southern Sudan
Commission mandate, as it could have a major impact
on preparing and conducting the referendum on time.
We urge both parties to prevent further delays in the
Commission's work. The international community and
the United Nations should do their utmost to assist the
parties in their efforts. The engagement of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and its
technical and logistical support in the process of
preparing and conducting referendums is
indispensable.

With regard to preparations for the Abyei
referendum, the situation is even more urgent. The
parties therefore have to immediately address the issue
of establishing the Abyei Referendum Commission.
We welcome the role of the Secretary-General's
Panel for the Referendums in monitoring and assessing
the referendums processes. Due consideration must
also be given to contingency planning for the
transitional post-referendum period. We are encouraged
that UNMIS and the United Nations country team have
already commenced preparations for United Nations
support in the post-referendum period.

During this critical time, we must not lose sight
of the humanitarian situation in Southern Sudan, which
deserves due consideration and the full attention of the
international community. The population of Southern
Sudan still needs the unwavering commitment of the
humanitarian community. Sufficient funding for
humanitarian needs must be put in place in order to
ease the suffering of the affected population. By the
same token, extensive development of the governance
capacities of the Government of Southern Sudan,
regardless of the outcome of the referendum, should
not be neglected. In that regard we commend the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
United Nations Development Programme for their
efforts in providing assistance to the Government of
Southern Sudan.

As for the situation in Darfur, we reiterate our
full support for the peace process in Doha led by the
United Nations and the African Union and the
mediation efforts of Joint Chief Mediator, Mr. Bassole.
It is essential that all parties seize the opportunity
offered by the Doha peace process, and we urge them
to join that process without preconditions or further
delay. As there is no alternative for lasting and
sustainable peace in Darfur, the international
community has to exercise its pressure on those
refusing to do so.

We underline that it is essential to continue
working towards a comprehensive solution for Darfur
that would include a ceasefire and security
arrangements, fair representation at all levels of
government, reconciliation and economic development.
Addressing those aspects, together with the rule of law
and justice - particularly ending impunity and holding
all perpetrators of war crimes responsible - would
offer a solid basis for sustainable peace in Darfur.

There is no doubt that the upcoming period bears
extremely high risks but also offers opportunities.
Primary responsibility for the outcome rests with, and
is in the hands of, the Sudanese people. It is also

important to emphasize that at this decisive time, the
Sudan needs both the attention and support of the
international community.

Allow me to conclude by expressing our strong
belief that the Sudanese people have the strength and
the courage to overcome all challenges and choose a
better future for themselves and the entire region. As
far as the CPA parties and their leaders are concerned,
they must be fully aware of their responsibilities and
duties towards their people and must govern their
actions toward ensuring a safe and prosperous future
for the country.

Finally, on behalf of the country that will preside
over the Security Council in January 2011, I can assure
the Council that Bosnia and Herzegovina will do its
utmost to facilitate the efficient exercise by the Council
of its role with regard to the foreseen referendum
process.

