Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, Ijoin others in welcoming Mr. Valentin Inzko
to the Council. We appreciate his concise and pointed
briefing.

We would like to offer some observations on the
challenges that lie ahead for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

First, while we welcome the relatively calm
and stable security environment in the country, it is
disappointing that there still remain major challenges
arising from the power struggle and lack oftrust among
political actors. The cautious optimism that prevailed
early last year quickly turned into disappointment and
frustration. The Government coalition, which was
formed after six months of twists and turns, has proved
to be short-lived. The protracted power struggle among
political parties is still impeding the Government
from working on pressing issues such as constitutional
reform.

It is worrisome that the rule of law has been
similarly undermined by political instability. The rule
of law is a prerequisite for democracy and a central
component of long-term peace and security. In the
light of that, we remain deeply concerned that political
leaders casually violate the law for their own purposes
and repeatedly fail to implement the decisions of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court. The
deadlock on the appointment of the remaining judges
to the Federation Constitutional Court is also a serious
source of concern. We urge all the political stakeholders
to engage in constructive political dialogue and to
respect the Constitution and the procedures established
by the law so that the Government can fully function
and perform its responsibility under the Constitution.

Secondly, Another worrisome trend is the growing
open advocacy for the dissolution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As the High Representative elaborated
in his report (S/2013/263, annex), there have been
distressingly high levels of provocative rhetoric from
the leadership of the Republika Srpska, challenging
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Such nationalistic rhetoric will only serve
to inflame ethnic tensions. We call on leaders from all
parties to refrain from divisive rhetoric, which only
undermines national reconciliation and the prospects
for long-term stability.

The political instability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
brings me to my third point, that is, the importance
of national ownership. Despite years of international
support, we are still witnessing a continuing political
crisis, and little progress has been made on national
reconciliation. I believe that that can largely be
attributed to the lack of ownership on the part of political
stakeholders. No democratic process is sustainable in the
absence of a meaningful degree of political ownership
and national reconciliation. In that vein, we would like
to encourage the authorities of Bosnia-Herzegovina to
further strengthen their efforts to promote the value
of tolerance and inter-ethnic understanding through
multi-ethnic education and confidence-building
measures. Enhancing the engagement of civil society
will also be crucial in ensuring accountable, responsive
and democratic governance.
Civil society can play a pivotal role by holding
political leaders and representatives more accountable.
In that regard, the Republic of Korea encourages the
High Representative to redouble his efforts to build
the capacity of grassroots civil society organizations.
Finally, we absolutely share with the High
Representative the idea that we need to pay continuous
attention to Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress, with
patience and a long-term approach. In that regard, we
would like to express our full support for the efforts of
the High Representative.

