Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to convey my gratitude to the
Chinese delegation for having taken the welcome
initiative of organizing a Security Council debate on
the important topic of the Peacebuilding Commission,
just a few days after the General Assembly held a
debate on the subject. My delegation listened with a
great deal of interest to the statement of Ambassador
Takasu, Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and we thank him for the very useful information he
provided to the Security Council.

The establishment two years ago of the
Peacebuilding Commission was undoubtedly an
expression of the international community's solidarity
with States emerging from conflict. In general, such
States face various challenges - economic, political
and social, as well as security-related - which they
cannot overcome without sustained international
support.

That is why after the inclusion on the
Peacebuilding Commission's agenda of Burundi, Sierra
Leone and Guinea-Bissau, we are gratified by the
recent inclusion of the Central African Republic,
followed by the setting up of a country-specific
configuration for that country which is being guided so
effectively by my neighbour at this table, Ambassador
Grauls, who himself recognizes that we are at an
important stage in efforts to mobilize the international
community to rehabilitate that country. We also hope
that cote d'Ivoire's request for inclusion on the
Peacebuilding Commission's agenda will soon be
granted. That will probably have to wait until the end
of the electoral process.
Rightly considered a body possessing the
functions of both strengthening peace and preventing
the resumption of hostilities in post-conflict situations,
the Peacebuilding Commission has already been able to
accompany a number of States through a phase of
political and security normalization, the restoration of
State authority and economic renewal - in short, the
laying of solid foundations for sustainable
development.

We thus wish to congratulate the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country configurations, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office on their significant achievements.

The present debate is a timely one. It enables us
to take stock of achievements and remaining
challenges and to join all the actors in seeking the best
ways to enable the Commission to better discharge its
mission. We encourage the Commission to continue
on-site visits, which have shown themselves to be
irreplaceable tools to get a good feel for the realities
and to engage in direct exchanges with local actors and
their partners.

We welcome the contacts and other informal
interactions with other United Nations bodies. This
cooperation should continue within the framework of a
clearly understood partnership and a harmonization of
actions that will ensure that the United Nations bodies
avoid duplication while abiding by their respective
mandates.

The participation of international organizations
and civil society in the work of the Commission is also
praiseworthy and should continue within the
framework of a pooling of efforts to develop integrated
strategies.

Basing ourselves on the principle that the main
task of the Peacebuilding Commission is to facilitate
the institutional link between peacekeeping, post-
conflict operations and the international network for
assistance and the mobilization of donors, my
delegation would like to make the following
comments.

First, the Peacebuilding Commission must step
up its efforts to mobilize potential partners possessing
the necessary resources to assist States in their
rehabilitation processes, because, quite clearly, even
though significant progress has been achieved, a great
deal of potential remains untapped.
Secondly, as an intergovernmental body, the
Peacebuilding Commission should play a mainly
political role, one of coordinating the actions of all
stakeholders in order to avoid duplication, maintain
constructive dialogue with all national players,

promote in all circumstances national ownership of the
process, make recommendations and suggest integrated
peacebuilding strategies.

Thirdly, as an advisory body, the Peacebuilding
Commission should not in our View aspire to formulate
projects or to take final decisions instead of the
Peacebuilding Fund, which is better equipped to do so.
We encourage the Commission and its partners to
continue their efforts for better mobilization of national
expertise, particularly in drawing up projects.

Fourthly, we believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission's contribution to reconstruction and
institutional capacity-building will be effective only if,
in its approach, the Commission focus on cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, which,
given their familiarity with the field, are in a position
to play a significant role in the political dialogue with
concerned States and in the mobilization of efforts at a
regional and subregional level. Here, I should like to
underscore the major role played by the Economic
Community of West African States in Guinea-Bissau
and Sierra Leone, as well as the active participation on
a bilateral basis of some of its members, in the
rehabilitation of these two countries.

The peacebuilding stage is a delicate phase in the
post-conflict transition process. On this road towards a
restored peace, all dimensions should be equally
addressed. We thus recognize that quick-impact
projects, if well-implemented, can prove most effective
in stabilizing the socio-economic situation, mobilizing
political will and re-establishing trust and laying the
foundations of rapid rehabilitation.

It remains necessary, however, that all main
sectors be rapidly covered and enjoy international aid.
This will prevent the feeling that the international
community gives pride of place to such sectors of
governance, elections and strengthening of the
judiciary over such vital fields as energy or basic social
services.

Activity on strengthening the rule of law is
certainly important in promoting the participation of
partners and in laying down the framework for
appropriate strategy and behaviour of stakeholders.
However, one should not forget that building the basis
for lasting peace and development remains the final
objective.

It is important that the message of the

international community be well understood. This will

contribute to reinforcing the confidence of national

actors and to promoting effective national ownership of
the process.

