Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I wish to express my sincere condolences, and those
of my delegation, to the delegation of Morocco and to the
people and Government of Morocco on the passing of His
Majesty King Hassan II, whose policies were essential in
creating a positive climate in the Middle East conflict and
in other regional situations.

I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
professional and efficient way in which you are
conducting the work of the Council. I wish to thank you
for convening this formal meeting. We hope that this will
become a frequent practice for the benefit of other
Members of the United Nations, in particular whenever
senior Secretariat officials present reports on the main
topics being considered by the Security Council.

We wish to express to Mrs. Ogata our gratitude for
her statements, and also we wish to express our
appreciation to her and to the whole staff of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for their dedicated work. Her words further
bolstered the view that the Security Council should devote
as much attention as possible to the humanitarian aspects
of conflicts. This is compatible with the essential
functions of the Council. At the present time, the concept
of peace and security includes also elements of justice,
human rights and development. This qualitative evolution
should be followed carefully, since it offers an innovative
way of improving the well-being of peoples and insuring
a lasting solution on solid bases for most of the internal
conflicts which the Security Council has on its agenda.

Those conflicts are the ones that result in the largest
number of refugees, internally displaced persons and
massive human rights Violations, according to the Security
Council's records and the reports of the Secretary-
General. In order to resolve such conflicts, systematic
action is required. This means dealing simultaneously, to
the extent possible, with the political, humanitarian and
economic causes in the country and in the region where
the problem exists.

In this connection, Africa's problems are no different
from those of other regions. As indicated in the Algiers
Declaration of 14 July last, those conflicts are vestiges of
the East-West conflict and are fuelled by a precarious
economic situation and weak Government institutions.
While the lack of resources makes the situation even

 

worse, it is necessary, first of all, in order to encourage
investments and other economic measures, to establish an
appropriate political framework that will allow for the
optimum utilization of humanitarian assistance. In this
context, we wish to congratulate the World Food
Programme on the recently approved emergency operation
in the amount of $106 million to assist five African
countries.

The task is enormous, and the figures speak volumes.
In the report of the Secretary-General of 15 July on the
preliminary deployment of the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, mention is made of the
fact that in addition to the 700,000 internally displaced
persons in its territory there are 300,000 refugees.
Mrs. Ogata has just provided us additional information
about the situation in other countries of the region. We trust
that resources commensurate with needs will be available
in order to dispel the impression that there is less concern
about the problems of Africa. It is fitting, therefore, to
congratulate Mrs. Ogata for devoting more than 40 per cent
of available resources to deal with emergencies in that
continent.

While the Lorne agreement, aimed at putting an end
to the conflict in Sierra Leone, and the Lusaka agreement
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo open up major
opportunities, we must ask ourselves what we can do here
in the Security Council to cooperate with UNHCR and the
various humanitarian organizations.

On the one hand, the Council could help to prevent
and contain humanitarian disasters in Africa through
decisive action in conflicts that appear on its agenda. The
task of preventing humanitarian crises could be included in
a broader context of peacekeeping and peace-building.
Clearly there is an interdependence among human rights
Violations, humanitarian crises and threats to peace and
security. As a consequence, humanitarian action is
increasingly related to peacekeeping and peacemaking
activities.

On the other hand, the Council could carefully
monitor, in an ongoing manner, the peace agreements
mentioned. It is important to ensure that the link between
poorly resolved conflicts, the humanitarian problems they
cause and underdevelopment does not re-establish
conditions that promote renewed and intensified fighting
and humanitarian abuses of the civilian population.

For all of these reasons, expert personnel must be
involved in the humanitarian task of development and
reconstruction, in accordance with the mandate of the
Security Council and in accordance with the Charter. It is
therefore important to provide the utmost security to the
humanitarian personnel carrying out their work in conflict
or post-conflict areas. We wish once again to reiterate the
need for the Governments and parties involved in those
States that host United Nations and humanitarian
personnel to respect international law and the relevant
conventions. The Security Council should invite such
parties to state unambiguously their readiness to act
accordingly.

Lastly, the parties to conflicts should recognize that
acceding to and pledging to respect conventions and the
relevant legal instruments, inter alia in the field of
humanitarian affairs, human rights and economic issues,
is a necessary first step to demonstrate to the international
community, to donors and to other interested parties that
they have truly decided seriously to embark upon a
forward-looking path of reconstruction.

