Mr. Lacanilao (Philippines): We would like to
begin by noting the conclusion of the election ofjudges
to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) last Friday. We hope that that will
provide impetus to the efforts of the Tribunal as we
face the final years of its work.

My delegation would like to thank the Presidents
and the Prosecutors of the two Tribunals for their
reports this morning. We note with satisfaction that,
first, the Tribunals continue to operate at full capacity
and secondly, since the last time the Council heard
their reports, in June this year, the Tribunals have
continued to improve the efficiency of their
proceedings and to concentrate their focus on the most
senior leaders suspected of being responsible for the
most serious crimes.

We commend the efforts to establish institutions
and rule-of-law mechanisms in the national
jurisdictions of concerned countries to prevent
impunity and to promote justice. We hope that the
situation of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) is now more hopeful and hope that the
Tribunal will continue its work towards the
achievement of the completion strategy.

I would like to comment on the points raised in
the report of the ICTY. We commend its efforts to
contribute expertise to training seminars for judges and
prosecutors in the former Yugoslavia so as to enhance
the capability of national jurisdictions to try pending
cases as well as to support the efforts to establish a War
Crimes Chamber within the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that the bulk of the cases will
need to be tried by national courts and that, aside from
being a critical element of the completion strategy, the
ability of the Tribunal to refer cases to competent
national jurisdictions for trial will enhance the
involvement of national Governments in bringing
reconciliation and justice to the region. That will serve
the process of healing wounds and strengthening the
sense of nationhood of the republics in the former
Yugoslavia. I hope that, in his closing statement, Judge
Meron will be able to provide an indication of when
cases of minor suspects could actually be transferred to
national jurisdictions.

Today, we again heard the plea of the Tribunals to
have adequate personnel to perform their work. We

were informed last June that this requirement had been
seriously affected by the hiring freeze, which not only
limits the ability of the Tribunals to take on new staff
to meet their increasing workload, but also prohibits
hiring even to replace essential personnel who leave
the Tribunals. The Tribunals also pleaded for support
to improve their ability to retain qualified staff and
rectify the severe staff shortage. We hope that this
problem will be addressed in the near future, as it
could affect the completion strategies. I hope that the
concluding statements will further elaborate on why
the problem still persists.

My delegation is fully cognizant of the challenges
and difficulties involved in achieving the completion
strategies, specifically the requirement for the
completion of all trials by 2008. We hope that the
Tribunals will faithfully comply with the timelines set
by the Council in the completion strategies. We
understand that major fugitives are yet to be brought
before the Tribunals and that any delay in their arrest
would have an adverse impact on the Tribunals' work.
We call on all concerned delegations to cooperate fully
with the Tribunals so that all trials can end by 2008 and
the Tribunals can be closed by 2010. My delegation
would not want to see any further adjustments to the
completion strategies.

