Mr. Kobler: At the outset, let me take this
opportunity to wish happy Nowruz to all those who
celebrate on 21 March.

I am honoured to present to the Council today the
second report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/154)
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2061 (2012), on
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI). I shall also brief Council members
on the most recent developments in Iraq.

I would like to begin by describing two significant
and contrasting events that recently took place in Iraq.
On 27 February, Iraqi Airways flight number 157 landed
at Kuwait International Airport. That historic flight
was the first after the 22-year halt in commercial air
traffic between Iraq and Kuwait. That event affirmed
the strong desire of the leaders of Iraq and Kuwait to
open a new chapter in their relations, which have been
heavily burdened by history.

However, a few days later, on 4 March, more than
40 Syrian soldiers and 10 Iraqis were killed inside
Iraqi territory. This week, a series of atrocious terrorist
attacks added more innocent persons to the long list of
victims of such attacks. My condolences go the families
of the victims and to the people of Iraq.

Those incidents demonstrate how Iraqis face a
complex set of interrelated problems, among them
the very real potential for a spillover of Violence from
Syria. Such destabilization would add to and fuel the
existing political and security challenges facing Iraq,
which threaten the achievements of the past decade.

Since late December, tens of thousands of
demonstrators in Iraq's western provinces have taken
to the streets to voice their grievances. Their demands
are centred around issues of human rights and access
to basic services. They feel unprotected, insecure and
excluded.

My colleagues and I witnessed that firsthand in
Ramadi, Samarra, Mosul, Fallujah, Tikrit and Kirkuk.
Around the country, we listened to the demonstrators'
frustrations. Over time, they spoke more harshly and
proposed more radical solutions.

The volatility on the streets is also reflected at the
political level. The ministers of the Al-Iraqiya Sunni
bloc continue their boycott of Cabinet meetings, which
has lasted for almost three months. Political coalitions
are weakening. In essence, the political fabric is fraying.

The Government has taken a number of initiatives
to address the demands of the demonstrators. I have
welcomed those efforts, which have yielded some
results.

One such initiative was the establishment of a
committee chaired by Deputy Prime Minister Hussein
al-Shahristani. The committee has reported that it has
facilitated the release of approximately 3,400 prisoners.
In addition, all female prisoners have been transferred
to their home governorates, where they will serve the
remainder of their sentences. Those measures are in
direct response to the demands of the demonstrators.

The committee has also reinstated pension
payments for 11,000 public-sector retirees who were
members of the former Baath regime. Combined with
decisions on other issues, the al-Shahristani committee
claims that its decisions have covered roughly 100,000
individuals.

A second committee, under the chairmanship of
the head of the National Alliance, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, is
focused on finding common language for three pieces
of highly contentious legislation, naemly, the law on
counter-terrorism, the accountability and justice law,
and a new general amnesty law. In that regard, tangible
results still have to be achieved.
Since the onset of demonstrations, I have sought
to advance inclusive and direct political dialogue and
national reconciliation. I have offered our good offices,
first as a means of relaying information between the
demonstrators and the Government. I have expressed
our approach as follows.

First, UNAMI is an impartial actor. We keep an
equal distance from all sides. We offer our good offices,
whether for mediation, convening, or witnessing, any
negotiated agreement. However, secondly, UNAMI is
not neutral on human rights. We have spoken up against
the increasing use of sectarian language. We have
advocated the principle of non-violence, including to
the demonstrators. We have called on the Government
to exercise the utmost restraint. Thirdly, UNAMI urges
the Government to respond to those popular demands
that can be addressed in the short term, and to do so
immediately. Other demands will require more time for
a response. The demonstrations have been under way
for nearly three months. However, the mistrust among
the components of Iraq ~ Shia, Sunni and Kurd and
other communities - goes much deeper. The deep-
seated lack of trust threatens the political fabric and
the social bonds that should bring Iraqis together in one
united, federal country on the basis of the Constitution.

Members of each and every ethnic and social
group continue to be the target of acts of terrorism,
assassination and kidnapping, including while
practicing their faith. Terrorists seek to ignite sectarian
conflict and turn the clock back on Iraq's nascent
stability.

In total, acts of terrorism from November 2012 to
the end of February 2013 claimed the lives of almost
1,300 civilians. More than 3,000 innocent Iraqis have
been wounded. Furthermore, almost 600 Iraqi security
forces have been killed and 1,000 injured as a result of
those atrocious terrorist acts. I have condemned those
acts in the strongest possible terms. I have called on all
of Iraq's leaders and religious authorities to rise as one
to stop the bloodshed.

Relations between the central Government and
the Kurdistan Regional Government continue to be
strained. Kirkuk remains the flashpoint for Arab-
Kurdish relations. On 16 January, for example, a series
of attacks resulted in 26 deaths and the wounding of
190 other individuals.

The absence of President Talabani, who has had a
truly stabilizing role in Iraq, is bitterly felt. I wish him
a speedy recovery.
I strongly encourage talks to continue between the
Iraqi army and the Peshmerga on the withdrawal and
relocation of troops.

To bring about fruitful relations between the
central and regional Governments, the passage of the
revenue-sharing and hydrocarbon laws will be crucial.
I call on the Parliament and the political blocs to reach
a consensus on those laws without further delay. I wish
to renew my offer of good offices to the parties, and
call upon their goodwill. The sharing of the immense
natural resources of Iraq in a fair and equitable way is
a must, and a prerequisite to rebuilding the trust. We
will continue to build trust no matter how difficult it is.

Iraq is set to hold provincial council elections in
less than one month from today. On 19 March, the
Cabinet in Iraq decided that the council elections in the
Ninewa and Anbar provinces would be postponed by
six months, with reference to the deteriorating security
conditions in those locations. I have expressed my
concern about that decision, as the citizens of those
provinces are looking forward to those elections with
great hope.

As the Independent High Electoral Commission is
continuing the technical preparations for the elections
in all 14 provinces, I have called on the Government and
Electoral Commission to ensure that elections can take
place as scheduled in apeaceful and secure environment.
I wish to commend the leadership of the High Electoral
Commission, in particular, Chairman Sarbast Rasheed,
as well as the dedicated commissioners and staff of the
Commission and polling stations, for their excellent
work. They are often subject to considerable pressure.
Unfortunately, and despite our efforts, there has been
no consensus on passing the law on holding elections in
Kirkuk province.

Iraq is committed to strengthening its relations
with its neighbours. By doing so, it aims to fully take
up its rightful place in the Arab world, the region
and the international community. I have mentioned
the progress achieved towards the normalization of
relations between Iraq and Kuwait, including through
Iraq's positive steps towards fulfilling its remaining
obligations under Chapter VII of the Charter. A major
milestone in that process will be the completion of
boundary maintenance work. The finalization of the
removal of obstacles along the border, in particular
the three houses in Umm Qasr, is a necessary step.
Understandably, that step is sensitive and politically
difficult for Iraq. However, it must be done by 31 March.

I also urge the Government of Iraq to accept
the funds set aside with the United Nations for the
compensation of Iraqi farmers pursuant to resolution
899 (1994). I sincerely hope that progress in that area
will lead to consensus on further outstanding issues,
including the file on missing Kuwaiti nationals and
property. During my most recent visit to Kuwait on
5 March, I sensed a spirit of optimism within the Kuwaiti
leadership. Therefore, it is with much anticipation that
I welcome the upcoming visit of Prime Minister His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah
to Baghdad in the near future.

In December, I visited Saudi Arabia. I sensed the
potential for relations between Iraq and Saudi Arabia
to be strengthened in a number of fields, including a
prisoner exchange based on the agreement reached
between the two sides - it would be a noble gesture if
an agreement could be reached before the holy month
of Ramadan; the opening of a border crossing between
Saudi Arabia and Iraq, with its 800 kilometre-long
border; and the active and committed participation
of both countries in a new regional initiative led
by the United Nations Environmental Programme
(UNEP) to combat sand and dust storms. I urge the
two countries to build upon the recent Visit of a high-
level Iraqi delegation to Riyadh. The restoration of
normal relations would benefit the two peoples, the two
countries and the region.

More than a year has passed since UNAMI began
its considerable efforts to facilitate the humanitarian
transfer of the residents of Camp Ashraf to the
temporary transit location of Camp Hurriya and their
relocation to third countries. I wish to reiterate my best
wishes today on the occasion of Nowruz, in particular
to the residents of Camp Hurriya and Camp Ashraf.

The urgency of relocating residents outside of Iraq

was underlined on 9 February, when an attack on Camp
Hurriya killed eight residents and injured an additional
40 persons. The Secretary-General, I and others have
condemned that attack in no uncertain terms. I have
fully supported requests made at the highest levels of
the Government of Iraq to improve security at Camp
Hurriya. The Government remains responsible for the
safety and security of the residents in accordance with
the Memorandum of Understanding signed with the
United Nations on 25 December 2011. The Government
has assured me that it will spare no effort in preventing
further attacks.

We face two major problems. First, the only
durable solution is to relocate the residents outside
of Iraq. I visited Albania on 15 March for talks with
Prime Minister Berisha. I welcome the decision by the
Government ofAlbania to accept 210 residents as early as
next month. I sincerely thank the Albanian Government
for that humanitarian gesture. Albania is thus the first
country to accept a large number of residents. I urge
other Member States to take similar steps. Yet, despite
additional offers being made, the residents of Camp
Hurriya continue to boycott relocation interviews with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). I join the Secretary-General in
urging the residents to fully cooperate with UNHCR.
Offers must be accepted.

Secondly, there are 100 residents remaining at
Camp Ashraf who refuse to join the larger group
at Camp Hurriya until the completion of property
negotiations. I encourage both the Government of
Iraq and the residents to constructively engage with
one another to promptly resolve the matter. I urge the
residents to designate lawyers for that purpose.

Finally, I also appeal to the camp leadership not to
prevent residents who wish to leave the camp from doing
so, to cooperate with the Iraqi authorities when it comes
to medical treatment, and to abstain from aggressive
behaviour against our United Nations monitors. United
Nations monitors must be able to freely interact with
the residents of Camp Hurriya.

I would like to thank Member States, in particular
the United States, and the European Union for their
financial contributions and their support for the efforts
to bring about a peaceful resolution of the issue of Camp
Ashraf and Camp Hurriya. I also wish, in the meantime,
to recognize the hard work of 136 United Nations staff
members, including 60 security personnel, who are
actively working on the file.

Having spoken at length about the group of 3,200
members of the Moj ahedin-e Khalq in Iraq, I would like
to note that our far larger humanitarian effort is focused

on three groups: Syrian refugees, returnees from Syria
and internally displaced persons (IDPs). Iraq currently
hosts nearly 120,000 Syrian nationals who have fled to
Iraq seeking safety and humanitarian assistance. Most
of the Syrian refugee population is currently located in
the Kurdistan region. An average of 800 individuals
enters the country every day. UNHCR is leading the
humanitarian country team in conducting a massive
emergency operation to respond to the refugees'
humanitarian needs. That operation will support the
Government of Iraq in ensuring that the refugees are
protected and assisted.

I would like to commend the Government of Iraq
for the generosity and hospitality it has shown to the
individuals and families seeking safety and security in
Iraq. I call on the Government to extend its generosity
by reopening the Al-Qaim and Rabia border crossing
points. I also appeal to all Member States to urgently
step up their contributions to the refugee response plan,
which still requires funding beyond June 2013.

In addition, approximately 80,000 Iraqis have fled
Syria to return to Iraq in the past few months. They fall
into the larger group of 1.2 million internally displaced
persons. Both returnees and IDPs are in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. The majority of those persons
live in informal settlements and constantly face the
threat of eviction. Those settlements are in appalling
condition. Returnees and the displaced lack access
to basic services, proper public health facilities and
schools. I call on the Government to increase the amount
and speed of delivery of assistance it provides to Iraqi
returnees from Syria. I also call on the Government to
ensure the swift reintegration of Iraqi returnees.

I would like to turn now to the broader human rights
situation in Iraq, and specifically the administration of
justice. That is an area that continues to be of concern.
Many detainees continue to complain of abuse,
mistreatment and torture, in particular in prisons under
the authority of the Ministry of the Interior. Every
case of torture is one case too many. Confessions
under duress are unacceptable. Courts continue to
be underresourced, which causes long delays in
processing cases, often beyond lawful limits. I wish
to reiterate the Secretary-General's call on Iraq to
consider a moratorium on all executions in accordance
with relevant General Assembly resolutions. Respect
for the rights of women, children and persons with
disabilities also remains inconsistent. Those groups
face discrimination and other social, cultural and legal
barriers to their full participation in the economic,
social and political life of Iraq.

Despite the problems noted, Iraq is making progress
in establishing the High Commission for Human Rights,
with the active support of the Government of Iraq and
the assistance of the United Nations. The Commission
will serve as a cornerstone of an Iraqi-owned and
-led system to guarantee the protection, respect and
promotion of the human rights of all of Iraq's citizens
in future.

On matters related to the environment, dust storms
have increasingly become a major problem for the
Iraqi people and the region. The dust storms in the
region are mainly generated in Iraq. From airports to
agricultural lands, dust storms extract a heavy annual
economic toll amounting to billions. Dust storms also
place significant strain on public health. Hospitals are
overwhelmed with persons requiring treatment for
respiratory conditions caused by dust.

Last month, Ijoined the environment ministers of
regional Governments at a meeting in Nairobi hosted
by UNEP. We established a clear political agreement
on the need to address the issue of sand and dust
storms. UNEP will lead in the creation of a regional
programme, in partnership with Governments, the
private sector and civil society. A trust fund has been
established for that effort, and I appeal to Member
States, especially those affected by dust storms in the
region, to contribute resources.

I also welcome the initiative of the Government
of the United Arab Emirates to host the next regional
meeting to discuss further concrete steps.

As in all my previous briefings to the Council,
I would like to conclude by touching on the urgent
problems facing the youth of Iraq. After the devastating
effect of war, and caught amid a soaring political crisis,
Iraq's youth are largely left to fend for themselves.
Youth unemployment stands at 23 per cent.

I have made young people a priority because, with
their potential and passion, they are the future of Iraq.
They will carry forward efforts towards the stability,
security and prosperity that all Iraqis seek to build. I
very much welcome the Government's efforts to work
towards a youth agenda. With the support of the United
Nations Population Fund, a national youth strategy will
be launched in the second quarter of 2013.
In February, I visited three different holy places in
Baghdad with 30 young Iraqis of different faiths and
backgrounds. Together we sat in shrines, churches and
temples in order to discuss what unites us, along with
our differences. I saw first-hand that reconciliation in
Iraq can truly begin with the young.

UNAMI will continue to provide a platform for
young people to express themselves, be empowered and
vocalize the actions that will build their country.

In closing, I am reminded that the Iraqi people are
blessed with three important assets: a rich and ancient
culture; a Vibrant young population; and natural wealth.
I hope that Iraq will remain determined and steadfast
in this very challenging time and take advantage of this
rich endowment to further advance the country.

With the support of Member States, UNAMI will
continue to assist the people and the Government of Iraq
in its mandated tasks. I wish to thank the Government
of Iraq for its cooperation during 2013, as in previous
years.

I wish to place on record my deep thanks to the
Security Council for its continued support.

