Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we wish to thank the delegation
of Chile for its constructive efforts in preparing
resolution 2193 (2014), extending the mandate of the
Judges and Prosecutors of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

We are extremely disappointed that the ICTY has
not acted in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010)
with respect to the time frame for the conclusion of
its work. Last year's resolution 2130 (2013) extending
the mandate of the Judges to December required the
Tribunal to take all possible measures necessary to
complete its work with the aim of facilitating the
closure of the Tribunal, taking into account resolution
1966 (2010). These measures, unfortunately, have not
been taken. Moreover, the time frame forecast for the
conclusion of the Tribunal's business has not only
not been shortened, but in fact has been significantly
lengthened.

It would seem at times that any justification
is sought to ensure the maximum delay in the
consideration of certain cases. The Tribunal would
appear to pay no heed to Security Council resolutions,
which is unacceptable on the part of that entity of
international justice. Objective contexts, such as the
state of health of certain defendants, can only partially
explain the delays. Planning Within the Tribunal
is clearly ineffective, and the distribution of work
inequitable. For example, the six-month delay in one
appeal was "based on an incorrect assessment of the
case, as compared with other cases" (S/2014/556, para. 38), as well as by "difficulties... in the activities of the
legal team" (ibid), as clearly outlined in the November
report of the ICTY.

We also fail to understand why, in one case, the
Tribunal requested six months to study materials, and
then asked for a further year. The President of the
Tribunal decided to compromise in this case, as a result
of which the Judges appointed in 2013 cannot actually
begin their work on the case until June 2015 if they do
not wish to re-read all of the material with which they
are seized.

We have often proposed the use of outside expertise
for the Tribunals' administrative affairs, which we
believe could truly serve to rectify the situation.
Those proposals, unfortunately, are not reflected
in the new resolution. The situation with respect to
the implementation of Security Council decisions
concerning the closure of the Tribunal by next year
has hardly improved. In that context, our position on
the resolution has not changed and our delegation has
abstained in the voting, as it did last year.

