The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

I should like to preface Indonesia's comments by
expressing our thanks to the Chairmen of the 1267
Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and the 1540 Committee for their comprehensive
briefings on their respective work. My delegation
commends once again the quality of the work
undertaken by the three terrorism-related Committees.
I also wish to use this opportunity to extend our
appreciation for their initiative to deliver a joint
statement of the Committees. We are of the view that
such an approach reflects greater coordination among
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council entrusted to
deal with terrorism.

With regard to the 1267 Committee, I would like
to reassert Indonesia's unwavering commitment to
promote the effective implementation, legitimacy and
credibility of the 1267 sanctions regime. We are fully
committed to joint efforts to improve the quality of the
consolidated list, particularly through enhancing its
completeness and accuracy. My delegation has some
concern about the fact that there has been mixed
support by Member States in implementing the
sanctions regime.

In line with observations made by the Monitoring
Team of the 1267 Committee, my delegation identified
some underlying causes of the situation that should be
adequately addressed by the Committee. We have
noted a growing perception that the current procedure
is not adequately fair and clear. The perception of
unfairness in the application of targeted sanctions has
also generated concerns in several countries. Moreover,
the growing number of legal cases in the national
courts of Member States questioning the conformity of
the sanctions measures with human rights principles
will potentially pose significant challenges to the
efficacy and credibility of the 1267 sanctions regime.

My delegation is of the view that mainstreaming
procedural fairness and asserting human rights
principles in the work of the Committee will also
strengthen the effectiveness of the implementation of
the 1267 sanctions regime. Legitimacy and credibility
of the sanctions regime will also depend, in large part,
on its procedural fairness.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 1730
(2006), by which a focal point for receiving de-listing
requests from individuals has been established, as an
achievement for the improvement of sanctions
procedures. However, my delegation maintains that the
establishment of such a focal point has yet to meet the
minimum standard required to ensure fair and clear
procedure. In that regard, my delegation attaches great
importance to the basic elements of minimum
standards as indicated in the letter of the Secretary-
General to the President of the Security Council dated
15 June 2006.

On the issue of compliance, my delegation
welcomes the commitment of the Committee to
develop specific and general recommendations based
on an analysis of what could be done to prevent
possible non-compliance, including by identifying the
challenges and difficulties faced by States in
implementing the sanctions. We should not lose sight
of the fact that an overly imperious approach to
ensuring compliance could jeopardize the high level of
cooperation that has been consistently shown by States.

Now let me touch upon the briefing on the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. My delegation
underscores the role played by the CTC in creating and
sustaining international momentum to strengthen
counter-terrorism efforts. Cooperation, transparency,
even-handedness and consistency in approach must
always be guiding principles of the work of the CTC.

Indonesia underlines the importance of thorough
and consistent analysis by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) of the
implementation by Member States of resolution 1373
(2001). Indonesia also welcomes the adoption of
Preliminary Implementation Assessments (PIAs) as an
effective tool to enhance the CTC's ability to evaluate
the implementation of the resolution. On the quality of
the PIAs that have been discussed in the CTC, we have
identified some areas of their content that should be
further improved.

With regard to the visits carried out by CTED, I
would like to reiterate their significance, particularly in
promoting a better understanding of the progress of all
States in meeting their obligations and in collecting
information about their needs. With a view to
promoting the credibility of the visits as one of the
objective tools for assessing the implementation of
Member States, we emphasize the need for CTED to

employ a more balanced approach in proposing the
States to be visited to the CTC. We believe that visiting
developing and developed countries would also
generate some positive impacts and benefits for the
work of the CTC.

Concerning the expiration of the mandate of
CTED on 31 December 2007, as provided for in
resolution 1535 (2004), I should like to suggest that the
Security Council start considering the matter at its
earliest convenience. My delegation is ready to engage
in a comprehensive evaluation of the work of CTED in
reinforcing the functions of the CTC.

Turning to the 1540 (2004) Committee, I would
like to reassert Indonesia's supports for the main tasks
of the Committee: promoting global capacity and
raising international standards for implementing the
resolution. In our View, the work of the Committee
should be done within its mandate and be guided by the
principles of cooperation, transparency and equal
treatment. Indonesia will, as always, continue to
actively support and participate in the work of the
Committee.

As for the issue of reporting on the
implementation of the resolution, we should
acknowledge that resolution 1540 (2004) reporting
requirements are perceived by some Member States as
too complicated and unsuited to the capabilities of
many developing countries. For developing countries
with limited resources and many other equally pressing
priorities, the increasing burden of reporting in its
various forms can be overwhelming. That is a fact that
should be adequately addressed by the Committee in
considering any additional measure to achieve full
implementation of the resolution.

Finally, my delegation believes that the full
implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) can be effectively carried out
through continuous efforts, patience, dialogue,
cooperation and assistance. In that regard, we underline
the significance of outreach activities and technical
assistance. Such efforts have positive implications for
the comprehensive implementation of the resolutions.
As far as the provision of technical assistance is
concerned, Indonesia stresses that it should be
provided upon the request of a State in a way that
respects sovereignty and national priorities.

I now resume my responsibilities as President of
the Security Council.
I call on the representative of Cuba.

