Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
for his briefing. It is not yet time to bid him farewell,
and we will postpone that for now, because he has
promised to work on this matter up to the last minute.

Recently in Syria we have seen a trend towards
stabilization associated with the liberation of a greater
part of the country's territory from the terrorist presence
At this stage, Syrians need international support in
re-establishing an economy that has been destroyed by
the war. The citizens of Syria who are endeavouring
to return to their homeland should be getting genuine
support from the specialized international agencies. We
strongly urge our partners to be guided on these issues
by the interests of ordinary Syrians and to refrain from
artificially tying them to political progress. Otherwise,
as with the unilateral sanctions that end up burdening
ordinary citizens, it does not match their publicly
trumpeted humanitarian slogans. Judging from what we
have heard today, however, our urgings are not likely to
find a response from our so-called humanitarians.
Russia, Iran and Turkey are the country guarantors
of the Astana process and are continuing their close
joint work in the interests of a Syrian settlement. We
in this Chamber never tire of asking questions of those
who tell us haughtily what we have done wrong and
what we should do. But what have those here been doing
for a Syrian settlement? We know what they discuss
in their so-called small group, and the documents that
result from their meetings. They have no relation to the
Syrian settlement. They are a collection of ultimatums
and conditions. We suggest that the small-country
group publish the memorandums that they adopt in
their meetings and make them accessible to a broad
public. We do not want to do it for them. Then we can
discuss with them who is trying to launch a Syrian-
owned political process and who is dictating to Syrians
what their future should be.

The high-level agreement between Russia and
Turkey on temporary measures for stabilizing Idlib
governorate has had a palpable effect on the situation that
is much appreciated by many of those involved - but
not all. It seems that some of our partners are never
satisfied. Things before the memorandum were bad, and
things after the memorandum are also bad. According
to what we have heard today, the memorandum would
barely have happened if it hadn't been for the efforts of
the so-called small group. Iwant to let the Council know
that the memorandum is being implemented in full, and
our Turkish colleagues are working very hard to that
end. A number of opposition groups have announced
their support for the Sochi memorandum. More than
1,000 militants have left the demilitarized zone. A
significant quantity of heavy military equipment has
been removed, although there are reports that some
groups are trying to hide some of it in the mountains.

The situation is not without difficulties, for
which the most radical rebel cells, particularly Jabhat
Al-Nusra, are to blame. They are trying to undermine
the implementation of the memorandum by shelling
towns and villages bordering the de-escalation zone,
including the western outskirts of Aleppo. We assume
that extreme measures will be applied to incorrigible
terrorists. Those who are ready to break with the
radicals are being given a good, indeed a unique chance
to return to normal society, and they should make that
choice as soon as possible.

All international players must respect Syria's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Neither Idlib nor any other part of the country can
be seen as some sort of separate entity with special
arrangements. Unfortunately, not everyone is complying
with those fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The United States representative asked about the
motives of the Russian presence and activity in Syria.
My answer is that Russia is in Syria at the invitation of
its legitimate Government. Our aim is to assist Syria
in combating international terrorism. We have no other
goals or motives. IfI may, I will ask him in return what
the basis is for the United States presence in Syria and
what its motives are. Are they to combat terrorism,
or to create quasi-State entities on the territory of a
sovereign country and a springboard for some sort of
future action in the region?

There are military bases being built and expanded
in Syria, including the notorious Al-Tanf, around
which a real terrorist breeding ground has formed. The
demographic makeup of north-eastern Syria on the left
bank of the Euphrates is being violently reconfigured.
The fight against the remaining isolated centres
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is
getting nowhere, as if the task of finally defeating the
terrorists was not an issue. Now and then the terrorists
take over new territories, as is happening in the area
of Hajin. From time to time militants are transported
somewhere. We do not know what is happening in the
areas controlled by the so-called coalition where ISIL
members are being held. Are they kept in improvised
prisons, prosecuted, returned to their countries of
origin? This uncertainty confirms our long-standing
suspicions that countering terrorism is only a pretext for
maintaining the coalition's military presence in Syria.

As our Syrian colleagues have informed the
Security Council, civilians are being killed as a result
of the so-called coalition's air strikes on residential
areas. We are very concerned about the reports of the
use of phosphorous munitions during those bombings,
which should be thoroughly investigated. In the
territories under the control of the coalition and its local
allies, puppet self-governing bodies are being created
independently of the authorities in Damascus. What
is that if not a blatant violation of Syrian sovereignty
through the country's forcible dismemberment? These
are neocolonial policies, plain and simple.

We should not omit to mention the ugly story of the
fake White Helmet rescuers associated with terrorist
organizations. It is they who are some ofthe main actors
in the militants' toxic-substance provocations, which
Damascus is then purposely accused of perpetrating.
Some of them have been brought out of Syria, but not
all of their Western patrons are in a hurry to investigate
their clients after analysing their personal affairs. The
White Helmets represent a threat to the security of the
States of the region, which is why we are asking their
patrons to take them away and to hurry up about it.
All of them. We wish them luck integrating them into
democratic society.

In the meantime, we are pleased to see Damascus
and other Middle Eastern capitals finding ways to
normalize relations, starting with the most ordinary
kind, the human contacts and the trade that have
maintained regional ties for thousands of years. The
Nasib crossing on Syria's border with Jordan opened
just a few days ago. And with the assistance of Russian
specialists, work has begun again on the Quneitra
crossing after a years-long interruption. There is
mutual interest in returning the cross-border interaction
between Syria and Iraq to pre-conflict levels. That is a
natural process in the interests of the residents of the
region, and it would be criminal to interfere with it.

Increased attention is currently focused on forming
a constitutional committee on the basis of the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress held in Sochi in January.
If we are to establish a viable body, which we hope
everyone is genuinely interested in, its working
parameters require the consent of the Syrian parties.
Like other partners, we want to see the committee
established as soon as possible, but in this case it will
be counterproductive to pursue artificial deadlines,
with artificial terms that are artificially introduced. 1
would like to know why we are not setting deadlines for
resolving other crises, such as the Palestinian-Israeli
settlement, Yemen or Libya. There, too, let us loudly
and fervently demand immediate settlements and set
deadlines that do not accord with the interests of the
parties or the situations that have evolved. If a process
is to be credible, all the parties must agree, and that
takes time. So we have to be patient. We simply have to
respect the partners and not demand that they agree to
what suits us rather than the parties directly involved
in negotiations.

We ask our colleagues from the so-called small
group, many of whose participants have not proven
themselves in the area of the Syrian settlement, to
refrain from unwarranted ultimatums and from putting
pressure on the United Nations mediation efforts. While
we are open to dialogue, we wonder whether countries
that refuse even to talk to the legitimate Syrian
Government can play a positive role in supporting the
political process.

Mr. De Mistura is well aware that Russia has
consistently supported the United Nations efforts for an
intra-Syrian settlement and has repeatedly helped it to
emerge from what were seemingly hopeless impasses.
We have been convinced more than once of his ability to
make informed decisions based on his rich diplomatic
experience. We hope that his visit to Damascus will be
successful. However, we will not stop repeating that for
more active progress towards peace in Syria we need
to unite the constructive efforts of all the international
and regional players with influence and to refrain
from confrontation and the execution of geopolitically
destructive projects.

