Mr. Escalona (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to greet you, Mr. President,
and the other distinguished members of the Security
Council, most respectfully, and thank you for the work
you have done throughout this year.

The Permanent Mission of the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United
Nations recognizes the importance of the debate that
we have been having in recent months to resolve
various conflicts and maintain peace. In particular, we
would emphasize that, on 16 December 2008, the
Security Council considered resolution 1850 (2008),
submitted by the United States and the Russian
Federation, by which a series of measures aimed at
achieving peace in the Middle East, especially in
Palestine, were agreed. That made it possible, after
four and a half years, to adopt a resolution to facilitate

08-6603]
the way for direct negotiations between the parties that
could lead to just and lasting peace.

We welcome the appeal for the establishment of a
Palestinian State and for all States and international
organizations to contribute to the optimal functioning
of the Palestinian Government and to strengthening the
development of its economy. But we also believe that
the implementation of the resolution must not be
exclusive or limited, as mentioned by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine. On the contrary, in order to
ensure lasting peace, there must be acceptance of and
legitimacy for all the political, economic, social and
cultural aspects of which it is comprised.

The Palestinian people are a martyred people who
have suffered greatly from genocide, persecution and
the violation of human rights. That is why we stress
our full support for the communique on the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, adopted by the Coordinating Bureau of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on 20 November
2008, which was forwarded to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations on 24 November in document
S/2008/735.

The communique condemns Israel's ongoing
violations of international law and the human rights of
the Palestinian people, which severely threaten the
territorial, cultural and social integrity of the
Palestinian people and the socio-economic conditions
of their nation, and represent an ongoing attack on their
right to life. It calls for an immediate withdrawal of the
occupying Power, the removal of border controls and a
halt to Israel's settlement activities on Palestinian
territory and its illegal practices, which are often
fomented from outside to maintain the momentum of a
war that is ultimately very lucrative for arms traders
and manufacturers.

There are those in Israel who promote peace and
support a prudent and negotiated solution. In some
intellectual, political and academic circles in Israel,
there is no doubt that there will be a Palestinian State
and that an exchange of territory will create relatively
few problems. However, despite those positive
elements, there must be greater resolve and more
determination within the United Nations bodies to
generate that critical mass that sooner or later will lead
to real peace.

Gaza continues to suffer from Israel's disregard
for human rights and has become a humanitarian

emergency that must be treated as such. That is a
situation that humankind can no longer ignore. The
excessive and disproportionate Israeli military action
are of such a scale that, we reiterate, mankind can no
longer tolerate. Negation of the other seems to be the
hallmark of their policy. Here, we must recall the
statements by Richard Falk, Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, who has denounced the Israeli
blockade on Gaza as a flagrant, ongoing and
substantial violation of international humanitarian law,
and described the situation as a humanitarian
catastrophe and the policies implemented as a crime
against humanity, accusing those who continue to
provide political and economic support to Israel of
being Israel's accomplices. Indeed, that civil servant
was detained by Israel in contravention of the norms of
respect owed to those working towards a negotiated
peace.

We had thought that the horrors perpetrated at
Sabra and Shatila on 14 September 1982 were behind
us. That event led to a greater loss of lives than the
terrible events of 11 September 2001 here in the United
States, which was described by the General Assembly
as genocide. Yet, we note with concern that the policies
that led to that barbarity remain the same.

When the Security Council called on
16 December for strengthening international peace
negotiations so as to achieve a definitive peace treaty
between Israel and Palestine, we hoped that that desire
would become a reality. We continue to believe that
peace needs to be sought by both peoples. However,
we also deeply believe that we urgently need to stop
the ongoing aggression against the Government and
people of Palestine, without undermining their
legitimate and noble aspirations to build a State and a
stable economy as soon as possible, and to live a life of
dignity. Above all, however, we must not allow those
who have committed crimes of genocide to go
unpunished, which is the only way to heal the wounds.

For the Government of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, silence is an option neither with respect
to the Palestinian cause and the Middle East nor with
respect to the causes of the peoples of the world. That
has been affirmed by President Hugo Chavez Frias in
all international forums. That is why, from this
Chamber, we send a brotherly message of hope and
solidarity to the Palestinian people. We truly hope that

they will achieve lasting peace in the region, which
will undoubtedly also benefit the Israeli people.

