Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's important open
debate on the very topical issues of on youth, peace
and security. Indonesia welcomes the opportunity to
continue to build on the Security Council's landmark
resolution 2250 (2015). The overwhelming support
for the resolution is a clear demonstration that we
all consider the well-being and future of our young
people to be a shared endeavour. We would also like
to express our appreciation to Ms. Wickramanayake,
Mr. Simpson, Ms. Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Ekomo-
Soignet, and we have noted with interest all the excellent
recommendations that have been made.

Today's young people are the most interconnected
generation ever, and yet they are facing challenges that
disrupt their potential to make a difference in their
own lives and those of others. Many still have to strive
to emerge from poverty and a lack of education, and
to deal with issues such terrorism, violent extremism
and transnational organized crime. Those challenges
threaten communities' peace and stability and can even
derail peacebuilding efforts or ignite new conflicts. In
that regard, I would like to share Indonesia's views in
the context of the five pillars of action of resolution
2250 (2015) - participation, partnerships, prevention,
protection and disengagement.

First, we should promote inclusiveness, building a
sense ofbelonging among our young people and making
sure that they are an integral part of society. They
should also be given a bigger role in preventing conflict
and encouraging peace and development. Governments
should invest more in creating environments where
young people are empowered to take ownership, take
control and exert a positive influence on the issues that
matter to all of us.

Secondly, we must empower young people to
be part of their societies and take on their role as
full-fledged members of those societies, as well as
protecting them from violent groups' recruitment and
propaganda. It is a sad irony that in many cases, families
and communities are the last to know about what their
young members are thinking and doing. In our efforts
to combat the radicalization of young people, we in
Indonesia have been working consistently to encourage
families and communities, together with grass-roots
civil-society organizations, to actively engage their
young people in developing programmes that deliver
tailored interventions.

Thirdly, Governments should invest more in
providing education, employment opportunities and
skill development for young people in order to prevent
them from being marginalized. Their optimism can
turn to frustration when they cannot earn a living, and
is often exploited by radical groups to fuel their own
agenda. It is important to make young people the centre
of our development efforts. There is no one-size-fits-
all answer. The best strategy for generating work and
training our young people is to focus on solutions
that are tailored to local needs and to carefully design
education programmes that nurture the values of
tolerance, mutual respect and a culture of peace.

Fourthly, as the independent progress study (see S/2018/86) suggests, many of our young people would
choose to reject a life of violence and crime if they
could. That choice must be supported, and yet there are
situations where young people are coerced into following
the negative influences that may destroy their lives. As
long as conflicts exist, they will continue to be fertile
ground where extremists and radical groups will seek to
recruit young people. That emphasizes the importance
of working to find viable solutions for conflicts. We
must ensure that repatriation and resettlement efforts,
as well as rehabilitation and reintegration processes, are
run smoothly and sustainably in both conflict and post-
conflict situations. We should never allow our young
people to take the path of violence and extremism.

In view of the large size of Indonesia's youth
population, our Government has consistently worked to
ensure that they are able to fully exercise their rights.
In 2009 we enacted a youth law that serves as the legal
foundation for integrating youth empowerment into our
national development plan, which includes programmes
for ensuring access to education, basic health services
and young people's participation in public life and our
decision-making processes, as well as in promoting
human rights, including young people's rights. We also
recognize the importance of fighting for the hearts and
minds of our young people, encouraging dialogue and
partnering with them to build strong communities that
can counter the negative messages of extremism. We
believe that young people play an important and positive
role in the maintenance and promotion of international

peace and security. We should speak their language in
addressing this issue, because they know what is best
for them. Children are our future, and the future is in
our hands. It starts today.
