Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
today's briefers: the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; Mr. Serge
Christiane; and Ambassador Karel van Oosterom for
their respective briefings. I welcome the presence
among us today of the Secretary of State of the United
States, Mr. Mike Pompeo.

Poland welcomes the sixth report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/1089) on the implementation ofSecurity
Council resolution 2231 (2015), which we find to be
objective and balanced. The Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) has been an important achievement
of multilateral diplomacy, the objectives of which have
been concurrent with our shared goal of strengthening
nuclear non-proliferation.

We note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has reported that the Islamic Republic
of Iran is implementing its nuclear-related commitments
under the Plan and that the Agency itself continues to
verify the non-diversion of declared nuclear material
and the absence of undeclared nuclear material and
activities in Iran. We welcome the efforts of the IAEA
to strictly monitor and verify Iran's commitments in
order the guarantee that the Iranian nuclear programme
remains peaceful and that Iran fulfils all of its nuclear-
related commitments under the JCPOA and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We call
on Iran to continue to apply the Additional Protocol to
its Safeguards Agreement and to formally ratify that
Protocol in the near future.

At the same time, the stabilization of the situation
in the Middle East is crucial to global security. For
that reason, we should strive not only to guarantee the
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme, but
also take steps to develop a comprehensive solution
to the security problems in the region. It is necessary
to take a broader perspective on the matter. Iran's
activity cannot be seen only from the point of view
of its compliance with the nuclear deal. That nuclear
agreement does not deal with all of the contentious
issues related to Iran's regional policy and its capacities
related to delivery systems.

Taking into account the current tensions in the
Middle East, Iran's policy - including the development
of ballistic missiles - is causing justified concerns.
Ballistic missile tests and some of Iran's activities
in the region, including reported missile transfers
to non-State actors in Lebanon, Yemen and Syria,
may deepen mistrust and are inconsistent with the
provisions of relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1540 (2004), 2216 (2015) and 2231
(2015). The launching of Zolfaghar short-range ballistic
missiles and Qiam missiles against targets in the town
of Hajin in Syria on 30 September and 1 October, as
well as the testing of medium-range ballistic missiles
conducted by Iran on 1 December and other testing of
ballistic missiles, constitute unnecessary escalation.

Declarations by the Iranian authorities on the
continuation of their missile testing in order to
build up its defence capabilities may be perceived as
provocative, threatening and contrary to the provisions
of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015). Such actions are
counterproductive to the stabilization of the situation in
the Middle East, as well as efforts to prevent the further
proliferation of nuclear weapons. We call on Iran to
refrain from actions that could undermine the further
implementation of both the J CPOA and resolution 2231
(2015).

Poland supports the procurement channel and
the Procurement Working Group, as well as the
coordinating role of the European Union within the
format, as we believe that that transparency measure
ensures the conformity of relevant transfers with
resolution 2231 (2015) and contributes to supporting
the non-proliferation regime.

Last but not least, I would like to thank Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom of the Netherlands for his excellent
work as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). Both the Ambassador and his team have
shown the professionalism and necessary transparency
in promoting the efficient work of this difficult format
of the Council.

