Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic): For the second time in less than a week we are
meeting in unpleasant circumstances, except that I am
given the opportunity for a second time to express my
thanks to you, Mr. President, for your prompt response
to the request of the Arab Group to hold this open
meeting of the Security Council, which is devoted to
dealing with the very serious and deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. Bearing
in mind that deteriorating situation, this meeting is
additional proof of the fact that resolutions of
international legitimacy must be implemented, as
embodied in the Security Council resolutions relating
to the Palestinian question, in particular resolutions
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002).

It is indeed regrettable that the Security Council
should be holding consecutive meetings in order to
reaffirm and insist on the implementation of resolutions
it has previously adopted.

Since there is a dire crisis threatening the
Palestinian people, from a humanitarian point of view,
the refusal to implement Security Council resolutions
and the ensuing grave developments call for immediate
intervention to protect the defenceless Palestinian
people. This will be a test of the Council's credibility
and will require it to assume its responsibility in
accordance with the Charter of the Organization.

Compliance with the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949 should be among the Council's main
priorities. It should demand that humanitarian services
not be impeded and that they be able, unconditionally,
to reach the Palestinian people.

The Islamic Republic of Mauritania wishes to
express once again its full solidarity with the brotherly
Palestinian people and with the symbol of their
struggle, President Arafat. We call upon the Council to
adopt measures that are in keeping with its
responsibilities and with the needs of the situation,
which brooks no further delay.

