Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Mladenov
for his sobering briefing. I would like to thank him
and his staff for everything they are doing to try to
calm down the Violence. I also echo his tribute to the
medical staff on the ground, as well as his appeal for
facilitatiting the evacuation of the wounded.
We have seen a concatenation of loss of life,
casualties and volume of live fire in Gaza yesterday,
and this has been shocking and appalling to most of
us. It is a depressingly familiar pattern that we have
seen over recent weeks, and it includes the deaths of
the children. At a highly sensitive time in the region,
we call for calm and restraint. The further escalation of
Violence serves no one's interests. It is only destructive
to peace efforts and to wider regional security.

We understand that 60 people were killed yesterday
in Gaza, six of whom were children. Around 2,771
people were reported injured, and that included over
1,300 injured by live ammunition. The death toll on
Monday means that 90 Palestinians have been killed
in the past six weeks for approaching the fence that has
been placed around Gaza. There is an urgent need to
establish the facts around yesterday's events, including
why such a volume of live fire continues to be deemed
justified. The Palestinian right to peaceful protest is
undeniable. At the same time, we are deeply concerned
that peaceful protests in Gaza have been exploited by
extremist elements. For example, we have seen troops
belonging to the Israeli Defence Forces targeted by
improvised explosive devices, and we have seen the use
of Molotov cocktails. That is not acceptable.

Palestinians have a right to peaceful protest, and
Israel has an undeniable right to protect its borders
from Hamas and other terrorist groups and threats. The
United Kingdom remains strongly supportive of Israel's
right to defend itself. We recognize today is a sensitive
anniversary for the Palestinians. We implore Israel to
act with restraint in accordance with international law
and, more than anything, to ensure that its security
forces do not resort to the use of excessive force.

The volume oflive fire used in Gaza yesterday and
the consequent number of deaths is destressing and
cannot be ignored by the Council. I want to reiterate
the United Kingdom's support for independent and
transparent investigations into the events that have
taken place in recent weeks, including the extent to
which the rules of engagement of the Israeli security
forces are in line with international law. The death
toll alone warrants such a comprehensive inquiry. We
continue to urge that the findings of the investigations
be made public and, if wrongdoing is found, that those
responsible be held to account.

Our position on the status of Jerusalem and the
move of the American Embassy is well known. Our
position is clear and long-standing. It is that the status
of Jerusalem should be determined in a negotiated
settlement between the Israelis and the Palestinians,
and that Jerusalem should ultimately be the shared
capital of the Israeli and Palestinian States. We need
to look forward, and we need to work urgently towards
a resolution of the long-standing issues between Israel
and the Palestinian people. Like the Council, the United
Kingdom is committed to a two-State solution, with
Jerusalem as a shared capital, and to achieving peace
and stability in the wider region. We see negotiations
towards a two-State solution as the best way to end the
occupation and to meet the national aspirations of the
Jewish and the Palestinian peoples. But, now more than
ever, we need a political process that delivers a two-State
solution. We agree with the Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General that the situation in Gaza is
desperate and deteriorating and that the international
community must step up its efforts. To that end, I would
like to conclude by requesting that the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and his Office bring forward proposals to address
the situation in Gaza. They should include easing
restrictions on access and movement and international
support for urgent infrastructure and economic
development projects. We also reiterate our support for
the Egyptian-led reconciliation process and the return
of the Palestinian Authority to the full administration
of the Gaza Strip.

