Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we are grateful for the presence of Mr. Edi Rama, Prime Minister and Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of Albania and Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), among us today. We are confident that his experience and leadership will contribute significantly to achieving the Organization's goals. We take this opportunity to congratulate Foreign Minister Lajeak and the Slovak chairmanship on the successes achieved during his term. We recognize that the OSCE's priorities are consistent with the work being done in the United Nations and the Security Council, namely, inter alia, ensuring the continuity of political commitments, preventing escalation, improving security and _ strengthening dialogue. We note that its vision and challenges are also in line with multilateralism, regional security and hopes for achieving peace through political dialogue. We commend the Normandy format meeting held in Paris on 9 December 2019 with the support of the Trilateral Contact Group. The meeting resulted in the exchange of 200 prisoners between Russia and Ukraine on 29 December 2019 under the supervision and facilitation of the OSCE. That sends a positive message that we are moving in a new direction, and we hope that other confidence-building measures opening up new avenues, including the holding of another Normandy format summit in the near future, will become a reality. Mr. Rama's recent visit to Ukraine has given an important impulse to the efforts of the Special Monitoring Mission in that country. We hope that resolving that conflict will remain a priority objective for the Mission, in line with the Council's concern and willingness to contribute to a peaceful settlement of the conflict through the effective implementation of the Minsk agreements. The Dominican Republic welcomes the fact that combating violence against women, which is a matter of great importance to the United Nations, is among the urgent issues on the OSCE agenda. In addition, we note with interest the willingness to promote dialogue with a view to reversing the increase in hate crimes and hate speech and fostering tolerance and non-discrimination, as well as exchanges on environmental protection. The OSCE is an important regional hub for such issues, covering more than a billion people, and aligns with the highest interests of the United Nations. In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the OSCE and the efforts of the co-Chairs of the Minsk Group with regard to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict and the Transnistrian settlement process. We wish the Albanian chairpersonship every success with its agenda for the new session and call for its comprehensive work plan to be taken up with energy and determination, with the support of the Council, in the interest of strengthening multilateralism and its contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security.
