Mr. Nakseu-Nguefang (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank you, Sir, for the invitation to
participate in this meeting and to commend your
initiative to organize this important debate on a topical
issue. We also take this opportunity to offer you our
condolences following the tragic events in Egypt a few
days ago.

Terrorism and violent radicalization are among
the most salient threats facing la Francophonie. For a
number of years, the French-speaking regions of the
North and the South have been rudely shaken by acts
of terrorism, owing not only to the numerous recent
attacks on our States members, but also because
terrorist networks are targeting a significant segment of
French-speaking youth in their recruitment strategies.

That situation is not limited to la Francophonie.
Today it is a global concern. The situation is also of
particular concern to our organization, whose founding
principles - the promotion of democracy, cultural
diversity, tolerance and solidarity - have been put to
the test. Therefore, on behalf of the Secretary General
of la Francophonie, Her Excellency Mme. Michaelle
Jean, we welcome the holding of this open debate and
would like to express our thanks for the opportunity
offered to us to share the vision of our organization.

We welcome presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6,
just adopted, which demonstrates the strong
determination of the international community to
counter hate speech. Similarly, we welcome the Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674)
launched at the beginning of the year. La Francophonie
intends to contribute fully to the implementation of
that Plan.

The situation is urgent. The conditions that lead
some of our youth to adhere to destructive speech are
manifold. Besides the unresolved conflicts that fuel
hatred, one of the causes of the increase in violent
radicalization that we must address is the crisis in the
relationship between the State and society. The deficit
in governance and political representation increasingly
is leading to a breakdown of trust in the State and its
representatives, at all levels. It can be shown that there
is very little room left for expressing the needs of young
people. The young people feel that they are not properly
directed nor involved in sociopolitical life, and they
accuse the State of not being able to tackle inequality
or to provide professional and economic opportunities.

It is important that public actors, supported by
international partners, be more and better able to
integrate young people, as well as women, into politics:
to create conditions conducive to involving them in
the exercise of power, to rejuvenate the political class
and bring in more women, and also to promote civic
and political engagement as a means of involvement
and create spaces for debate and dialogue in the public
sphere, universities and in social networks.

In that connection, on 10 March the Secretary
General of La Francophonie launched a campaign
entitled "Free together". It provides a public forum
for the voices of the francophone young people in
suggesting that they make their voices heard and affirm
their commitment to the values of La Francophonie,
which are freedom, equality, solidarity, brotherhood,
diversity and peace. This campaign is having
resounding success in the social media. In less than a
week more than 2 million young people have shown
an interest, reflecting their thirst for universal values.
The campaign also aims to encourage young people to
develop educational, cultural and artistic projects that
illustrate their commitment to the values of freedom,
tolerance and solidarity.

Also in that connection, La Francophonie is
considering the role and responsibility of the media in
dealing with the subject of terrorism. In any case, the
freedom of the press must be guaranteed and innovation
in the media must be promoted so that journalists
can provide keys for understanding so that people
can understand this phenomenon and deconstruct the
narrative of terrorist groups. Similarly, we should raise
awareness among groups owning the social media
about their responsibilities with regard to the spread
of such content. In this sense, La Francophonie is
currently studying the stakes involved in regulation
in the digital age. Finally, we believe it is important
to emphasize media education. The development of
tools to understand the risks associated with the use
of new technologies and tools that can develop critical
responses to that content should be encouraged.

La Francophonie will hold an international
conference entitled "The fight against terrorism and
the prevention of violent radicalization: towards an
integrated francophone approach" on 6, 7 and 8 June
in Paris. The objective of this conference is to develop
a comprehensive strategy to fight terrorism and
prevent violent radicalization in our society. It will
pay particular attention to the political and economic
integration of young people, education, the rule of law,
coping strategies and the role and responsibility of the
media in fighting terrorism.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the importance of
multilateral action and say that we stand ready to work
with the United Nations in this matter, which is urgent
for all of us. What is at stake are the values to which we
all hold and the future of our young people.

