The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.

I thank High Commissioner Navi Pillay and Special
Adviser Adama Dieng for their briefings. We believe that
the Council fully echoes their urgent call for attention
and action. The ethnically targeted killings in South
Sudan are unacceptable and must stop. Only a fortnight
ago, the Security Council convened an open debate on
the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide,
and reaffirmed that never again should such events
occur (see S/PV.7155). The use of radio broadcasts to
incite ethnic violence is reminiscent of a prelude to that
catastrophe, adding a new and dangerous dimension
to the crisis. We call on both President Salva Kiir and
Mr. Riek Machar to publicly state their firm opposition
to any attacks against civilians as well as their
commitment to seeking accountability. All political
and tribal leaders in South Sudan must publicly declare
their objection to violence and take responsible actions
accordingly. We look forward to the final report of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on
human rights violations.
With the onset of the rainy season, we are deeply
concerned about the dire situation of over 1 million
displaced people. The UNMISS protection of civilian
sites are already overcrowded, and they were never
designed to cope with the enormous task of protecting
such a huge number of civilians. A comprehensive
strategy for the protection of civilians should be
formulated to make best use of the capabilities of
UNMISS. We also encourage the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to enhance its
mediation efforts.

Intensifying battles in the oil-producing fields
threaten to trigger a regional escalation of the conflict.
The United Nations and IGAD need to swiftly finalize
the modalities for implementing the monitoring and
verification mechanism under the cessation ofhostilities
agreement. Only a political solution can return the
situation to normalcy. The Council must be ready to
take additional measures to discourage spoilers and
expedite stability.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.

