As diplomats and politicians, we tend to think that everything is negotiable. This is also the underlying idea behind the Security Council: building international consensus. But we cannot negotiate with nature. The physical, chemical and geographical realities of global warming will not compromise with us. Climate change is happening, and its consequences for peace and security are already real, from the Sahel to the islands of the Pacific and the Caribbean. Sooner rather than later, climate change will be a catalyst in almost every conflict that we are dealing with. Our briefers made that very clear today. The defining question for us is therefore whether we will finally live up to the challenge. The answer given by the vast majority of the members of the Security Council and of the United Nations as a whole is clear. They expect us to take action, and so do future generations. Today we are proposing three steps that can be taken right away. First, the Security Council needs better information on climate-related security risks. This should include early warning indicators, allowing us to act before it is too late. At an international conference in Berlin last month, we launched a Global Climate Security Risk and Foresight Assessment, which can become a reference point for our work in the Council as well as a tool to strengthen United Nations efforts on mediation and preventive diplomacy as a whole. This will require better training and expertise within United Nations missions and mediation teams. As an example, Germany is funding an expert who advises the country team in Somalia on the security implications of climate change. This should become a standard practice in all United Nations operations. Secondly, it is time to give climate and security a face. We call on the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Representative on climate and security as soon as possible. He, or she, could ensure that climate change is placed where it belongs, namely, at the heart of the Security Council's work, which is to maintain international peace and security in the twenty-first century. Thirdly, the United Nations needs to be ready to act when climate-related security risks hit. Such risks must therefore be addressed in all mandates and conflict-prevention strategies. Together with our partners, we will convene an informal expert group of the Security Council on climate and security as soon as possible. Our goal is to enshrine this topic in the Council's work once and for all. Today I invite all participants to join us in this effort. I am grateful and confident that our joint initiative will be carried forward by those who succeed us in the Security Council. The fight against climate change should not divide us. We fight it to save ourselves, and we fight it for the people around the world who are already facing violence and displacement as a result of climate change. They cannot afford to wait. The time for diplomatic patience is therefore over. The Security Council cannot negotiate with the realities of nature. Action is all that counts.
