The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of October, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Vassily
Nebenzia, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, for his service in the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
our deep appreciation to Ambassador Nebenzia and
his team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Peace and security in Africa

Mobilizing youth towards silencing the guns by
2020

Letter dated 30 September 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/779)

The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Bience Gawanas, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Africa; Ms. Aya Chebbi, African Union
Special Envoy on Youth; Ms. Hafsa Ahmed, Co-founder
and Chairperson of Naweza; and Mr. Victor Ochen,
youth activist.

Ms. Ahmed and Mr. Ochen are joining the meeting
Via video-teleconference from Nairobi and Kampala,
respectively.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Mrs. Jeanne d'Arc Byaje, Permanent
Observer of the Economic Community of Central
African States to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20l9/779, which contains a letter dated
30 September 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.

I now give the floor to Ms. Gawanas.


