Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. We note the key role of
the United Nations in establishing a more reliable, fair
and effective architecture for international relations,
where the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security is borne by the Security
Council. The Russian Federation has consistently called
for the development and improvement of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
on a wide range of issues, based on the Charter of the
United Nations and, in particular, its Chapter VIII.

With respect to joint efforts in the maintenance of
international peace and security within the Security
Council's purview, we deem it of critical importance
to ensure the Council's approval of and control over
regional and coalition operations that envision the use of
force. Only by adhering to the decisions of the Security
Council can the necessary international legitimacy be
attributed to the use of sanctions mechanism. It must
also be noted that, in the context of new and emerging
threats and challenges, cooperation in areas such as
counter-terrorism, drug trafficking, organized crime,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
the illegal flow of small arms and light weapons is of
the utmost importance.

We have consistently supported developing
multifaceted cooperation among the United Nations,
the African Union and African countries vulnerable
to crises. Although we are talking primarily about
the African Union, other regional and subregional
organizations, which usually have abetter understanding
ofthe specificity of local issues, are also of considerable
relevance. We welcome the establishment of the African
Peace and Security Architecture with the assistance of
the international community. We are convinced of the
need to further strengthen the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union, so as to increase
the effectiveness of efforts to solve the problems of
peace and security in Africa and to better tackle crises
around the globe.

In that connection, we note the efforts ofthe United
Nations and the African Union to stabilize the situation
in Darfur, Somalia, the Central African Republic,
the Sahel and Mali, as well as on the inter-Sudanese
track. Of equal importance is the coordination of
actions to prevent conflicts in South Sudan. At the
same time, we commend the successful cooperation
between the African Union and other subregional
organizations - such as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the East African
Community, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the
Economic Community of West African States and
the Southern African Development Community - in
neutralizing the threats to peace, security and stability
on the African continent.

We are deeply concerned about the ongoing
activities ofthe armed group Boko Haram in a number of
countries. We welcome the efforts of regional partners
of Abuja in providing assistance to counter that group's
threat to the security of West African States and the
countries of the Gulf of Guinea, in the understanding
that any international assistance should be provided
only with the consent of the Nigerian authorities.

There is also great potential in the cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. We also feel that there is promise for the
broadening of contacts between the United Nations and
other dynamically growing regional structures, such
as the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Union of South American Nations and the
Caribbean Community.

One of Russia's priorities is to strengthen the
cooperation between the United Nations, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, which are enhancing their
political standing in the world and strengthening
regional and international architectures for security. We
consider the Collective Security Treaty Organization to
be a multifaceted structure able to respond to a wide
range of contemporary challenges and threats that
its member States might face. In that regard, we see
prospects for deepening the cooperation between the
Collective Security Treaty Organization and the United
Nations in the area of peacemaking. In the framework
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization, there
is intensive work underway in the development of its
own peacekeeping capabilities, including cooperation
with the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Furthermore, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization is assisting international efforts aimed
at post-conflict rebuilding in Afghanistan as well as at
stemming the threat of drugs coming from that country.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
plays a major role in ensuring stability and security
in the Eurasian region. We note that the SCO has
rightly become a cornerstone of regional security in
all of its manifestations. Its activities relate to counter-
terrorism and countering extremism. In that regard,
we have seen the positive impact of the organization's
regional counter-terrorism structures. There has also
been development in cooperation in the areas of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
international information security.

Of particular importance for the European continent
are the activities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe - an organization that
complements the efforts of the United Nations in the
region and within the framework of its mandate - in
establishing agreed mechanisms across the region. On
I August, we marked the fortieth anniversary of the
signing of the 1975 Final Act of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe, which is one of
the most modern security architectures in the world.
We are fully committed to the Helsinki principles of
inter-State relations, their linkages and the reciprocal
obligations under the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We call upon
all States of the Eurasian and Atlantic community to
follow the letter and spirit of those principles.

History has demonstrated how double standards
and a selective approach to implementing standards in
an attempt to strengthen one State's security undermine
that of other States and how intervention in inter-State
affairs increases security threats for the region as a
whole. Unfortunately, over the past year - as this is
clearly demonstrated by the Ukrainian crisis - we are
witnessing a crisis in European security. There is a need
to continue to seek solutions to that situation. We think
that the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe should reject confrontation and return to
discussions in a constructive spirit. That is the only
way to find solutions to the accumulated and systemic
problems - while finding steps to ensure the principle
of the indivisibility of security. We hope that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
will return to discussing the idea of establishing a
unified military-political, humanitarian and economic
space from the Atlantic to the Pacific oceans, including
the integration processes or what is known as the
"integration of integrations".

We fully the support the efforts of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe aimed at
assisting in settling the conflict in Ukraine and welcome
the essential work of the Special Monitoring Mission in
monitoring the situation on the ground. However, of key
importance for the swift implementation of all provisions
of the package of measures for the implementation of
the Minsk Agreement, which recently have reached
an impasse, is active and productive dialogue within
the framework of the Contact Group and its working
sub-group. Clearly, without progress in implementing
the political provisions of the Minsk agreements and
direct dialogue between Kyiv, Lugansk and Donetsk,
there can be no final settlement or sustainable
de-escalation.

