Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comments today and for his comprehensive report
(S/2011/634*). We welcome this opportunity to join
the discussion on justice and the rule of law. As the
Secretary-General's report, of October 2011, makes
clear, the rule of law and transitional justice are critical
in preventing conflict and atrocities and in rebuilding
societies that have been torn apart by systemic
violence.

Today I would like to address three aspects of
justice and the rule of law as they relate to conflict and
post-conflict situations. The first concerns the
importance of support for justice at the international
level. The second is the need to build the capacity of
domestic justice systems, and the third concerns recent
efforts by the United States to institutionalize and
deepen our own commitments in that area.

Strengthening the rule of law requires more than
technical expertise. It also requires political will and
coordinated action by a wide range of international
actors. One key way through which the international
community has signalled that impunity for the most

12-2096]

serious crimes will not be tolerated is the creation of
international and mixed tribunals, as well as
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding mechanisms.

Active support by all States for international and
mixed tribunals is crucial. We have supported those
international accountability mechanisms across the
globe, from the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts
of Cambodia to commissions of inquiry in places like
Kyrgyzstan, Cote d'Ivoire and Libya. In this regard,
the International Criminal Court (ICC) can play an
important role in contributing to the fight against
impunity. The United States supported the Security
Council's ICC referral regarding Libya, and we are
helping to ensure that those charged in that country by
the Court face justice consistent with international
standards.

Although the United States is not a party to the
Rome Statute, over the past several years we have sent
observer delegations to sessions of the Assembly of
States Parties and to the Review Conference in
Kampala. In December, we co-sponsored a high-level
panel at the Assembly of States Parties to highlight the
importance of ensuring protection for witnesses and
judicial officers. We have engaged with the Office of
the Prosecutor and with the Registrar to consider ways
to support specific prosecutions already underway. We
have also responded positively to a number of informal
requests for assistance.

As we approach justice and the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations, we must place
special emphasis on the protection of women and
children, as well as of other vulnerable groups. That
includes persons targeted for violence based on sexual
orientation or gender identity.

We must ensure accountability for those
responsible for the most serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
we must deter further violations. Hindering such
persons from travelling, accessing funds and arming
themselves by the application of targeted sanctions can
play an important role in deterring future violations.
We have strongly supported targeted sanctions to help
combat the threats to international peace and security
posed by the most egregious of such Violations. The
rule of law also means that States must fulfil their
international legal obligations, including Chapter VII
obligations, related to sanctions imposed by the
Security Council.

While all of those international accountability
mechanisms play an important role, on their own they
are insufficient. We must also catalyse a broader
process of long-term prevention. The lessons of
international justice must be embraced at the national
level and developed locally to ensure that States can
protect their citizens' rights.

The many rule of law capacity-building
initiatives to advance transitional justice deserve the
continued support of the international community. The
United States, together with its partners,
enthusiastically supports initiatives in such States as
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire
and elsewhere to bolster domestic capacities to
investigate and prosecute atrocity crimes and to build
justice systems that can deliver fair and impartial
justice. We can help to deter and prevent future
violence through such actions as embedding judicial
advisers in local prosecution cells, supporting
specialized mixed courts, funding witness protection
programmes, training police to investigate sexual and
gender-based violence, and training border security
officers.

Finally, let me end by noting two recent
initiatives that the United States has undertaken to
make good on its commitment to address many of the
issues being discussed here today.

First, in December 2011, President Obama signed
an executive order launching the first-ever United
States National Action Plan on Women, Peace and
Security, which provides a comprehensive road map
for accelerating and institutionalizing efforts across the
United States Government to advance women's
participation in making and keeping peace. The
National Action Plan recognizes that women are not
just victims of war; they are agents of peace and
essential to building the rule of law in any society.

Secondly, the United States Government, under a
presidential study directive, undertook a
comprehensive review to strengthen the United States'
ability to prevent and respond to mass atrocities. The
directive mandated the establishment of an atrocities
prevention board that will coordinate prevention and
response efforts and help the United States to engage
early and effectively. The review also focused on how
we can work with our international partners to more
effectively prevent and respond to atrocities. We look
forward to working with them to strengthen the
international community's capacities in that area.

Those two initiatives exemplify the importance
that the United States places on ensuring that we
prioritize the rule of law and transitional justice as
essential elements in efforts to prevent and respond to
conflict and to assist in building peace.

As has been pointed out in today's discussion,
strengthening the rule of law around the world
reinforces peace, progress and security. We look
forward to further discussions of rule of law matters
throughout the United Nations system, including future
discussions here in the Council, as well as the high-
level event on the rule of law to be held in the General
Assembly this fall.

