Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month.

I also welcome the new non-permanent members
of the Council and wish them every success in their
efforts. I assure them of our cooperation in the Security
Council with regard to the situation in the Sudan by
sharing all information with them.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/1113), which is before the Council. I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Lacroix, for his comprehensive briefing, from
which we greatly benefited. I would like also like to
greet from afar the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Commission itself for their efforts,
and thank them for their ongoing support to the Sudan.

We have considered the report before the Council
on the implementation of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. It
is a periodic report that is submitted every 60 days as
an assessment of the situation in Darfur. The Council
has perhaps noted that such reports seem to contain
nothing new. We believe that the Secretariat examines
only minor incidents and misdemeanors documented
in police stations. We believe this practice reveals
shortcomings in preparing the reports submitted by the
Secretary-General to the Council.

I would refer to paragraphs in the report that outline
the situation and the conflict in Darfur, listing minor
incidents that could occur even in the safest and most
secure cities. It appears that the authors of the report
have prepared it based on incidents reported to police
departments. This fully reaffirms what we have been
repeating and confirming, which is even confirmed in
those reports, to the effect that the situation in Darfur
is now normal, safe and just like many other areas and
cities throughout the world.
In that regard, I recall that we warned against that
situation when UNAMID's mandate was renewed in
June 2017 (see S/PV.7989), saying that shortening the
length ofthe reporting periods could result in weakening
the reports submitted to the Council. We said that it
would be preferable to increase it or maintain a 90-day
reporting period.

The adoption of resolution 2363 (2017), which
calls for the gradual withdrawal of UNAMID and a
reconfiguration of the Mission, has brought Darfur to
a new phase of peacebuilding and the consolidation of
achievements in the areas ofpeace, security and stability
in all areas of the state, with the exception of a small
pocket in Jebel Marra. The resolution has validated the
calls that have been made by the Sudanese Government
since 2015 for the Mission to adapt to developments in
Darfur that changed the nature of the conflict that was
fought there.

In that regard, all that remains of the crisis in
Darfur are its consequences for development and
displaced persons, which are directly linked to the
peacebuilding agenda. We see it as high time that the
United Nations and the international community work
to support the Sudanese Government in addressing
those challenges once and for all. Similarly, we are
grateful for the tireless efforts of Qatar, the sponsor of
the Doha peace process, and other friendly States in
providing assistance in rebuilding and the voluntary
return to villages and making basic services available,
which has encouraged displaced persons to return to
their homes and normal lives.

Furthermore, a number of representatives in the
Council have spoken about the Doha agreement. The
essence of the agreement has brought us to this stage
because 85 per cent of it has now been implemented. I
should also like to draw the Council's attention to the
fact that the Implementation Follow-up Commission
for Peace in Darfur was established under the Doha
agreement and includes the five permanent members of
the Security Council. It meets in Khartoum and Doha
every six months, in rotation, to assess and analyse
developments in Darfur. We call on Council members
to consult its reports so as to see the implementation of
the Doha agreement, which was overseen by the League
of Arab States, the United Nations, the African Union
and other peace partners.

With all due respect, I therefore have to say that
I cannot accept two statements made by Council
members, calling for the need for a peace process. We
believe that the Doha Document offers the constitutional
foundation for the peace operation. To substantiate that,
I need only cite the changes in size that the Mission
has undergone on the ground and the provisions of
resolution 2363 (2017), adopted on 29 June last year.

The Sudanese Government, supported by the will
of the people of Darfur, is working to consolidate and
sustain peace by implementing projects that assist in
this regard, the most important ofwhich is the weapons-
collection campaign, because the reasons for keeping
weapons no longer exist. Overall, the report indicates
that the campaign has had outstanding results despite
a lack of resources and capacities, but the real and
sincere willingness to see it through has contributed
to its success and completion. As we have said in
previous statements, weapons collection is an absolute
prerequisite for sustaining peace and security. The
Sudanese Government has therefore spared no effort
to ensure the completion of the campaign and collect
weapons from civilians so that members of the armed
forces are the only ones to carry them and to police all
those who fail to respect laws that apply to bearing and
acquiring weapons.

We reaffirm that the success of that campaign
depends on firm respect for the law without exception- a
precept that we have followed consistently. Furthermore,
we stress the importance of cooperation with UNAMID
and ofmeetings and consultations with the Joint African
Union-United Nations Special Representative for
Darfur. It is worth noting that the Vice President of the
Sudan, the resident representative of the African Union
and the United Nations will meet in Darfur shortly. The
Vice President of the Sudan has said that the Sudan is
ready to fully leave the process to and allow UNAMID
to address it if the Mission is committed to carrying
out the weapons-collection campaign. This is where we
can be flexible with regard to that issue, but we must
address weapons collection because the proliferation of
arms in any conflict zone will result in the persistence
of challenges and emergency special operations that
will be launched automatically.

My country welcomes the steps taken by UNAMID
in the context of implementing the recommendations
contained in resolution 2363 (2017). In that regard,
11 sites have been closed during the first phase of
reconfiguration. We look forward to the start of the
second phase of the Mission's downsizing, pursuant
to resolution 2363 (2017). Accordingly, I reaffirm that
the Sudanese Government will continue to cooperate
with UNAMID towards the fulfilment of its mandate,
including the closure of the remaining sites during the
second phase. We agree that such cooperation is very
important. Various reports, including the one before us,
have highlighted that cooperation, in particular with
regard to authorizing customs clearance for containers,
visas, freedom of movement, and granting access to the
Mission and humanitarian partners.

Furthermore, we have also approved the Mission's
request to establish a temporary operating base in the
G010 region. In that spirit, the Sudanese Government has
allocated a 5,620-square metre parcel of land in Jebel
Marra for the temporary operating base in G010. We
call on UNAMID and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to reconsider the construction of a ground
route connecting Zalingei, G010 and Rokiro, which
would be of great benefit to the population of that
region. The construction of the military airport in G010
will not have the same beneficial impact as would such
a ground route, which would permit access to the region
and provide services to Darfur. The Governor of Darfur
has submitted our plans to UNAMID.

In conclusion, we welcome the ongoing tireless and
complementary efforts aimed at completing the peace
process, and we welcome once again the dawn ofpeace,
which will bring development that will end the conflict
once and for all. The delegation of my country thanks
UNAMID for its work in various areas. We also thank
police- and troop-contributing countries and reiterate
our willingness to cooperate with all regional and
international partners in connection with UNAMID so
that it can finally leave the Sudan.

