Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and the
briefing by Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda.

Peru notes with deep concern the continued violence
and serious human rights situation in Libya, which have
led to a serious humanitarian crisis, with more than
150,000 internally displaced persons and numerous
accusations of atrocity crimes. We believe that, in
line with its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
should refer to the International Criminal Court cases
in which access to justice and accountability must
be ensured, and we therefore support the work that
the Court is doing in Libya. It is clearly complex and
requires the full cooperation of all States, including the
local authorities. Accordingly, while we acknowledge
the efforts of the Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office,
we should remind the Libyan authorities of their duty to
execute arrest warrants issued by the Court.

We also believe that, while the International
Criminal Court plays a fundamental role in ensuring
that the most serious crimes do not go unpunished,
its jurisdiction is complementary to the responsibility
of every State to protect its people. That includes
the obligation to investigate, prosecute and punish
those responsible for atrocity crimes. In that regard,
in addition to constituting a legal obligation, the
authorities' cooperation with the Court must be seen
as an opportunity to strengthen justice and the rule of
law in domestic and international areas. That means
fostering greater confidence in legal institutions and
effective deterrence. Confidence in the justice system
and predictability in its response to atrocity crimes is
of particular relevance for a country like Libya, which
is affected by conflict and terrorism committed by
organizations - such as Da'esh and its affiliates and
Boko Haram - that control parts of Libya and are
allegedly involved in trafficking migrants.

Peru believes that it is essential to advance
implementation of the United Nations action plan on
an inclusive political process in Libya as quickly as
possible. In the immediate future, that means ending
the current cycle of violence and working on concrete
measures to effectively protect the people, especially
the civilian population, as well as confronting terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. We believe that such
action must be predicated on discussions between the
High Council of State and the House of Representatives,
as well as through the good offices ofthe United Nations
Support Mission in Libya throughout the process. Good
faith, a spirit of mutual understanding and respect for
international law and international humanitarian law
must prevail among the parties.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the work
of the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ghassan Salame', as well as that of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, whose
support in March enabled the Office of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court to make its first
visit to the country since 2012.

