Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Afghanistan.
I also thank Ambassador Apakan, who provided
effective leadership during the visit, for his report on
the recent Security Council mission to Afghanistan. I
also thank Ambassador Tanin for his briefing.

We note from the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/318) that, in spite of the strong efforts of the
Afghan Government and the international community,
the overall security situation in the country remains
serious. We are concerned that the number of security
incidents increased significantly during the reporting
period. As members of the Council know, yesterday a
United Nations vehicle was shot at in Kabul, resulting
in the unfortunate death of one staff member. We
convey our condolences to the bereaved and the United
Nations families.

Insecurity remains a great constraint to efforts to
achieve peace and development in Afghanistan. This
has remained an obstacle to the progress which the
Afghan Government and people are striving for. We
note, however, that, in spite of the volatile security
environment, the Afghan Government has continued to
forge ahead with the implementation of national
programmes that are critical to the achievement of
peace and development in the country, and we
commend it for that.
We would like to stress the importance for the
Government to reach out to all Afghans in the quest for
peace and stability in the country. In this regard, we
welcome the hosting of the Consultative Peace J irga by
the Afghan Government early this month. This
nationally driven effort is critical to the achievement of
peace and stability in the country. We look forward to
the effective implementation of the outcome of the
national Peace Jirga.

Despite some concerns, we are encouraged by the
progress being made in preparation for the September
legislative elections. In particular, we welcome the
successful registration process conducted by the
Independent Electoral Commission. The significant
increase in the number of female candidates will
enhance the participation of Afghan women in nation-
building. We also welcome the progress that the
Afghan Government and people are making by
increasingly assuming leadership and responsibility for
the development process. This is a sure way to build
sustainable peace and development in the country. In
order to give effective support, we call on development
partners and the international community to align their
support with the priorities and programmes of the
Afghan Government.

We support the four priority areas that UNAMA
has identified for United Nations assistance to the
Government and people of Afghanistan, namely,
support for elections, reconciliation and reintegration,
regional cooperation and aid coherence. They will
facilitate laying the foundations for sustainable peace
and development. Emphasis on these areas would
support efforts in other areas of development.

In conclusion, I wish to underscore the close
linkage between stability, security and development in
Afghanistan and the region as a whole. A coordinated
approach at the regional level and enhanced
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours
are also essential, especially in the fight against
insurgency and the trade in narcotics. In this regard, we
commend UNAMA for its support to regional
initiatives that contribute to regional stability.

Finally, we highly commend Mr. De Mistura and
his UNAMA team for their good work under very
challenging conditions.

