Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for the initiative of convening this
debate on the situation of child soldiers. The delegation
of Brazil highly appreciates your presiding over this
meeting, as it demonstrates Benin's commitment and
contributes to endowing the matter before us with the
required political relevance and urgency.

I wish also to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his fifth report on children and
armed conflict, which serves as a basis for our
deliberations.

The situation of children affected by armed
conflict has grave consequences for the international
peace and security agenda. Violations committed
against children by armed groups - not just
recruitment but other egregious violations as well -
seriously compromise the prospects of war-torn
countries. In Africa in particular, the situation of
children affected by armed conflict is extremely
serious and poses a serious challenge that should be
met.

Since the Graca Machel report of 1996, a
landmark in this area, the need to take action has been
receiving growing international recognition. We
appreciate the work done by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and his
Office, to raise awareness of this issue and to help
develop a body of norms for the treatment of children
affected by armed conflict.

Given the prominence of the issue, the next step,
as the Secretary-General indicates in his report, is to
take effective measures in order to ensure "the era of
application".

Positive developments are currently under way,
such as the gradual integration of children affected by
armed conflict issues in peacekeeping activities, for
which the inclusion of child protection advisers in
peacekeeping operations has proved useful. The
development of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes that take into account the
specific needs of children, as encouraged by the
Secretary-General in his report, is also promising.

However, the response of the United Nations
system to the situation will need significant
improvement in order to ensure that the era of
application becomes a reality. Given the diversity of
actors involved, which all of us are familiar with,
responsibilities must be assigned, and better
systematization is required.

Keeping in mind the proposals contained in the
Secretary-General's report, Brazil supports enhancing
the efficiency of the United Nations system in
gathering, compiling and vetting information on
violations, in partnership with national Governments
and civil society. In addition, great care will be needed
in order to ensure the homogeneous application around
the world of any measures to be adopted by the
Council in that area.

It is essential to obtain precise and reliable
information on the situation of children affected by
armed conflict. We also appreciate the recognition in
the report of the many "destinations for action" which
may make use of the information compiled and exert
their influence in order to hold violators accountable.

The Security Council must continue to
demonstrate its political will, but, while remaining
seized of this issue, the Council must also recognize
the essential roles of and collaborate closely with other
destinations for action such as the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, equipped as they
are to respond to the social and economic dimensions
of this complex issue.

The International Criminal Court (ICC), as
indicated in the report, can also play a decisive role in
deterring violations against children in the context of
armed conflicts. If the ICC is provided with access to
reliable information, its capacity to fulfil its mandate to
prosecute those responsible for such war crimes would
be greatly enhanced.
Brazil is fully committed to the cause of
promoting and protecting the rights of the child in
general, and we are determined to furthering, in the
Security Council, the agenda of protection for children
affected by armed conflict. Indeed, life and security for
children everywhere is a key goal for Brazil. It is
unacceptable that violations of the rights of children
should continue to undermine the future of nations.
The Council should work to find long-lasting solutions
to this grievous situation by contributing towards
ending impunity for violators of the rights of children
in conflict situations.

