Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
greeting and welcoming the Foreign Minister of Mali,
His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop. I would also like
to extend condolences to France and to our colleagues
following the loss of one of their compatriots, who was
part of peacekeeping efforts in Mali - a country whose
people have done so much for Africa.

I Wish to thank Mr. Lacroix for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Mali and on the activities
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali over the past three months.
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate him on
his appointment as the new Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and wish him all the very
best in the effective discharge of his responsibilities. It
was clear to us from our very first encounter with him
in Paris a few weeks ago that he has all it takes to hit
the ground running at the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, even at such an unprecedented and
complex time.

We are encouraged by the recent progress in the
implementation of the June 2015 Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. We note the holding of
the high-level meeting of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, which has facilitated renewed efforts for
the establishment of interim administrations in three
areas for the launch of joint security patrols. We
appreciate the efforts of the international mediation
team in convening that meeting and the parties for
demonstrating commitment to making progress in
the implementation of important aspects of the peace
agreement. We also welcome the National Accord
Conference, held in Bamako from 27 March to 2 April,
as part of the implementation of the peace agreement
to address the root causes of the conflict and ensure
greater inclusiveness in the peace process. We note the
outcome of the Conference, which brought together
the signatory parties and different sections of Malian
society and concluded with the adoption of a National
Charter For Unity, Peace And Reconciliation. Those
recent developments have injected some momentum in
the implementation of the agreement; they need to be
further consolidated. The support of the international
community, including countries of the region, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union and the United Nations needs to
be sustained.

As other colleagues have stated, with only three
months left before the end of the interim period, the
implementation of the agreement, no doubt, still faces
a number of hurdles and the country continues to
confront enormous peace and security challenges. The
need for the restoration of inclusive State authority in
the central and northern regions of Mali remains critical
but continued insecurity in those regions poses serious
challenges that prevent the effective deployment of State
officials and, in some instances, forces those who have
already started their duties to leave the area. Terrorism
and violent extremism, transnational organized crime
and illicit trafficking continue to pose serious security
threats in Mali. The targeting of signatory parties
by terrorists and violent extremists to obstruct the
implementation of the peace agreement and perpetrate
insecurity in the north is a matter of serious concern.

The recent announcement of a merger by armed and
terrorist groups in Mali underscores the seriousness
of the threat. The efforts of Mali and the countries
of the Group of Five for the Sahel region to fight the
resurgence of violent extremists and terrorist networks,
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and
other forms of transnational organized crimes need to
be supported. In that regard, we note the decision of the
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel to deploy a
5,000-strong joint force.

We appreciate the civilian and military personnel
of MINUSMA who are operating under extremely
difficult circumstances. We understand the enormous
challenge faced by the Mission and recall the meeting
of the MINUSMA troop- and police-contributing
countries held in January (see S/PV.7874) to discuss
the ways and means of enhancing the capacity of the
Mission to enable it to effectively carry out its mandated
tasks. There is a need to follow up on the outcome of
that meeting in order to provide the Mission with the
necessary logistical support. We hope that next mandate
renewal of the Mission will afford us an opportunity to
address some of these issues.

