Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to emphasize that France
emphatically condemns the attacks that took place in
Burkina Faso and claimed many lives, including those
of women and children. France offers its condolences to
the families of the victims and reaffirms its solidarity
with the countries of the region in their efforts to
combat terrorism.

I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for his briefing.

During the high-level week of the General Assembly
at its seventy-third session, 52 countries endorsed
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which crowned the
Secretary-General's initiative on peacekeeping reform.
At that time, France expressed its full support for this
initiative through the President of the Republic. Now,
one year after its launch, it is time to take stock of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and chart our
path for the coming year. The results so far have been
very positive, and I wish to particularly highlight the
following points.

Since September 2018, a further 100 countries
have joined the Declaration of Shared Commitments,
indicating that the vast majority of Member States have
engaged with the Secretariat in favour of reforming
peacekeeping operations to ensure that they are
capable of addressing the challenges of the twenty-
first century. Structures have been put in place, both
within the Secretariat and by Member States, to
enable us effectively assess missions, identify both
difficulties and good examples and fully implement our
respective commitments.
The partnership framework that underpins the
Declaration of Shared Commitments is working.
Thus, the shortcomings identified by the Secretariat
with respect to certain contingents within the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) have been
taken into account by troop-contributing countries.
France has, inter alia, provided the necessary training
and the performance of its troops is now fully
satisfactory. We hope that this partnership framework
will be maintained and that regular dialogue can be
established between the Security Council and the
Secretariat on performance issues in particular.

We must now move on to the next stage, given that
significant challenges remain. We are at a crossroads.
Some processes have been created, new mechanisms
tested and initial positive outcomes achieved, but we
cannot rest on our laurels ifwe wish to make this reform
a success. This concerns all of us - the Secretariat, the
Council and all Member States. Financial contributors,
troop contributors and penholders all have a role to
play, and therein lies the crux of triangular cooperation.

The quest for performance must continue.
The effective and shared implementation of the
comprehensive performance assessment system and
its extension to all missions; the systematization of
predeployment visits; the light coordination mechanism
to ensure that training offers and needs jibe; and
strategic planning efforts integrated into all mission
components are all elements that will contribute to
the ongoing improvement of the effectiveness and
efficiency of peacekeeping operations.

This performance objective affects not only
military and police personnel, but also civilians. Much
work remains to be done to ensure that all missions have
the right people in the right posts and that everyone
possesses the necessary qualifications. The skills being
sought today for the head of a peacekeeping operation
are no longer the same as they were 10 years ago. The
United Nations human resources policy must be tailored
to take that into account. Our goal is to establish a

genuine culture of performance that is measurable,
goal-based and braced by clear accountability and
incentive mechanisms, as well as remedial action.

France plays a major role as a permanent member
of the Security Council, financial contributor and
troop contributor to national operations in support
of peacekeeping operations and intends to be at the
forefront to ensure the successful implementation of the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We pledge our full
support politically, within the Council as a penholder, so
that peacekeeping operations have clear, benchmarked
and prioritized mandates in order to advance well-
defined and transparent political objectives, as was the
case for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MINUSCA
and MINUSMA.

We also pledge our full technical support in terms
of training and supply of equipment. France, which is
heavily involved in the training of the African soldiers
likely to be deployed in peacekeeping operations each
year, will maintain that commitment, both bilaterally
and in coordination with regional peacekeeping
training schools. Our support for French language
acquisition will also continue. We are convinced that the
linguistic dimension underpins the success of Missions,
particularly in Francophone environments, and we will
continue to work actively in that direction. We will also
commit to stepping up our financial contribution to the
Department of Peace Operations.

In conclusion, I would be remiss if I failed to
reiterate the importance of two elements: on the one
hand, adequate funding for those Missions and, on
the other, the proper coordination and cooperation of
peacekeeping operations with the various local and
regional actors on the ground. Regional organizations
are playing an increasing role in the promotion of peace
and security, as provided for under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is a major priority of our
work, and it is imperative to establish United Nations
support for African peace operations as soon as possible.
We therefore welcome the fact that the African members
of the Council have decided to raise this issue once
again. That not only acknowledges African ownership,
but also the subsidiarity required in the relationship

between the United Nations and regional organizations,
while respecting the primacy of the Security Council.
That is one of France's strategic priorities.

