Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Allow
me to thank Special Representative Hasegawa for his
briefing. In addition, and in particular at this difficult
time, I would like to express our gratitude to Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta for being with us today and for
his frank assessment of the current situation in Timor-
Leste.

I wish to align myself with the statement to be
made shortly by the representative of Austria on behalf
of the European Union.

Like the other members of the Council, the
United Kingdom is extremely concerned by the events
of recent days, and in particular by the loss of life
about which we have heard. Those events highlight the
challenges that Timor-Leste continues to face. They
also remind us, as the Foreign Minister has said, that
we should not in any way take for granted the
remarkable progress that was being made in Timor-
Leste since the very difficult beginning. What is clear
now is that the international community has to
intensify its support for that country and for the
Government, as well as to play the role that is
necessary to permit Timor-Leste to respond to the
challenges and to move towards lasting peace and
stability. Despite the darkness of the present hour, we
have to send the message loud and clear: that we stand
by Timor-Leste at this time.

Building peace is never easy. Given its origins, I
think that is particularly the case in Timor-Leste. I was
very struck by two sentences that the Foreign Minister
used. He said that Dili was on the edge and that fear
was palpable among a people traumatized by past
violence. That has to stay with us and remind us even
more of why we have to stay the course and be
committed and united to help the Government of
Timor-Leste as it tackles the immediate problems and
tries to address longer-term issues.

Despite the seriousness of the present situation
and the recent events, it is important that we recognize
the progress that has been made, as also set out in the
briefing we have heard. We should also be encouraged
by the steps taken to improve effective democratic
governance, the adoption of key items of legislation
and the continued cordial relationship between Timor-
Leste and Indonesia. But what is clear is that it is all
the more incumbent upon us to see further efforts made
in a number of areas.

It would appear, for example, that the recent
problems were caused - or at least exacerbated - by
failures within State institutions, including the military
and the police. Those are areas in which key bilateral
partners will no doubt be looking to bolster their
support and build on what they have already been
providing. In particular, however, we need to do that
with an eye to the presidential and parliamentary
elections in 2007.

The most important role, it seems to us, in
resolving the current situation and in addressing the
longer-term challenges will, of course, be played by the
Government of Timor-Leste. That is why it is
imperative that the international community intensify
its support and that the United Nations efforts focused
on building and consolidating indigenous capacity
actually enable the Government to take further
responsibility for the reform process and to tackle the
very difficult situation.

That is why, like others, we are in favour of the
follow-on United Nations mission in Timor-Leste. We
have heard the arguments this morning; we do not need
any more persuasion. Given all the points in my
brief - what I would have argued in favour of it - I
am going to assume that this should happen and that
we have all been carried away by the substantive
arguments.

As to us, may I conclude by saying that we
remain committed to working with Security Council
partners, with the Secretary-General and, crucially,
with the Government of Timor-Leste to try to ensure
that, from the present difficult situation, as I said, we
shall produce a stable, peaceful and prosperous future
for the people of Timor-Leste. That must be the
abiding commitment that we stick to.

