Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov for his briefing and
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(8/2018/80).

Since 2014, Da'esh has lost 98 per cent of its
territory, and the global coalition has liberated more
than 7.7 million people from its rule in Iraq and Syria.
The United Kingdom is proud of the role that it has
played in conducting more than 1,600 air strikes in Iraq
and Syria, training more than 60,000 members of the
Iraqi security forces and supporting counter-Da'esh
operations, with approximately 1,400 United Kingdom
personnel in the region. In addition to winning the
war, we are working to win the peace by supporting
stabilization and the humanitarian response. The
United Kingdom has committed $3.4 billion to the
Syrian crisis since 2012. In Iraq, we have committed
$320 million in humanitarian aid, $418 million in
loan guarantees through the World Bank to support
fiscal stability and economic development, and nearly
$35 million to support stabilization.

However, we cannot afford to be complacent. As
the Secretary-General's report highlights, Da'esh has
been weakened and fragmented, but around the world
we continue to face a grave threat from individuals
and cells affiliated with, or inspired by, Da'esh. The
continued threat of terrorism is unfortunately something
that we have felt personally in the United Kingdom. As
we think of the victims of terrorism around the world,
we must redouble our efforts to defeat Da'esh for good.

First, we must continue and step up our efforts to
tackle terrorist misuse of the Internet. We are already
making strides in that fight online. The event last
September led by Prime Minister Theresa May, together
with President Macron and Prime Minister Gentiloni
Silveri, was a landmark achievement in bringing States
and industry together to tackle the threat. The output of
Da'esh propaganda has fallen by more than half since
its peak, and sympathizer accounts are being taken
down faster than ever before. The United Kingdom's
first-of-its-kind terrorist-content referral unit has
worked with technology companies to take down over
300,000 posts.

But we need to do much more to ensure that we
have the tools and technology to remain ahead of the
terrorists. Building on the establishment of the Global
Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism, we are seeking to
encourage technology companies to take the initiative
in tackling terrorist content uploaded to the Internet.
We need to ensure that terrorist content is taken down
rapidly and limited in its circulation, and to prevent it
from being made available in the first place. Larger
companies need to support and spread best practices to
smaller companies.

Secondly, we must strengthen our collective ability
to counter the threat of returning and relocating foreign
terrorist fighters, which was rightly highlighted by the
Secretary-General's report and is a focus of resolution
2396 (2017). We are encouraged that more than 60
countries are now working to build on INTERPOL's
global database currently tracking 43,000 fighters,
but there is more that States around the globe must
do to strengthen border security, including work on
advanced passenger information, passenger name
records and biometrics. We must also do more work
on developing effective prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration strategies, while paying special attention
to the particular challenges posed by women and
children returnees.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom remains committed
to enhancing aviation security to counter terrorism,
building on the Council's resolution 2309 (2016).
To do that, the United Kingdom is investing in the
development of new technology as well as working
with partners around the world. We also welcome the
agreement last October on the Global Aviation Security
Plan of the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), and we call on ICAO and all States to ensure
that the plan is fully implemented.

Finally, I want to reiterate the United Kingdom's
support for the Secretary-General's reform of the United
Nations counter-terrorism architecture and for the
Office of Count-Terrorism (OCT) under the leadership
of Under-Secretary-General Voronkov. We welcome
the initial steps taken to enhance coherence within the
United Nations system, especially the commitment to
work closely with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and Executive Director Coninsx.
We look forward to OCT developing greater ability to
support States, in particular in areas where the United
Nations can add unique value, such as in the prevention
of violent extremism.

As the report outlines, the threat of terrorism is
pervasive and evolving. But in the same way the global
coalition brought so many of us together against a
common enemy in Da'esh, we must remain united to
meet these new threats. This is a global threat and it
will require global action.

