We thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing this afternoon. We would like to start by recalling that, shortly after the accession of the Syrian Arab Republic to the Chemical Weapons Convention and the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) confirmed the destruction of the stockpiles and 27 chemical-weapon production facilities declared by the Syrian Arab Republic. However, despite that historic success, there have been recurrent allegations of the use of chemical weapons and several reports by different OPCW investigation teams confirming that some of those incidents had indeed taken place and providing convincing evidence of the chemical agents used and the way in which the attacks were perpetrated. That leads us to the conclusion that stocks of toxic chemical agents, particularly sarin and chlorine, remain on Syrian territory. In that regard, the Dominican Republic continues to urge Syria to cooperate fully with the OPCW with a view to finding a tangible solution to the long-standing issues remaining, including those related to its initial declaration. Furthermore, we understand that all State parties to the Convention have the obligation to comply with the agreed commitments without prejudice and to abide by the decisions of the bodies entrusted to them, including the Conference of the States Parties and the OPCW Executive Council. In that regard, it is regrettable that the Syrian Arab Republic has not complied with any of the measures contained in the Executive Council decision of 9 July, which was based on the conclusions of the first report of the Investigation and Identification Team. We therefore continue to encourage the Syrian authorities to obtain the necessary assistance from the OPCW Technical Secretariat with a view to achieving full compliance with the Convention. Furthermore, we take note of the recent twenty-third round of consultations between the Syrian authorities and the Declaration Assessment Team in Damascus, and we hope that those consultations will continue and produce results that will constitute significant progress on this dossier. In addition, we note the recent reports issued by the Fact-Finding Mission in Syria (FFM) on the incidents of alleged chemical weapons use in Saraqib in 2016 and in Aleppo in 2018. Those reports concluded that the information examined did not make it possible to establish whether or not chemical agents had been used as weapons in those incidents. We reaffirm our full confidence in the professionalism, impartiality and objectivity of the FFM's work and findings, and take this opportunity to urge Member States to provide the necessary information to assist the various ongoing investigations. The Dominican Republic reiterates its firm and principled position condemning the use of chemical weapons in any place, by any person and under any circumstances. Their use is unjustifiable and constitutes a flagrant violation of international law and the Chemical Weapons Convention. It also represents an undeniable threat to international peace and security. Preventing the use of chemical weapons is therefore the responsibility not only of the Syrian Arab Republic but also of the international community. We therefore urge all Member States to provide their full support and cooperation in that regard and to fulfil their commitments in accordance with the Convention and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Our fundamental joint objective must be to prevent the use of toxic chemicals as weapons, to completely destroy their stockpiles and to identify the perpetrators and hold them accountable for actions that contravene international law.
