I want to thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their remarkable briefings this morning. It is clear that, as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we are experiencing extraordinary times that call for extraordinary measures. In this regard, we must congratulate President Agius and his staff for their efforts aimed at ensuring the continuity of the work of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT). Adapting to the new normal is fundamental for the IRMCT mandate schedule. Furthermore, we wish to highlight the measures taken by the Mechanism to fight the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on its staff and workload. We commend Judge Agius for the measures put in place to provide the staff with impressive tools to overcome the pandemic. He is doing an inspiring job. We applaud the Mechanism's efforts to integrate a gender perspective into its work and activities. We hope that the gender-related activities postponed by COVID-19 will resume shortly. We encourage the Mechanism to continue the great work of educating staff and others on these issues. The Dominican Republic has positive regard for the progress made on the judicial cases and therefore encourages the Mechanism to continue its work towards achieving its 2020 goals in this regard, despite the possible delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we are pleased to hear that the consultation process on the update of the Practice Direction on the Procedure for the Determination of Applications for Pardon, Commutation of Sentence, or Early Release of Persons Convicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, or the Mechanism, is in its final stages. Allow me to refer to a crucial point. The importance of cooperation. Like every other international tribunal, the IRMCT requires cooperation from the States. Without a joint effort, the IRMCT cannot meet the objectives of its mandate. We have an obligation to fully cooperate with the Mechanism, especially during investigations. Indeed, a perfect example of the benefit of successful cooperation between States and the Mechanism is the arrest of Felicien Kabuga. We commend the joint efforts of the French authorities and the Office of the Prosecutor in achieving this important result. The Dominican Republic reiterates its commitment to the IRCMT and fully supports the extension of the mandates of the President and Prosecutor beyond 30 June 2020. The Dominican Republic considers the role of the IRMCT to be essential in the fight against impunity for the crimes against humanity committed in the former Yugoslavia and the genocide against the Tutsi. Victims must receive justice for the terrible damages they have suffered.
