Mr. Cohen (United States): We thank Secretary-
General Guterres and Commissioner Chergui for
their briefings.

I too would like to begin by saying a few words
in special tribute to the Malawian and Tanzanian
United Nations peacekeepers and the soldiers from the
Armed Forces ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo
who were killed there last week. This is an important
reminder for all of us that the decisions made in this
Chamber have real consequences for peacekeepers and
their families. Our prayers are with the families of the
men and women killed last week and with the wounded
who survived.

Making our peacekeeping missions more effective
and more accountable to the people they serve is a
top priority for the United States. The African Union
(AU) continues to be a strong and necessary partner
of the United Nations in advancing political, security,
economic and humanitarian goals in Africa. The
relationship between the two organizations is unique
and special, and must remain so. The United States
recognizes the sacrifices that the AU and African
troop-contributing countries are already making for
peacekeeping operations in Africa. Ethiopia alone
has more than 8,000 troops serving in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and over 4,000 in the AU
Mission to Somalia. Burkina Faso has more than 2,000
troops dedicated to United Nations peacekeeping, and
last month paid the ultimate price when it lost two
soldiers to a terrorist attack in Mali.

The question we are asked to address today is how
we can improve the unique relationship of the United
Nations with the African Union - not for the benefit of
the organizations themselves, but to help the people of
Africa build apeaceful and prosperous future. It deserves
a focused, sustained and honest conversation. Council
members must not be rushed into making precedent-
setting decisions without careful consideration of
their consequences. Many here today have called for
the Security Council to make United Nations-assessed
contributions available as a predictable and sustainable
means of support for African peace support operations.
This proposal, in particular, demands that we pause to
consider how it would aid peace, security and human
rights in Africa.

The Security Council is on record as adopting
two resolutions - resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017) - expressing its desire to work with the AU to
find reliable funding structures for peacekeeping. We
have also affirmed that the primary responsibility for
conflict prevention lies with States and that the Council
is ready to work with them to keep the peace. Those
resolutions set out clear conditions that the African
Union has to meet before the Security Council can even
consider using United Nations-assessed contributions
to fund AU peace support operations. They include the
expectation that the AU must provide at least 25 per
cent of the cost of operations. The Council also asks that
there be full financial transparency and accountability
and requires AU troops to adhere to high performance
standards and maintain good conduct and discipline
and respect for human rights.
Progress has been made and we congratulate the
AU on it, but more work is needed before the Security
Council's conditions can be considered fulfilled. It
is too soon to make decisions about changing the
peacekeeping relationship between the United Nations
and the AU when the AU is still working on its internal
reforms. Other issues have led us to believe that taking
this step now would be premature. There are serious
unanswered questions about how to protect the Security
Council's authority on matters related to international
peace and security in any future arrangement that
supports AU peace support operations with United
Nations-assessed contributions. Council members
must be given time to ensure that there is full political
and legislative support from their capitals before
making this commitment. Our Congress's agreement
is imperative for the United States. I know that is also
the case for other countries and their legislatures, and
we will not be able to engage our new Congress on this
important and complex issue until the new year, which
is the soonest we could considerjoining consensus on a
new draft resolution.

The United States is calling for more consideration
before we commit United Nations funds to AU peace
support operations, but it would be a mistake to
interpret our caution as a lack of support for peace,
security and human rights on the African continent.
The United States has long been and will remain the
Organization's top contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, but on top of our assessed
funds, we are committed to helping troop-contributing
countries prepare their troops for deployment to United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa. Since 2005,
we have spent $1.5 billion on training support with 23
active partners in Africa. In 2018, the United States
supported the training of military personnel in African
peacekeeping missions in the Central African Republic,
Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur,
Abyei and South Sudan.

The United States also supports security in
Africa through hundreds of millions of dollars in
counter-terrorism and law-enforcement assistance.
Our humanitarian, health and development assistance
supports the health and education of millions of women
and children as well. In short, the United States is
committed to Africa's future stability and prosperity.
We are proud of our partnership with the AU and the
many African troop-contributing countries.

In conclusion, we see today as a step forward in our
shared effort to strengthen the partnership of the United
Nations with the AU. A rushed process in a matter of
days to make a decision that would change peacekeeping
permanently would undercut our progress. Instead, let
us continue the good work on all sides to bring our two
organizations closer together, with respect for their
unique roles, to help the people of Africa create the
peaceful, secure and prosperous future they deserve.

