Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
information provided by Assistant Secretary-General
Taye-Brook Zerihoun. We are also grateful to the
Permanent Mission of Kuwait for requesting this
important meeting, and to the presidency for convening
it in such a timely manner.

Today we woke up to the alarming news that, as a
result of violent repression by Israeli security forces, 15
people had been killed and more than 1,200 wounded.
All of them were innocent civilians participating in the
Great March of Return. The Plurinational State of Bolivia
strongly condemns Israel's disproportionate violent
military action against the Palestinian population and
calls on the Government of Israel to refrain from the
use of violence and respect international humanitarian
law, including the protection of civilians.

The exacerbation in, and trends of, violence in Gaza
are the result of 70 years of unresolved and persistent
conflict, including 50 years of illegal occupation of
Palestinian territories by the occupying Power, Israel,
and the inhumane blockade of the Gaza Strip, which
has led to a catastrophic humanitarian situation. As
long as this situation persists, a just and lasting peace
for both peoples will be less and less likely.

During the past 50 years, Israeli policies of
dispossession and occupation have filled the Palestinian
people with suffering. In January 2018 alone, the
Israeli authorities demolished or seized 32 Palestinian-
owned structures in the West Bank, and last week we
were informed of the Israeli Government's decision
to build 1,500 new settlements in Area C. We call on
the Government of Israel to cease the expropriation
of Palestinian land and halt the expansion of the
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories, in
accordance with resolution 2334 (2016).

We are also convinced that the announcement by
some States to change the location of their embassies
to the city of Jerusalem will only increase tensions in
the region and lead to an escalation of Violence of great
proportions. As a pacifist country, Bolivia sees the path
of dialogue and negotiation with clear expressions of
political will from both sides for achieving a two-State
solution to be the only alternative that can guarantee
a just and lasting peace in the conflict between Israel
and Palestine.

We therefore reaffirm our full commitment to
multilateralism and international law and reiterate
our support for all international efforts leading to a
peaceful solution, such as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, inter
alia, which will guarantee a just and lasting peace
and allow both peoples to live within recognized
and secure borders. We also reiterate that the only
long-term solution is the two-State solution, which
finally consolidates a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 internationally
recognized borders and with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.

