Our friend from the Dominican Republic, Jose, reminded us in his intervention that, from tomorrow onwards, Germany will hold the presidency of the Security Council. At the same time, Germany will start its presidency of the European Union. Both are very important for us. They are the cornerstones of our post-Second World War policy. The foundation of both organizations is the rule of law and the rules- based international order. For us, the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are key for our policy. When I talk about the rule of law today, it has to do with this very foundation of German foreign policy. I will take the opportunity of the presence of the Iranian Foreign Minister to talk about the rule of law and Iran. Unfortunately, Iran is violating the very basis of what we are discussing here at the United Nations: the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The human rights situation in Iran is appalling. Human rights activists are persecuted. There are political prisoners. There is no press freedom, no right of assembly, and there is aggressive foreign policy meddling in the region. Iran not only does not recognize Israel, but also displays missiles with "death to Israel" written on them. This is all very appalling. With regard to the rule of law, I come to resolution 2231 (2015): a part of the rule of law and one of the most important resolutions that we have. I would like to thank the Secretary-General and his team for the thorough investigation, which found developments that are contrary to, and inconsistent with, resolution 2231 (2015). To respond to my colleague from China, we believe that the Secretariat is absolutely mandated to pursue this work. The Secretary-General is tasked with combating threats to peace and security, and therefore must do everything to preserve this. With regard to the position on resolution 2231 (2015), we would like to align ourselves with what the United Kingdom and France, as the other European three members, have to say. Since China is also a signatory, I would also align myself with what my Chinese colleague just said about the snapback mechanism. The overarching goal for us is the preservation, continuation and full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which has been described by some in the media as a masterpiece of diplomacy. Thanks to the JCPOA, it was possible to have Iran step back from its moves towards the acquisition of a nuclear bomb. It is very unfortunate that the United States left the JCPOA. By doing so, it actually violated international law, because the JCPOA is enshrined in binding resolution 2231 (2015). We are very concerned to now be seeing Iran stepping away from the JCPOA, as was also mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/531). To illustrate this, imagine somebody running a red traffic light; that is no justification for another driver to run a red light as well. Iran should engage constructively with the remaining JCPOA signatories. Because of these steps away from the agreement by Iran, France, Germany and the United Kingdom (E3) have invoked the dispute-resolution mechanism, a measure within the framework of the JCPOA. Just as we continue to uphold our commitments as the E3 and even go beyond our commitments when it comes to the INSTEX mechanism, we are concerned about the United States not only leaving the JCPOA but also ending the waivers for key JCPOA projects. The E3 remain committed to those projects, including the Arak modernization project.* We are concerned about the reference to Iran's missile activities in the Secretary-General's report. They are inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015). As the E3, we have informed the Secretary-General and the Security Council about those concerns. On the conventional arms embargo, we share concerns on the implications of the expiration of those limitations. On the other hand, we would recall that the sanctions on Missile Technology Control Regime-listed items will remain in place and that the transfer of arms by Iran to non-State actors will remain prohibited according to other Security Council resolutions. We can build on those provisions when we consider how best to address the expiry of the arms embargo. We are ready to engage with the JCPOA members and the Council to determine how to best do that. We just celebrated the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Charter. That is the basis for our rules-based international order. Multilateralism is about commitments and reliability. I would like to appeal to everybody to return to resolution 2231 (2015) and to the JCPOA and implement it. *
