Mr. Gambari: Thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
outcome of my recent mission to Myanmar from
29 September to 2 October. Members of the Council
are fully aware of the circumstances in which the
Secretary-General decided to dispatch me to Myanmar,
and I am grateful for the clear and strong support
expressed by the Council for my mission.

On behalf of the Secretary-General, I would like
to thank the Myanmar Government for having received
me and for the cooperation extended to my delegation
during our visit. Within the context of the good offices
mandate entrusted to the Secretary-General by the
General Assembly, my mission had three main
objectives: first, to assess the situation on the ground in
the wake of recent demonstrations; secondly, to deliver
clear messages from the Secretary-General to the
Myanmar authorities at the highest level; and thirdly,
to try to promote dialogue between the Government
and the opposition as the best path to ending the
present crisis and achieving national reconciliation.

Before addressing each of those objectives,
however, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Myanmar authorities for their flexibility in developing
the programme of my visit as it evolved. As was the
case during each of my previous visits to Myanmar, I
was able to meet with both the Chairman of the State
Peace and Development Council, Senior General Than
Shwe, and with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. I also met
with Acting Prime Minister Lieutenant General Thein
Sein and other members of Government. Although,
despite repeated requests, I was not able to meet with
other relevant interlocutors - including the National
League for Democracy (NLD) and representatives of
the monks and 88 Generation Students - I did receive
messages from many groups and individuals that have
also informed my findings, including, of course, the
close help I got from the United Nations country team.

The conditions in which my mission was
undertaken and its duration were such that any
assessment of the situation on the ground is necessarily
limited. In my last two briefings, I updated members of
the Council on the backdrop to the growing
demonstrations since 19 August. The authorities
initially exercised restraint in dealing with the
07-52995

protests - which was very much appreciated - but in
the week preceding the mission tensions escalated
through violent repression by the authorities against
peaceful demonstrators. By the Government's own
account, up to a dozen people - including a Japanese
journalist - were killed, several dozens wounded, and
over 2,000 arrested. Unconfirmed reports, however, put
the number of casualties higher.

By the time my mission started, the protests on
the streets of Yangon had been largely put down, and
by the time the mission ended, the streets were busier
and activity seemed to be returning to normal, although
the situation remains tense. Of great concern to the
United Nations and the international community are
the continuing and disturbing reports of abuses being
committed by security and non-uniformed elements,
particularly at night during curfew, including raids on
private homes, beatings, arbitrary arrests and
disappearances. There are also continuing reports of
mass relocation outside Yangon of monks arrested in
the course of the demonstrations and monasteries that
remain blockaded. The High Commissioner for Human
Rights, who is with us at this meeting, and the Human
Rights Council have issued strong appeals for
independent verification of those reports and
accountability for any human rights violations.

During the mission, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator in Yangon reported that at least two
national United Nations staff members were arrested
and detained. I brought that fact immediately to the
attention of the authorities at the highest level, and the
two staff members were subsequently released. A third
national United Nations staff member and a dependent
were also reported missing later, and both have also
since been released. The United Nations Office in
Yangon has received requests from people asking for a
safe place to hide.

In my discussions with senior Governments
officials, I was told that the demonstrations were
instigated by a small minority of elements opposed to
the Government and supported from outside; that the
demonstrations were limited to Yangon and Mandalay,
while the rest of the country had remained calm; that
the authorities had indeed shown the utmost restraint in
handling the situation; and that most of those arrested
could be expected to be released shortly, after
investigation and interrogation. My delegation was also
taken to a mass rally in Lashio, in north-eastern Shan
State, which was organized in support of the
3
Government's National Convention and seven-step
political road map.

It is clear, however, that the demonstrations over
the past few weeks have been, for the most part, an
expression of deep and widespread discontent about
socio-economic conditions in the country. General
vulnerability in Myanmar is defined by accelerating
impoverishment and the growing inability of the social
service structures to address the basic needs of the
general population. As an illustration, a United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) assessment of
household living conditions for the period 2004-2005
noted that one third of Myanmar's people lived below
the poverty line and that 90 per cent of the people were
spending less than $300 per year. At the time of the
study, UNDP predicted that a 10 per cent rise in prices
could push another one third of the country below the
poverty line. Since then, the price of fuel has been
increased twice, and significant levels of inflation have
driven prices up considerably for basic food items and
commodities. The overall poverty level is also
indicated by the share of the household budget taken
by food consumption, which on average is as high as
69 per cent.

Although the protests coincided with the
Government's sudden decision on 19 August to sharply
increase the price of fuel, the marches by monks across
the country appear to have provided a catalyst for the
demonstrations to become explicitly political in nature.
That must be understood within the context of
Myanmar's complex history since independence. What
is clear is that since 1988 the democratic aspirations of
the people of Myanmar have been denied by the
Government in the name of stability and security.
Although the Government succeeded after 14 years in
completing the National Convention on 3 September,
and although it assured me that the seven-step road
map is broadly supported by the population, the
exclusion of key stakeholders, such as the NLD, and
the failure to meet the expectations of key participants,
such as ethnic ceasefire groups, tends to undermine the
credibility and legitimacy of the process. In that
context, the Government must open up and broaden the
process that is to define Myanmar's future, and
therefore meet the demands for greater inclusiveness,
participation and transparency, in order to accelerate
the transition to democracy and to civilian rule.

With regard to the second objective of my
mission, I am pleased that, amidst the ongoing crisis, I
was able to deliver clear and strong messages on behalf
of the Secretary-General directly to the authorities at
the highest level. My first message was to emphasize
the changing domestic, regional and international
context within which my mission was taking place,
with the clear and strong support of Myanmar's
neighbours, including China and Japan, countries of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
Security Council. As I have said before, the world is
not what it was 20 years ago, and no country can afford
to act in isolation from the standards by which all
members of the international community are held
accountable. It is therefore essential for Myanmar's
leadership to recognize that what happens inside
Myanmar can have serious international repercussions.

My second message was to express the deep
concern of the Secretary-General and the international
community about the most recent events and to make
specific recommendations for immediate steps to
de-escalate tensions. Those recommendations include:
putting an end to night raids and arrests during curfew;
lifting the curfew as soon as possible; releasing all
those arrested during the demonstrations; allowing
access to clinics for those wounded during
demonstrations; withdrawing military forces from the
streets; ensuring respect for human rights and the rule
of law in the exercise of law enforcement, in
accordance with international standards; allowing the
International Committee of the Red Cross to have
access to persons detained and to assist in tracing
missing people; and putting an immediate end to raids
on monasteries.

Thirdly, I emphasized the need to address without
delay the political and socio-economic factors
underlying the demonstrations through specific mid-
and long-term measures, predicated on dialogue among
all stakeholders. Any decrease in tensions can be
sustained only if it is accompanied by positive steps to
address the root causes of unrest. Specific
recommendations have been put to the Government in
that regard. The Council is already aware of the
following key areas in which I have been encouraging
the Government to make tangible progress: first, the
release of all political prisoners, including those
arrested in the course of recent demonstrations;
secondly, the promotion of an all-inclusive national
reconciliation process; thirdly, full cooperation with,
and better access for, humanitarian organizations;
fourthly, the cessation of hostilities in conflict areas,
07-52995
including in Kayin State; and fifthly, continued
cooperation with the International Labour
Organization.

While it remains unclear how responsive the
authorities will be to those messages, I believe that the
mission helped develop understanding of the regional
and international perceptions of the situation in
Myanmar and of the urgent need for them to implement
some of the specific ideas put to the authorities in
order to meet domestic and international expectations.
In terms of immediate steps, I would like to note that
the authorities have already announced a relaxation of
the curfew in Yangon and Mandalay. Reports indicate
that the visible military presence in the streets has been
reduced. I have also been informed by the Government
that, as of today, a total of 2,095 persons arrested in the
course of demonstrations have been released, including
728 monks, and that more releases will follow as a
direct result of my request to the authorities on behalf
of the Secretary-General. While those steps are
welcome, further steps will need to be taken over the
next few days and weeks, not only to overcome the
current crisis but also to address the underlying factors
of the recent unrest.

With regard to the third objective of my mission,
namely, the promotion of dialogue, the visit allowed
me to resume the role I started playing during my last
visit, by conveying messages between the senior
leadership and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. The fact that I
was allowed to meet with her a second time after
meeting with the Senior General in itself suggests the
usefulness of the United Nations good offices as a way
for the parties to explore the possibility of engaging in
early dialogue. I am therefore cautiously encouraged
by the Government's announcement yesterday that
Senior General Than Shwe is prepared to meet Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, although with certain conditions.
This is a potentially welcome development that calls
for maximum flexibility on all sides. The sooner such a
meeting takes place, the better, as it is a first and
necessary step to overcome the high level of mistrust
between them. I sincerely hope that the potential for
dialogue will be recognized to the same extent by both
sides, and that it can translate into concrete steps in the
immediate wake of the crisis.

Another necessary step for genuine national
dialogue to take place is the release of all political
detainees, particularly the sick and the elderly. After
all, only free men and women can engage in dialogue.

The future of Myanmar belongs to all the people of
Myanmar. It is therefore in the interest of the nation
that all those who have a contribution to make should
have the opportunity to do so. The issues for dialogue
are known - from serious political and human rights
concerns to pressing humanitarian and socio-economic
issues - but only by working together as one people
will Myanmar be able to address them and move
forward as one nation.

In that connection, the specific recommendations
that were put to the Government, including the
possibility of establishing a broad-based constitutional
review commission, are aimed at encouraging the
Government to engage in a post-National Convention
process of consultations that is all-inclusive,
participatory and transparent. That would enable the
credibility and legitimacy of the draft constitution to be
submitted to a referendum. The United Nations has
experience in facilitating such a constitutional review
process.

In addition to the imperatives of the political
dispensation, the Government needs to be more
sensitive to the extremely fragile humanitarian and
socio-economic context within which the recent
demonstrations and crisis broke out. In that regard, the
recommendation put to the Government to consider
establishing a broad-based poverty alleviation
commission to identify and address socio-economic
needs will be a useful vehicle for promoting national
dialogue on ways to improve the overall "health" of the
country. The work of United Nations agencies in the
country has been recognized as useful by the
authorities. Every effort needs to be made to continue
to find areas of mutual interest where progress can be
made, including in the areas of health, education and
drug reduction.

While the humanitarian and political action needs
to continue to be coordinated, it is essential not to let
humanitarian actions become hostage to political
conditions, and vice versa. Any serious steps on the
political front should be acknowledged by the
international community through the provision of
incentives in the humanitarian and socio-economic
areas.

In conclusion, I would like to say the following.
Amidst the tragic events of the past few weeks, this is
an hour of historic opportunity for Myanmar. As I have
said before, responsibility for the future of the country
5
ultimately rests with the Government and people of
Myanmar. However, the world is watching closely how
that responsibility will be exercised in the interest of
all the people of Myanmar.

To delay the prospect of a peaceful, prosperous
and democratic Myanmar is to deny it to those who
deserve it the most: the people of Myanmar. They have
suffered too much for too long. At this point, what they
need above all is hope, and I would be encouraged if
this mission helped Myanmar's leaders to listen to their
own people.

The Government also needs to know that the
world needs a peaceful, prosperous and democratic
Myanmar that can contribute to the development of the
region and play a useful role in the international
community. I want to reiterate here that, over the past
two years, Myanmar has demonstrated greater
openness and cooperation with the United Nations and
the international community. Now is the time for
Myanmar's leadership to make the bold choices that
will demonstrate that these efforts have not been in
vain and that Myanmar is ready to partner with the
international community by making serious, tangible
progress in the areas of concern to the international
community. If it does so, it will find that there is much
goodwill out there to help it along the way. Myanmar is
part of a dynamic and prosperous region. As the
ASEAN countries have already demonstrated, they
recognize that they also have a responsibility to
support Myanmar's efforts towards a peaceful and
stable future.

Finally, as I have emphasized from the beginning,
the Secretary-General's good offices are a process, not
an event. It is important to recognize that one mission
by itself cannot resolve the fundamental challenges
facing Myanmar today. Advancing the causes of all-
inclusive national reconciliation, democratization and
full respect for human rights will require sustained
engagement by the United Nations, including through
the intensification of the Secretary-General's good
offices, with the active support of Myanmar's
neighbours, ASEAN countries and the international
community, including a united Security Council.

