Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin, Sir, by expressing my thanks for the

opportunity to participate in this open debate which
you have convened in such a timely fashion to address
the question of post-conflict peacebuilding. This issue
is relevant to us, in view of our own experiences since
the signing of our Peace Agreements in 1996, with a
significant United Nations presence. I wish also to
express my thanks to the Secretary-General,
Mr. McKechnie of the World Bank and Ambassador
Heraldo Mufioz, for their presentations, which have
undoubtedly enriched this debate.

We welcome the Secretary-General's emphasis on
the importance of national ownership, the central idea
of his report (S/2009/304). This recognition is, in our
view, essential since a firm and lasting peace agenda
can be executed only when the main national actors
find in it a minimal agenda for compromise and
consensus.

At the same time, we find useful the commitment
undertaken to promote a coherent and efficient
response by the United Nations system. In this regard,
we believe it is important to make use of the full
potential of the Peacebuilding Support Office, and, to
this end, we concur in the importance of clearly
defining its role, taking into account the
complementarity that it could offer to other Secretariat
bodies.

We believe that equal attention needs to be given
to the fact that the broader support from bilateral
donors and non-governmental organizations should be
coherent, coordinated and sustained, and above all
complementary to the efforts to build confidence in the
peace process. That is particularly critical and there is
a need to prevent such support from exacerbating the
causes of conflict or from generating new sources of
tension, as has happened on some occasions in the past.

As regards the proposal on predictable
international assistance, we welcome the Secretary-
General's commitment to create new systems for
recruitment of personnel from neighbouring regions,
from countries with similar socio-economic, cultural or
linguistic structures, or that have already undergone a
process of post-conflict transition.

We appreciate the ideas put forward for an
enhanced capacity for rapid deployment of personnel,
although this proposal seems complex to us because of
the costs that it might involve in terms of keeping
professional staff on permanent standby, especially for
developing countries. We trust that the proposed
review and the information provided by the Secretary-
General on the basis of the relevant provisions of
General Assembly resolutions 61/279 and 63/280, will
contain mechanisms that are more flexible and that will
make it possible to draw upon the capacity of the
southern hemisphere.

The report of the Secretary-General reminds us of
the importance of responsiveness, harmonization,
flexibility and risk-tolerance in the financing
mechanisms for the capacity of the system to give an
appropriate response. The establishment of multi-donor
trust funds and other pooled financing mechanisms for
a country seems to us to be a measure that meets these
requirements. However, we continue to be concerned
about the trend of allocating earmarked funds to the
detriment of regular funding, an imbalance which we
believe to be the main cause of a lack of coherence in
the United Nations system.

As regards the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we have been interested to see the
proposals of the Secretary-General with a view to
continuing to improve its advisory function and its
function as a forum for a discussion on aid
effectiveness and for mutual accountability. The review
envisaged for 2010 offers us an important opportunity
to learn lessons from the experiences of these first few
years and to take decisions on the improvements that
need to be made.

We welcome the report's reference to the
Economic and Social Council, although we regret the
fact that it is limited to the issue of financing for
development. That ignores one of the main functions of
that organ, which is to coordinate the activities of the
specialized agencies and making recommendations to
them, especially in the context of the humanitarian
segment and the operational activities segment.

Finally, allow me to touch on a matter closely
related to today's discussion but not covered by the
reflections of the Secretary-General, namely the
desirability of initiating peacebuilding activities in
countries that are still in conflict, taking into account
the importance of effective coordination and
mobilization of resources from the peacekeeping stage
to the peacebuilding stage.

