Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): I want to
congratulate you personally, Sir, and the French Republic
on its presidency of the Council of the month of June
and for organizing this extremely important debate.

France, we must stress, has always stood firmly
by our side in the quest for and the construction and
consolidation of peace in Africa. Without France,
entire countries today would be in much more difficult
situations. I am thinking in particular of Mali and the
Central African Republic. In that connection, I welcome
the presence here of the President of the Central African
Republic, Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera.

I would like to say how pleased I am to take
part today in this discussion, which focuses on the
protection of civilians in the context of peacekeeping
operations. That is a topic that is both important and
very timely, and one that brings us together less than a
month after the World Humanitarian Summit, held in
Istanbul. I would also like to thank and congratulate
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his important
briefing, as well as Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for his own
excellent briefing.

The holding ofa ministerial meeting of the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations gives us an opportunity to take stock of
the actions undertaken in that area, and in particular
to deepen our reflection on the challenges before the
United Nations in general, and the Security Council in
particular, in terms of implementing the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.

We have all seen that, in various conflicts across
the world, in particular in Africa, armed conflicts have
always been characterized by the indiscriminate use
of violence and the high number of civilian casualties,
among which, unfortunately, the majority are children
and women. The gloomy picture painted in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/447) on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, as well as the current
humanitarian disasters around the world, remind us of a
reality that bears repeating: the majority of the victims
in armed conflict are civilians.

Allow me to express the great interest that Senegal
attaches to the protection of civilians in the framework
of peacekeeping operations. The commitment of my
country to peacekeeping operations is intrinsically
linked to the protection of civilians, and is further
bolstered by the various international instruments
on international humanitarian law, inter alia, the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their multilateral
protocols relating to human rights, not to mention the
various African legal instruments, in particular the
Organization of African Unity Convention governing
the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa
of 1969.

Concern for the protection of civilians remains a
major priority for Senegal in peacekeeping operations.
I would like to recall that my country signed the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians and, long
ago, took a number of measures aimed at ensuring the
protection of civilians. In that regard, the Senegalese
armed forces, in particular contingents that are
preparing for peacekeeping operations, have benefited
from initial training and ongoing training in the legal
aspects of conflicts with a View to better acquainting
them with international humanitarian law and human
rights issues in order to ensure better respect for the
obligations that are incumbent on them.

In saying that, I would like to recall the courage
demonstrated by Captain Mbaye Diagne ofSenegal, who
sacrificed his life to save civilians during the genocide
in Rwanda. It is commendable that the Security Council,
in resolution 2154 (2014), enshrined his memory in
the glorious pages of its history by establishing, on
8 May 2014, the "aptain Mbaye Diagne Medal for
Exceptional Bravery to honour military, police and
civilian personnel of the United Nations and associated
personnel who demonstrate exceptional courage in the
service of humankind and the United Nations.

Furthermore, it is important to underscore the need
to strengthen mobilization aimed at protecting civilians
in armed conflicts. It is true that States have the primary
responsibility to protect civilians, but it is also true
that the United Nations, through the Security Council,
has an essential role to play. To do that, it is important
to strengthen the culture of preventing violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights, in all
its forms, and to combat impunity for the perpetrators
of such violations.

Senegal is firmly convinced that progress in
peacekeeping operations in the protection of civilians
needs to be measured against the way that the current
threats to peace and international security have evolved.
The new threats are terrorism and Violent extremism,
which require us to adapt radically so as to deal with
them. In addition to peacekeeping and the maintenance
of security, today's mission activities include various
components, such as economic and humanitarian
assistance, the protection of human rights, assistance to
internally displaced persons and refugees, involvement
in political processes, reforming justice systems, the
training of police forces, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, demining,
peacebuilding and much more.

The police component of peacekeeping operations,
which was initially supposed to monitor, observe and
report, is today called upon to play a more important
role in the implementation of the new peacekeeping
operation mandates established by the Security Council.

Current missions go beyond the strict security
framework of peacekeeping operations and are being
transformed into peacebuilding and protection-of-
civilians missions, which requires enhanced synergy
between the military, police and civilian components.
We need to work more on that point.

At this stage, I would like to mention the reform of
peacekeeping operations, which is necessary. We need
to continue that process, even accelerate it, in order
to better adapt peacekeeping operations to the most
urgent present and future needs. The recommendations
made by senior officials in their various reports, as
well as those adopted by the General Assembly, include
very ambitious measures, such as the modernization
of troop equipment and increased financial support.
The effective implementation of those measures should
enable peacekeeping operations to enter a new phase in
achieving their missions, thanks to an ongoing dialogue,
inter alia on defining the contents of mandates and the
roles to be played by the various stakeholders, including
troop-contributing countries such as ours, donors and
the United Nations.

Senegal is honoured to be the seventh largest
troop- and police-contributing country in the world,
the third in Africa and the first in West Africa, with
approximately 3,769 men and women serving in seven
peacekeeping operations. My country is also the first
global contributor of police forces to peacekeeping
operations. Our experience has shown that, in order
to be effective, peacekeeping operations must not only
be based on clear mandates, but also need to have the
requisite financial resources and adequate equipment.
In Mali, for example, we think, like other member
States of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which met in Dakar on 4 June, that
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali needs to be
more robust, with equipment that is adapted to the
threats and murderous terrorist attacks directed against
the troops almost daily, as well as with strengthened
capacity in logistics and troops.

I would like to emphasize the importance of
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union and ECOWAS, in the framework
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which is devoted to regional agreements. That
cooperation needs to be strengthened and intensified in
order to provide greater support to regional economic
communities. In the same vein, I would advocate for
greater support by the international community to
the African Peace and Security Architecture, so that
Africans can better manage the conflicts that take place
in Africa.

The Security Council adopted resolutions 1265
(1999) and 1894 (2009), through which it established the
protection of civilians as a top priority and expressed its
determination to deal with situations in which serious
Violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights are committed. The Security Council must do
more in the face ofthose challenges. In the same spirit, it
is important to take into account resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, and the involvement
of women in conflict prevention and the management
and resolution of conflicts. It is also important to
implement resolution 2282 (2016), on post-conflict
peacebuilding, which the Council adopted on 27 April.
One month earlier, on 11 March, the Council adopted
resolution 2272 (2016), which aims to prevent sexual
abuse and exploitation by peacekeeping mission staff.
In that regard, it is important to note that His Excellency
Mr. Macky Sall, President of the Republic of Senegal,
is a co-sponsor of the International Campaign to Stop
Rape and Gender Violence in Conflict.

Senegal, as the Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, has
launched a reflection on two important topics, namely,
the use of technology in peacekeeping operations and
cooperation among the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union. In that
context, we also plan to hold a thematic debate on the
protection of civilians by focusing on the links between
various political strategies.

Senegal is also thinking very seriously about the
length of service of contingents, which sometimes
puts men and women in pecaekeeping operations in
situations that are very difficult to bear. We believe that
contingents should be relieved more frequently.

In conclusion, I would like to once again express
to you, Mr. President, and to France our warm
congratulations and gratitude for the initiative of
holding today's important ministerial debate. Through
me, Senegal would like to reiterate its commitment to
continuing to contribute to the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations around the world, with
the hope that these operations have sufficient and
appropriate resources and that their mandates are
sufficiently clear and robust, as necessary, for them to
perform tasks that have become increasingly complex
and dangerous.

