Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me join my
colleagues in congratulating Mr. Zarif on his recent
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo and welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Foreign Minister of
Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Foreign
Minister of Kosovo.

We view the situation in the northern part of
Kosovo with great concern. The last month has seen a
significant deterioration in the security situation
because of provocative action by Kosovo's Serb
demonstrators. Only yesterday we witnessed a new
level of violence perpetrated by Kosovo Serb
demonstrators against soldiers of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). While implementing their mandate to ensure
freedom of movement, KFOR troops were attacked
with stones, fireworks and Molotov cocktails. Thirty
KFOR soldiers from Germany and Austria were
wounded. Among them, two German soldiers sustained
gunshot wounds from small arms fired from the
sidelines of the demonstration.

Let me make this point in no uncertain terms: any
use of violence against KFOR or the other international
presences is unacceptable. It must be condemned in the
strongest terms. Both KFOR and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) are fulfilling their
mandate to ensure and maintain a safe environment,
including freedom of movement, and to establish the
rule of law. They act in full compliance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Attacks
against KFOR are thus attacks against the integrity and
authority of the Security Council.

We call on all citizens in Kosovo, including in
northern Kosovo, to refrain from any violence. We also
call on the Serbian authorities to exert their influence
on those responsible for inciting and resorting to
violence.

We have full confidence in the work of KFOR
and EULEX. All parties concerned have to cooperate
fully with the international presences. Erecting
barricades to restrict the freedom of movement in this
part of Kosovo is unacceptable. In this context, I would
like to welcome the call by President Tadie this
morning on the people in northern Kosovo to dismantle
the roadblocks and to refrain from violence. We
explicitly welcome that call by President Tadic'. Our
objective is peace and stability in the region with a
clear European perspective.

It is also pointed out in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/675) that the outstanding
issues can be resolved only through peaceful means.
The European Union-mandated dialogue is at the core
of the process that leads to peace and stability in the
region.

Germany actively supports the process of
dialogue under the auspices of Mrs. Ashton. This open
and constructive dialogue is designed to improve the
daily lives of citizens in both countries, to promote the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
and to pave the way for both countries to a secure,
European future. We thus welcome the new round of
bilateral talks that took place on 21 and 22 November,
which produced an agreement by both parties on
mutual recognition of school and university diplomas.
We call on both sides to build on the positive
momentum and reach further tangible results in the
meeting on 30 November and to ensure swift
implementation of the agreements already reached.

We deplore the increase in incidents of crime,
including those affecting minority communities, as
described in the Secretary-General's report.
Widespread organized crime remains a serious issue in
Kosovo. Nonetheless, we welcome the efforts by the
Kosovo authorities to address this issue. We share the
observation in the report on the overall positive
developments with regard to the rule of law in Kosovo
and the positive impact on the everyday life of the
citizens of Kosovo and the region. We also appreciate
the facilitating role played by UNMIK, be it with
respect to cooperation between Kosovo authorities and
INTERPOL, or between the Serbian and the Kosovo
Ministries of Justice.

EULEX has achieved further progress in recent
months in its full investigation of the allegations of
despicable crimes committed against Serbian nationals

during, and after the end of, the armed conflict in
Kosovo. With the appointment of Mr. Clint Williamson
as lead prosecutor for the Special Investigative Task
Force, a distinguished and capable prosecutor has been
tasked to lead the investigation. This development has
also been welcomed by Foreign Minister Jeremic. In
particular, I welcome that Mr. Williamson has received
full support from Kosovo, Serbia and Albania.

We have already stated that in our view that there
is no doubt that the EU Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo has the capacities, the competence and the
jurisdiction to carry out these investigations. EULEX
has Germany's full support and confidence. EULEX
has opened a preliminary investigation, and EULEX
prosecutors have met with Senator Marty to discuss his
findings. The Government of Kosovo is ready to
cooperate fully. EULEX has established good
cooperation with the authorities in Belgrade and
Tirana. EULEX prosecutors have already met twice
with the General Prosecutor of Albania on the matter.
We therefore do not believe it is necessary to set up an
additional mechanism for investigations, in the light of
the EULEX mandate.

In conclusion, let me underline once more that
Germany will continue to closely monitor the
developments in Kosovo. We remain committed to the
European perspective of the whole region. We
appreciate the contribution by UNMIK to peace and
stability and commend the dedication and service of its
staff.

