Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov;
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate Michele Coninsx;
and the Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, Ambassador Kairat Umarov, for their
informative briefings.

While the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is experiencing significant military setbacks and losing
its strongholds in Iraq and Syria, the threat is spreading
globally. Foreign terrorist fighters are returning to
their countries of origin or relocating to other Member
States. For example, the threat level has intensified in
South-East Asia due to returnees and relocators to that
region. There is even a video in which ISIL fighters
urge viewers who cannot travel to the Middle East to go
instead to the Philippines.

Advance Passenger Information (API), Passenger
Name Record (PNR) systems and connection of access
to INTERPOL databases with airports and border
checkpoints are important to detect foreign terrorist
fighters, especially when they use broken travel. Japan
encourages Member countries that have not yet done
so to introduce API and PNR systems, as well as
connection of access to INTERPOL databases with
frontline officers as soon as possible, in accordance
with resolutions 2368 (2017) and 2322 (2016).

The use of biometric tools is becoming more
and more effective in stemming the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters. Terrorists try to disguise themselves
and use forged travel documents when they cross
borders. They even undergo plastic surgery and change
their fingerprints. To detect these terrorists, Japan
has introduced fingerprint readers able to identify
altered fingerprints. We have also introduced identify
certificate passports with facial images in the identity
certificate chips. Last month, Japan started using facial
recognition gate machines at the Tokyo International
Airport to automatically match passengers' faces with
the facial images in the identity certificate passports.
This system has been proven to be effective even when
facial features have been altered by surgery.

We are concerned by the evolving tactics of
terrorists. We must respond and proactively take
measures against them. For instance, at the Group of
Seven Ise-Shima Summit in May 2016, Japanese police
set up drone detectors, drone interceptors and net-
launchers around the conference sites to prepare for a
possible threat from drones. Some Japanese companies
have started producing or using state-of-the-art
techniques to develop security systems. For instance,
one famous Japanese manufacturer is producing high-
tech facial recognition cameras to automatically detect
blacklisted faces in a crowd in a moment. One security
company employs artificial intelligence to analyse
and extract suspicious patterns from big data through
security cameras, robots or drones.

In closing, I would like to stress the importance of
continuing to develop our counter-terrorism measures
as terrorists change and evolve their tactics. Japan is
ready to work closely with other countries to enhance
their capacities in this area. We must unite against
terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters, by
implementing Security Council resolutions faithfully.

