Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would
like to begin by thanking Ms. Ellen Margrethe Laj
for her briefing and service to the United Nations,
particularly in South Sudan. I would also like to thank
Mr. Adama Dieng for his frank and clear briefing of
the risks that we now face in South Sudan, as well as
the President, Mr. Fode Seck, for his similarly honest
assessment of the situation as seen by the South Sudan
Sanctions Committee.
As we have heard, the situation in South Sudan is
appalling. The peace agreement negotiated last year
is moribund, if not dead. There is no political process
occurring, and the key actors are not inclined in any
serious way to join one. We had the horrific outbreak
of violence in Juba in July, and the response by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
was the subject of a searing report by the Independent
Special Investigator appointed by the Secretary-
General. Since then, Sudan People's Liberation Army
in Opposition (SPLA-IO) troops and other militias
continue to skirmish with each other and maraud about
the country, committing atrocities against each other
and innocent civilians, to the point where we are now
being warned of the real risks of a full-scale civil war
and even genocide.

Responsibility for the state of affairs rests
principally with South Sudan's leaders, who have
prioritized power and self-enrichment over the needs
of their peoples. However, some responsibility also lies
with those who have offered sanctuary to such people
and their assets, with those who have supplied arms to
fuel such a crippling war in the world's poorest country
and, indeed, with those who have constrained the
Council from taking effective action in response to a
situation that has been brewing for many years. We are
now being warned that a very real and serious disaster
is looming at a time when UNMISS is ill-equipped to
deal with it. As we know, UNMISS is operating in a
non-permissive environment, beset by deep systemic
and political problems and in a state of flux, facing
changes in leadership in the field and indeed in New
York next year.

UNMISS, as is sometimes forgotten, has four key
tasks: protecting civilians, monitoring and investigating
human rights abuses, creating the conditions for
delivering humanitarian assistance, and supporting
the implementation of the peace agreement. However,
the only task that UNMISS has really been able to
undertake in the past six months and longer is the first
of those tasks and, as has been cruelly demonstrated,
even that has not been done very well when the pressure
has been on.

Responsibility for the situation lies primarily with
the South Sudanese parties, especially the Government,
which has used its position as host Government and its
military strength to prevent UNMISS from carrying
out its mandate. What do we do? We cannot abandon
South Sudan, but neither can we magically conjure up
an instant change in the behaviour of South Sudanese
leaders or indeed in the way that UNMISS is constituted
and operates. Despite the scale of the problem, we need
to be focussed and realistic in our immediate objectives,
until longer-term arrangements can be developed and
put into place.

Right now, we first have to heed the warnings of
Mr. Adama Dieng about the dangers of genocide and
make it clear to South Sudan's leaders that they will be
held to account if events deteriorate further. Secondly, we
need to implement without delay the recommendations
in the Independent Special Investigation report that are
capable of immediate implementation.

The Council should be kept updated regularly
on progress in implementation, and the Secretary-
General and his team need to ensure that such updates
are provided. We also need to set clear guidance and
expectations for the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Force Commander, and
require them to ensure that the civilian and military
components of UNMISS work in support of each
other's operations, particularly with respect to the
implementation of the mandate, the rules of engagement
and the use of force.

The Security Council and the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) also have a shared responsibility to
address the systemic issues in UNMISS. We need to be
having more frank conversations with each other so as
to clarify expectations and to highlight the decisions
by the TCCs not to follow orders. We should also be
working with Council members and the TCCs to
document benchmarks and Violations of the status of
forces agreement and to build a shared understanding
of the picture of non-compliance.

At the level of the Council, we and the international
community have to take steps to change the calculus
of the Government of South Sudan, and the SPLA-
IO in particular, so as to give UNMISS the room it
needs to conduct its basic mandate. As a Council, we
need to send a clear signal, including through targeted
sanctions and an arms embargo, that the status quo will
no longer be tolerated.

The argument that sanctions must be linked to a
political process in order to be effective, or that they
might complicate the political process, only holds,
in our view, when there is a realistic prospect for
a political process. At the moment, there is none. In
that case, aside from at least reducing the importation
of weapons, especially heavy weaponry, the purpose
of the embargo would be to signal that international
tolerance of what has been going on in South Sudan has
reached an end.

New Zealand therefore looks forward to working
with the United States and other Council members on
the draft resolution that is anticipated.

