Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to this Security Council briefing.

Yemen has long been referred to as the forgotten
war. I am very grateful that this is no longer the case.
Never has so much international attention and energy
been given to this crisis, and rightly so. Yemen remains
the largest humanitarian disaster in the world, as we
will hear from Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley. The fight
against famine is ongoing. Women, children and men
are dying from preventable diseases, and the economy
remains on the verge of collapse. Those are the reasons
that urgent action is required from all of us.

Public opinion and leaders have called urgently to
remove the prospect of famine. That is a clear example
of the international conscience. For that reason, I
personally encourage the Council to support the five
requests presented by Mark Lowcock in this Chamber
late October (see S/PV.8379). It provides a clear road
map that we must all support.

The conflict continues and rages on. We see
Al-Hudaydah as the centre of gravity of the war,
which is why we deeply welcome recent reports of the
reduction of violence on the Al-Hudaydah fronts, and
we need it to last. I am extremely grateful to all leaders
and others who have called for a cessation ofhostilities.
There must be no temptation to restart that battle. As a
mediator in that conflict, I strongly believe that nothing
should be allowed to impede the chance of dialogue
and negotiation.

The Council has consistently called on all the
parties to avoid any humanitarian catastrophe, and
Secretary-General Guterres reminded us of our fears
in that regard the other day. But the situation in
Al-Hudaydah is fragile and unstable. We need to take
urgent action. As members of the Council will recall,
we made some progress over the summer to reach
a negotiated handover of the port of Al-Hudaydah to
the United Nations. I plan to visit Al-Hudaydah next
week, along with my colleague Lise Grande, not least
to revisit a United Nations supervisory role for the port
and to draw attention to the continued need for a pause.

I am encouraged by the recent calls from all parties,
the Government of Yemen in particular, as well as
Ansar Allah, in addition to the coalition, for the United
Nations to step forward at this time on this issue. Let us
build on that, rather than retreat.

With increased international attention has come
a renewed commitment from the Yemeni parties to
working on a political solution. I welcome President
Hadi Mansour's announcement of his desire to move
swiftly to a political solution, and I know from my
contacts in Sana'a that Ansar Allah is also committed to
that. With that in mind, I intend to reconvene the parties
shortly and to do so in Sweden. In that regard, I thank
the Swedish Government through the representative of
Sweden here, Ambassador Skoog, for its offer to host
those consultations.

I believe that we are close to resolving the
preparatory issues that will allow us to make that
happen. I am grateful to the coalition for agreeing to our
proposed logistical arrangements, and to the coalition
and Oman for their agreement to facilitate the medical
evacuation of some injured Yemenis out of Sana'a.

This is a crucial moment for Yemen. I have received
firm assurances from the leadership of the Yemeni
parties - the Government of Yemen first, and then
Ansar Allah - that they are committed to attending
those consultations. I believe that they are genuine,
and I expect them to continue in that way and appear
for those consultations, and indeed, so do the Yemeni
people, who are desperate for a political solution to a
war in which they are the main victims.

I have spent the last two months seeking support
from the parties for an updated version of the framework
for negotiations, the elements of which I orally briefed
members of the Council on 18 June. The framework is
based upon the three references, including resolution
2216 (2015), as wll as the progress made particularly
in Kuwait. I reiterate again, as I have done in
previous meetings of the Council, our gratitude to the
Government of Kuwait for hosting those talks in 2016.

After carefully listening to the parties over the last
few months, I am confident that the framework is in
line with both the requirements of the Council and the
new realities of the conflict in Yemen. The framework,
however, is my vision. But its ideas are not mine alone.
Every conversation and every negotiation that has
taken place before has been the basis for that document.
I have, as those present would imagine, shared it with
the parties for their views and ultimately, I hope,
for their acceptance, just as a basis for negotiation
and not to negotiate the text itself, which will be the
matter for which we will bring the parties together in
the coming weeks and months. When the parties have
had the opportunity to brief me on their views on the
framework, I would like to put it in front of the Council
and seek its endorsement, so that we can use it as a basis
for upcoming consultations on substance and agree on
a road map towards a transitional agreement, ideally in
the next round of consultations.

The framework establishes the principles and
parameters for United Nations-led, inclusive Yemeni
negotiations to end the war, resolve the conflict
and start a political transition process. It includes a
set of interim security and political arrangements,
including mechanisms, sequencing and guarantees for
implementation. It is a very broad-brush document, as
it is intended only as a basis for detailed negotiation.
However, I believe that the arrangements outlined
and referred to will allow for an end to the fighting
inside Yemen, the return of Yemen's friendly relations
with neighbouring States and the restoring of
State institutions.

I believe that the framework reflects the resolutions
of the Council in fact and in words and in no way
derogates from them. My task is to shape a way
towards a principled compromise that allows the people
of Yemen to live again in peace. It sets out a political
solution that is available and, as I have said, is there
to be adopted if we are to have the fortune to move
forward with it.

A mediator's principal task is to bring the parties
together to resolve their differences through dialogue
and compromise rather than combat and conflict. That
is what I hope we will see soon as we move forward.
We are doing all that we can to achieve those goals but,
as I said in the Chamber in April, the events of war
can always take peace off the table (see S/PV.8235). We
must not let that happen now.

We are working very hard to finalize the logistical
arrangements. I will go to Sana'a next week for that
purpose. I will meet the leader of Ansar Allah,
Abdulmalik al-Houthi, with whom I have had detailed
discussions in previous months about the need for
engagement, consultations and, ultimately, negotiations.
It will be useful to me to again hear his leadership on
such matters. I will also be happy to travel with the
delegation to the consultations, if needed.

For a political settlement to be sustainable, it must
be inclusive. It is a requirement of the resolutions
concerning this conflict. It must enjoy the support of
the Yemeni people. I am fortunate to have the support
of the Yemeni women's technical advisory group,
which not only came with us to Geneva but also is
providing specific ideas on tactics and strategies as
we move forward towards consultations. We are also
looking at using technology to strengthen inclusivity
and provide an interactive platform for the voices that
cannot travel but remain in Yemen to be heard as we
gather the parties around the table. In the twenty-first
century, in our view, physical presence is not the only
way to strengthen inclusion.

The southern question is always on our minds. We
are currently enjoying a period of calm but the threat of
violence, destabilization and instability is ever present.
I have spent a great deal of time listening to southern
groups and exploring ways to address their concerns.
Ultimately, the just resolution of the southern issue
should be achieved, in my view, during the transitional
period. It should meet the legitimate aspirations of the
people of Yemen and ensure that they enjoy the benefits
of good governance. That almost goes without saying,
but I think that it is important to record that objective
here. Southern actors will clearly have a crucial role
in safeguarding the outcomes of the peace process on
which we are now working, and it is vital to secure
their buy-in. However, it is my responsibility to alert
the Security Council that there is unfinished business
in the south of Yemen.

I would like to take the opportunity to announce
to the members of the Council that we are about to
conclude - and I had hoped to announce such a
conclusion - an agreement between the parties on
the exchange of prisoners and detainees. I think that
it would and may still be the first signed agreement
between the parties to the conflict. We have made
great progress. President Hadi Mansour was the first
to urge us to focus on that. I also had the support of
Abdulmalik al-Houthi when I first met him. I welcome
the commitment of all parties that have engaged in
good faith - the coalition, the Government of Yemen
and Ansar Allah. It is an important humanitarian
gesture and a timely message of hope to the Yemeni
people. As I said, I had hoped that we would have been
able to announce the formalization of that agreement
today. However, I am sure that it will happen in the
coming days.

I strongly believe that the parties need to get
together without conditions, also under our auspices, to
jointly address the dire economic situation in Yemen,
including the rapid deterioration of the Yemeni rial - a
key contributing aspect to famine. It is useful to note
and important to give credit to the Government of
Yemen for the fact that the depreciation of the rial,
which was so alarming in past weeks, seems to have
flattened out. I think that it is important to note that
extremely significant measure of the stress in Yemen.
That should not be a matter subject to political
consideration when the victims are the Yemeni people.
Indeed, that is not a confidence-building measure. It is
a moral responsibility and the obligation of the parties
to the Yemeni people. I hope, and have been planning
for some time, soon to convene a meeting of the Central
Bank of Yemen, to be facilitated by the International
Monetary Fund, in order to agree on an action plan that
would allow the Central Bank of Yemen to discharge
its responsibilities across the country and for all people
of Yemen.

Finally, we must seize such positive international
momentum on Yemen. The attention to Yemen is a great
asset, as is the unity of the Council. I strongly believe
that this is an opportunity at a crucial moment to pursue
a comprehensive and inclusive political settlement to
the conflict. Yemen can indeed no longer be referred to
as a forgotten war. I would ask the Council to consider
the fact that all our efforts should be directed towards
at least two issues. First is the humanitarian priority, to
which, I am sure, Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley will
refer shortly. That is the most important priority for the
people of Yemen. And, secondly, let us hope that there
will be no acts or omissions that prevent the convening
of the parties for consultations in Sweden in the coming
weeks. It is an opportunity that has been long awaited
by the people of Yemen and that the Council has long
asked of the parties. I think that we are almost there. I
do not know if we will succeed and what the odds are.
We need to focus on ensuring that nothing disrupts the
path to that meeting.

