Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Despite the significant lessening of tension
recently achieved in the West African subregion, the
situation there is still far from ideal and continues to be
a cause of concern for the Russian Federation.

This is primarily due to the situation of refugees
and displaced persons. We consider it a matter of
urgency and necessity to ensure safe access for
humanitarian personnel to this section of the civilian
population and to continue work on establishing
conditions for their return to safe areas inside their own
countries. We support the work carried out in this
connection by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

At the same time, we believe that a long-term
solution to the humanitarian problems in West Africa
can be achieved only if peace is established there. We
support efforts by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to settle differences in the
subregion by means of establishing good neighbourly
relations, refraining from the use of force and working
out agreed political steps to put an end to the activities
of armed rebel groups. We advocate that these efforts
be supported by the authority and capability of the
United Nations system. We welcome the establishment
of the United Nations Office for West Africa, which
will be playing an important role in coordinating the
international community's efforts to resolve the
problems of the subregion.

A key area in the efforts to stabilize the situation
in West Africa remains the long-term settlement of the
conflict in Sierra Leone. Overall, we are pleased with
how the peace process is proceeding. We believe that
the basis for further progress in this area remains the
Abuja Ceasefire Agreement between the Government
of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF). Provided both sides comply with it, the
Agreement can help to shift the settlement process
back into the Lome' Agreement track, which, we feel,
still has considerable potential.

We are pleased that preparations for the elections
in Sierra Leone are under way. We are convinced that
in order to build a solid foundation for a life of peace
in Sierra Leone, the elections must be democratic in
nature and must involve all political forces in the
country, including the RUF, providing its members
disarm and transform the organization into a political

party.

Together with all interested States, through the
coordinating role of the United Nations, we are ready
to continue work to successfully complete the United
Nations operation in that country, restoring peace and
calm to the land.

We welcome the positive moves towards
normalizing the situation on Guinea's borders with
Liberia and Sierra Leone. We note that ECOWAS
members have been able to shift the resolution of a
difficult conflict situation into the area of diplomatic
efforts and peace negotiations. The leaderships of
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone have demonstrated
political wisdom and a willingness to solve existing
disagreements through dialogue, refraining from the
use of military force.

We believe that developments in this hot spot
may become a useful example of how States in the
continent can resolve disputes by political means,
making use of the peacemaking potential and authority
of the African subregional organizations.

