Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank Mr. Jan Kubis for introducing the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2012/907), as well as for his tireless efforts as Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) aimed at restoring stability in that country.
I also welcome the presence among us of Ambassador
Tanin and I thank him for his statement.
In his report last September (S/2012/703),
the Secretary-General stated that the situation in
Afghanistan was a cause for cautious optimism. Three
months later, we see that while we have reason for hope
in certain areas, such as in the politial situation, others,
on the other hand, require additional commitment
and sacrifice, in particular when it comes to security,
human rights and combating narcotics.

On the political front, we see that, with the support
of the international community, Afghanistan has made
outstanding progress in fulfilling the commitments
made at the Tokyo Conference last July, in particular
by identifying steps to place the 2015-2024 on a solid
foundation.

The holding of credible presidential and
provincial elections, scheduled for 2014, continues
to be a significant challenge to overcome. Afghan
stakeholders, including civil society, have not hesitated
in firmly commiting themselves to preparing for those
elections. In order to provide a more robust legal
foundation for the electoral process, appointment to
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board will
henceforth take place on the basis of a law. We express
the hope that the Commission that is in place, in which
both houses of parliament are represented, will work
tirelessly to find a compromise on the appointment of
the remaining members.

The fact that political parties have also stepped up
their activities is an encouraging sign.

Given that the media has an important role to
play in that process, we appreciate President Hamid
Karzai's approach of meeting with members of the
media covering the elections. That approach also helps
to entrench the freedom of expression, which continues
to be a crucial aspect of democracy and of ensuring free
and fair elections.

My country acknowledges the United Nations,
and especially the United Nations Development
Programme, for the valuable support extended to the
Afghan authorities through the ELECT II assistance
programme (Enhancing Legal and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow, second phase).

In addition to the measures undertaken to hold
transparent and credible elections, it is encouraging to
note that the peace process is under way. Proof of this
was the holding of a week of peace and national unity,
during which numerous events took place throughout
the country. The release on that occasion ofa number of
Taliban members sends a strong signal to them and to
armed opposition groups, which, we hope, will respond
to the Government's outreach to them to resolutely join
the peace process.

In that regard, we welcome the holding in Chantilly,
France, starting today, as had been announced, of
inclusive talks with the participation for the first time
of representatives of the Taliban with close ties to
Mullah Omar. Those talks will represent a necessary
milestone towards the holding of genuine inter-Afghan
negotiations on the security future of Afghanistan
following 2014.

The visit by Mr. Rabbani late last month and
his meetings with the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) made
it possible to discuss prospects for the peace process.
That progress has been made in a more favourable
regional climate, given that the confidence-building
measures undertaken under the Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan are continuing to be implemented.

In the context of the process of strengthening
regional integration, several meetings have been
held, including the Mazar-e-Sharif conference on
strengthening economic ties between Afghanistan and
Central Asia, on 14 and 15 November.

While there have been positive developments in the
political field, unfortunately the same cannot be said of
the security situation, which remains unfavourable, even
as we are seeing the gradual transfer of responsibilities
from the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) to the Afghan authorities.

We take note of the conclusions of the Brussels
meeting held on 9 and 10 October, at the end of which
ISAF was directed to begin planning a post-2014
training mission. We also welcome the negotiations
undertaken bilaterally on 15 November by the United
States and Afghanistan, in line with their strategic
partnership agreement. For now, even though we are
witnessing an overall decline in the number of security
incidents, the people, particularly in the south and east
of the country, continue to pay a heavy price, as they
are the victims of the activities of illegal armed groups,
tribal clashes and disputes over natural resources. In
addition, United Nations personnel and implementing
partners are the victims of violence, as evidenced by
the attacks carried out against their convoys in several
provinces.

Human rights have not fared any better in that
atmosphere, which is marked by an increase of 28 per
cent in the number of civilian victims as compared
with the last three months of 2011. We are particularly
disturbed to note that women continue to be subjected
to violence and harmful traditional practices. The same
holds true for children, as attacks have been carried
out against educational and health-care facilities. It is
important that such heinous acts not reoccur.

We welcome the initiatives of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women and of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) aimed at dealing with the
practice of the early marriage of young girls.

The fight against drugs remains a major challenge.
Joint research undertaken by the Ministry of Counter-
Narcotics and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime indicatedthat opium cultivation rose by 18 percent
in 2012. We look forward to seeing the implementation
of measures in the context of the regional ministerial
conference held on 12 and 13 November aimed at
strengthening cooperation on counter-narcotics efforts,
specifically the establishment of a hotline between the

relevant national agencies and the creation of a regional
contact group.

There is no doubt that the situation in Afghanistan
continues to require assistance from the international
community, particularly in the wake of the scheduled
withdrawal of ISAF at the end of 2014. The hopes
sparked by the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan, held
on 8 July, cannot be dashed. The considerable progress
made must be consolidated.

Let me in conclusion reiterate Togo's deep gratitude
to the United Nations and to all of its specialized
bodies and agencies, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, UNAMA and ISAF, for all
of the sacrifices they have made to ensure a prosperous
future for Afghanistan.

