Mr. Cooreman (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the European Union.

Like others, I would like to thank Representative
Yamamoto for his briefing, but also for his tireless
efforts towards lasting peace in Afghanistan. 1 also
thank Commissioner Ghizaal Haress, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime Yuri Fedotov, and His Excellency Ambassador
Kairat Umarov, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), for their briefings.
I would like to highlight three points: the elections,
the peace process, and the international community's
support for Afghanistan.

First, Belgium congratulates the Afghan authorities
and citizens on the parliamentary elections held on
20 October, which marked another important step in
the consolidation of democracy in the country. It is now
important to learn from these elections. The Afghan
Government and institutions owe it to the courageous
citizens to have orderly, inclusive and credible
presidential elections in 2019. Electoral commissions
must maintain their independence and carry out their
mandates on the basis of experience they have acquired
thus far.

In addition to addressing the serious security
threat, logistical and technical problems must also
be addressed and investment made in transparency
and communication. The heinous attacks on schools
and medical facilities in the pre-election period
further remind us of the importance of full respect for
international humanitarian law. In this regard, Belgium
remains deeply concerned about the high number of
civilian casualties and calls on all parties to protect the
civilian population, in particular women and children.

My second point is on the peace process. The
Kabul process must form the basis for a comprehensive
and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-controlled peace
process. Belgium calls on the Taliban leaders to respond
to President Ghani's unprecedented peace offer and to
engage in direct peace talks. The Afghan Government
can already establish an inclusive and high-level
negotiating team. The international community,

including regional actors, must support this process by
acting in unison.

As the Council knows, Belgium attaches great
importance to the role of women in peacebuilding. I
am proud to announce a new Belgian contribution of
€2 million to UN Women in Afghanistan to support
the implementation of the national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In
this regard, we welcome the technical revision of the
Law on the Elimination of Violence against Women,
which is currently under way. Belgium notes with
concern shortcomings in the application of this law,
such as the use - not provided for by the law - of
mediation. We also encourage the Afghan Government
to redouble its efforts to increase women's participation
in public institutions.
Thirdly, Belgium joins in international support for
peace and progress in Afghanistan. The success of the
Geneva conference and the adoption of the resolution
on Afghanistan at the General Assembly (resolution 73/88) demonstrate the willingness of the international
community to unite to support progress, sustainable
peace and development.

Belgium is an unconditional ally of Afghanistan
through our membership in the European Union and
NATO. We will substantially increase our contribution
to the NATO mission and also contribute to the training
of the Afghan National Army. We also support the
humanitarian response to the drought through our
contributions to the Central Emergency Response
Fund, which Belgium will increase considerably.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to the victims of
violence in Afghanistan and the resilience ofthe Afghan
people and security forces. The objective of peace is
achievable in Afghanistan, and Belgium supports a
peaceful settlement led and controlled by Afghans and
will continue to support it in the future as well.

