Mr. Okuda (Japan): Allow me to begin my
statement, Mr. President, by congratulating you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August. I also express my appreciation to
Ambassador Rugunda and his staff from the Ugandan
mission for the excellent manner in which they
conducted the work of the Security Council for the
month of July.

I would like to thank Mr. Le Roy, Ms. Malcorra
and General Martin Luther Agwai for their very
extensive briefings on peacekeeping operations.

As they mentioned, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been among the most important tools
for the Security Council in maintaining international
peace and security. In spite of the harsh operational
environments in which they are deployed, United
Nations peacekeeping missions are making a difference
by improving the lives of people in countries emerging
from conflict.

Their success notwithstanding, the entire system
of peacekeeping operations is faced with various
challenges, which must be addressed through a holistic
approach. We welcome the ongoing efforts in this
regard in various forums within the United Nations,
including the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Secretariat, as well as those under way outside
the United Nations system. We consider it imperative
to formulate practical and concrete steps to address
issues pertaining to peacekeeping as a whole. We need
to have an open mind in this discussion in order to
achieve an outcome leading to more effective
peacekeeping operations in the future.

For this timely debate today, we would like to
touch upon three areas in which enhancement is
required: policy review of peacekeeping operations;
cooperation with troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries (PCCs); and troop
capacity and assets.

Regarding policy review by the Council, we
would like to raise two points. First, it is important for
the Council to have a comprehensive understanding of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and to review
them in a holistic manner. To that end, we consider it
useful to establish the practice whereby the Council
would periodically review, in an interactive manner, its
policy on peacekeeping operations, based on briefings
by the Under-Secretaries-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support.

Secondly, as my delegation pointed out in the
recent open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.6165), the Council needs to explore more
precisely the extent to which the mandates of
peacekeeping missions could be expanded to include
such peacebuilding activities as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the establishment of
democratic governance and the rule of law, and
capacity-building. If some of those peacebuilding
activities are to be carried out by other entities, we
need to consider how peacekeeping missions can
coordinate effectively with those activities.

The further enhancement of the interaction
between the Security Council and troop- and police-
contributing countries is required to achieve more
effective mission operations in the field. The Council's
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations was
established to serve as a forum to strengthen
cooperation with troop- and police-contributing
countries and other stakeholders. As Chair of the
Working Group, we have invited troop- and police-
contributing countries and other stakeholders to three
meetings this year to address gaps between mandates
and their implementation.

In the meetings, the Working Group was briefed
by the Secretariat and sought first-hand feedback from
the TCCs and PCCs on conditions on the ground. We
take this opportunity to thank those countries that have
shared their valuable experience and ideas with the
Working Group. We reported the outcome of the
meetings in the interim report of the Working Group
that was submitted to the President of the Security
Council at the end of last month. We plan to continue
the discussion in the Working Group in order to begin
efforts for the enhancement of cooperation with troop-
and police-contributing countries and other stakeholders.

In that regard, I would like to take this
opportunity to touch upon the following two points.
First, as suggested in the New Horizon non-paper, we
would consider it useful to create a so-called coalition
group to support each peacekeeping mission. Our
confidence in the utility of that approach is based on
Japan's experience as a member of the core group on
Timor-Leste. Garnering broad support among the
countries concerned, including regional partners and
donors, contributes greatly both to the actual operation
of a mission and to supporting the political process.
Such practices could be applied to other peacekeeping
missions.
Secondly, in May, the Council held a meeting
with the troop- and police-contributing countries of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste on
beginning the transfer of police authority. That is a
good example of an occasion for the Council to hold
meetings with troop- and police-contributing countries
not only at the time of mandate renewal, but also when
there are new developments in the field. Such
interaction is particularly important for the early
engagement of the TCCs and PCCs. We believe that
this precedent should also be applied to the operation
of other missions.

Finally, the enhancement of troop capacity and
assets and logistical support is indispensable in order
for a complex mandate to be implemented successfully.
Although we have seen positive progress in that area,
such as the enhancement of information gathering for
the protection of civilians in the United Nations
Observer Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the activities of peacekeeping training
centres in Africa, many participants in the Working
Group have pointed out the need to address the
inadequacy of troop mobility, including the need for
aerial assets, as well as the enhancement of
communications. Those issues are also touched upon in
the New Horizon non-paper. We would like to follow
up those issues from various perspectives, including
through the work of the Working Group, in conjunction
with the efforts of the Secretariat.

We hope that those political and operational
issues will continue to be addressed in the Council
towards the formulation of an enhanced strategy on
peacekeeping operations. As Chair of the Working
Group, Japan will continue its efforts to reinforce the
work of the Council through in-depth consideration of
those operational issues. We intend to resume the work
of the Working Group this autumn, with a focus on the
enhancement of cooperation with troop- and police-
contributing countries, while also taking up other
priority issues.

Japan highly appreciates the efforts of the United
Kingdom in the preparation of the draft presidential
statement of the Security Council. We will actively
engage in the follow-up of that presidential statement.

