Mr. Faour (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the French presidency for convening this
important meeting, designed to find an approach and, it
is to be hoped, a solution to this sensitive and painful
issue.

The Arab region is facing exceptional and
historic challenges in the form of the outbreak of the
Arab revolutions and calls for basic rights such as
democracy, freedom and human rights. While some
Arab peoples have secured victories and rid themselves
of dictatorships, others are still suffering from killings,
oppression and displacement as they struggle to achieve
basic rights. With the outbreak of the events in Syria,
that country's people have made enormous sacrifices
that have led to tens of thousands martyred, wounded,
missing or detained.

At Lebanon's national level, and in view of the
organic ties and historical and geographic factors that
link it to Syria, the Lebanese Government, on the
instructions of its President, General Michel Sleiman,
and Prime Minister, Mr. Najib Mikati, has adopted a
position that has been described as one of distancing,
seeking to neutralize Lebanon from the negative
repercussions of the conflict in Syria and to prevent the
Syrian crisis from being imported into Lebanon. Ifthat
policy has achieved a formula that will help it avoid
those negative repercussions and bridge the divisions in
Lebanese society concerning the rapid and intensifying
developments in Syria, while maintaining freedom of
expression and protecting diversity in Lebanon, the
Lebanese Government has not been idle in the face ofthe
influx of displaced Syrians into Lebanon.We are fully
committed to separating political considerations from
the humanitarian needs. That continues to be a basic
principle of official Lebanese policy. That clear, formal
commitment on the part of the Lebanese Government is
not just based on international legitimacy, conventions,
international law and human rights; it is also grounded
in the historical relations between the peoples of
Lebanon and Syria.

Those relations have been manifested in various
forms of brotherly solidarity at various times, free from
political considerations and interests. The most recent
example was when the Syrian people accommodated
thousands of Lebanese displaced during Israel's
aggression in July 2006. That aggression resulted in the
killing of more than 1,000 Lebanese and the wounding
and displacement of thousands of others, as well as
the total destruction of several villages and towns.
Incidentally, that was not the first instance of Israeli
aggression against Lebanon and its sovereignty. Israel
has habitually violated our sovereignty, all too often
refusing to abide by international laws and norms or to
implement any resolution of the Security Council.

To return to the situation in Lebanon, with some
exceptions here and there, my country has been
successful in reducing the danger of the Syrian crisis
spilling over into Lebanese territory. The outbreak of
the crisis has served to inject yet another controversial
issue into Lebanese society. However, the main political
indicators show that there is consensus in Lebanon on
the need to avoid, as much as possible, the spillover into
Lebanon of the complicated and serious crisis in Syria.
Were that to happen, it would push Lebanon once again
towards an unknown abyss of war and tension.

Needless to say, like other neighbouring States,
Lebanon has received tens of thousands of refugees
fleeing the violence and bombardment in various
regions in Syria. Lebanon's official position on dealing
with displaced persons has essentially entailed a
humanitarian approach independent of the political
affiliations of the various sectors of Lebanese society.
That is the principle that the Lebanese Government is
seeking to consolidate and pursue in its actions.

The Lebanese Government has reaffirmed that
it is keen to protect all displaced Syrians. Given the
current situation, handing any of them over to Syrian
authorities would place their lives in danger. That is
fully in line with the principles of international law. I
should therefore like, on behalf of the Government of
Lebanon, to avail myself of this opportunity to reiterate
that Lebanon is fully committed to accommodate,
assist and protect Syrian refugees irrespective of their
political inclinations or affiliations.

Along with the displacement of thousands of Syrian
citizens, Lebanon has also faced the influx ofthousands
of Palestinians - as if that oppressed people had not
suffered enough in the course of 60 years of being
deprived of their rights under Israeli occupation and in
the face of the inaction and inability of the international
community. They are facing displacement once again:
from their camps in Syria to Lebanon. In honouring our
international commitments, the Lebanese Government
affirms that it will work to coordinate and cooperate
with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East to provide support,
assistance and relief to our Palestinian brothers and
sisters seeking refuge.

It is also worth mentioning that the Syrian army's
dropping of bombs inside Lebanese territory is resulting
in grave danger to innocent Lebanese citizens along the
borders.

Lebanon continues to face an economic and
financial crisis that is being exacerbated by the absence
of political stability, including insecurity at certain
stages. That makes it important to request assistance
from the international Organization, including material
and moral support, so as to ensure the success of the
Lebanese Government's efforts to accommodate and
assist tens of thousands of refugees and displaced
persons. That requires an emergency plan to help weak
and marginalized groups.

Lebanon has always been on the side of international
legitimacy. We are a founding Member of the United
Nations. We served on the drafting committee of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Lebanon
has long been independent and democratic. Lebanon
has always been committed to human rights and
fundamental freedoms. That makes it incumbent upon
us to be more concerned about refugees and their needs.
But that cannot be possible unless we receive sufficient
support from the international community.

Through its various departments and in cooperation
with the Office ofthe UnitedNations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the World Food Programme and various
agencies and non-governmental organizations, the
Lebanese Government has for several months provided
assistance, housing, primary medical care and treatment
for the sick and wounded. We are also accommodating
Syrian students in Lebanese schools. However, the
influx ofa large number of additional displaced persons
in the past two months, in particular from Damascus
and other areas, has placed new burdens and challenges
on us. The Government has drawn up plans to face
those challenges in an organized and effective manner.

I hope that this meeting will serve as an opportunity
to come up with a comprehensive vision for providing
for the humanitarian needs of the brotherly Syrian
people, including through Lebanon's assistance, so as
to meet our responsibilities to those displaced in Syria
at this difficult time.

The great Arabic prison has begun to collapse,
with all the grave challenges and dangers that entails.
However, as a great Lebanese martyr put it, freedom
and democracy are undertakings worth suffering for.

