Mr. Spiric' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): May I first extend my warm greetings to
all present and express my pleasure at having been
given the opportunity, for the sixth time, to report to
the Security Council on the current situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. This is also an opportunity for me to
share my views on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the challenges and dilemmas we are
facing.
5

Since the previous Security Council meeting of
this kind, in May (see S/PV.6130), the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers has held 20 sessions,
18 of which were regular and two of which were
thematic. Thirty-eight bills and a number of important
strategies and action plans were discussed and adopted
at those sessions. The absolute priority - my own and
of my Office - was to meet the conditions for the
liberalization of the visa regime for citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is with great pleasure that I can
report that last week we fulfilled all requirements set
out in the European Commission's visa regime
liberalization road map falling within the competence
of the Council of Ministers.

That was not an easy task, because we needed to
meet 174 requirements. Yet this achievement illustrates
that it is possible for domestic stakeholders to reach
agreement. Thus, in a relatively short period of time we
have succeeded in formulating an international legal
assistance bill, a border control bill, an anti-money-
laundering bill, a criminal code amendment bill and an
anti-corruption and coordination agency amendment
bill. We also drafted and adopted a number of
strategies such as a strategy to combat organized crime,
a strategy to combat corruption and an action plan for
the implementation of the strategy, a strategy to
reintegrate returnees, and a strategy to prevent money
laundering and the financing of terrorist activities
along with its corresponding action plan for the period
2009 to 2013. We also agreed upon a model for
information exchange among police authorities, as well
as other decisions.

In addition, we adopted a number of system-wide
measures, thus enabling all institutions at all levels to
prepare for the issuance of the new biometric passport.
To date, more than 10,000 biometric passports have
been issued, while several thousand applications are
currently being processed. Having fulfilled the road
map requirements, we made significant progress
which, unfortunately, we failed to sufficiently promote
within and outside Bosnia and Herzegovina. Thus, yet
again, a success achieved by Bosnia and Herzegovina
was overshadowed by other less successful processes
or attempts at reform, which, by coincidence or not,
came at the same time.

It is exactly for that reason that I believe that
linking the issue of visa regime liberalization to any
other process within Bosnia and Herzegovina is utterly
counterproductive. Countless times we have been

assured by the European Commission that the road map
requirements are of a technical, not a political nature.
Hence, I want to believe that that assurance will be
reflected in practice and that, following a positive
report, we will be treated in the same manner as
neighbouring countries, in whose progress I take sincere
delight. Reports by international non-governmental
organizations indicate that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
met more conditions at this point than the neighbouring
countries had met at the time when they were awarded a
positive recommendation by the European Commission.
Hence, I would like to express my firm conviction that
our progress will soon be formally endorsed by the
European Commission in the form of a positive
recommendation.

In addition, during the past period we have
adopted and submitted to parliamentary procedure 38
bills, of which I would single out the anti-mine bill, the
free zones bill, the general product safety bill, the
tobacco product bill, the census bill - which, despite
the consensus reached at the level of the working group
charged with developing the bill and at the level of the
Council of Ministers, was not supported by the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly - and the
borrowing, debt and guarantee amendment bill, as well
as the draft budget for 2010, which was submitted to
the Presidency of Bosnia of Herzegovina for
consideration. We have also adopted a number of
strategies and action plans, such as the Bosnia and
Herzegovina communication strategy for the NATO
integration process, the small and medium-sized
enterprises development strategy, the strategy and
action plan for the control of small arms and light
weapons and others.

In the period from May to November, the Fiscal
Council held four sessions. Among the outcomes of
those sessions was the agreed draft budget for 2010,
which was forwarded to the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for further procedure in a timely manner.
Over the recent period, the Council of Ministers and
entity governments have been committed to fulfilling
the conditions set out in the letter of intent signed with
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) with a view to
preserving the macroeconomic stability of the country.
An IMF mission visited Sarajevo last week and gave a
positive statement on the extent to which the
conditions had been fulfilled thus far.
As regards the conditions for the transformation
of the Office of the High Representative to an Office of
the European Union Special Representative, I would
like to share my conviction that the 5+2 conditions will
not turn into 5+2+1, which, to put it mildly, would
further complicate things.

Since I had been informed by international
officials that the State property inventory conducted by
the Office of the High Representative would soon be
finalized, and with a view to facilitating the resolution
of that issue during the last session of the Council of
Ministers, I submitted that the decision should be
amended in such a way that the State Property
Commission would be tasked with producing, within a
period of 30 days, a preliminary list of the property
that Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions require in
order to exercise their constitutional competences.
Unfortunately, the ministers representing the Bosniak
people were not willing to vote in favour of such a
decision, the implementation of which would finally
meet the conditions for the transformation of the Office
of the High Representative.

The purpose of my statement today is to give the
Council a true picture of what has been achieved in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My intention is not to present
any fabricated information or to create a perception
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country free of
problems and challenges. After all, I am not certain
there is a country that has successfully trod the Euro-
Atlantic path without encountering any difficulties or
challenges. At the same time, I should like to reassure
those who persistently insist on finding that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has seen no progress at all and that all
prospects are nothing but bleak that that is not the case,
by sharing specific and verifiable information. Too
much pessimism is never an ally in attaining the
ultimate goal.

With no intention of entering into any debate with
the High Representative with regard to his report (see S/2009/588*) that has been submitted to the Council, I
find that the document does not leave much room for
optimism. I fear that the international representatives
in Bosnia and Herzegovina have fallen into the same
pitfall that has trapped some leaders for years now -
that of seeking the culprit, not the solution. And I shall
again repeat what I have said on many occasions. In
Bosnia and Herzegovina no party is either exclusively
guilty or absolutely innocent, and I urge the Council to
take that fact into account when considering any report
on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

To an adept analyst, the report tells more about
the Office of the High Representative and the situation
and relations within it than about the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. If the High Representative's
report depicts the true state of affairs in the country,
then I need to ask a question, quite openly: how is it
possible, then, that Bosnia and Herzegovina was
elected to a non-permanent seat in the Security
Council? I always believed that such an honour was
given to those countries in which real and visible
progress had been made. Another question may be
posed as well: how is it possible that almost all
European Union member States supported Bosnia and
Herzegovina's candidacy as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council when there is no readiness to
support even Bosnia and Herzegovina's application for
European Union membership? There are too many
illogicalities and too much experimenting with Bosnia
and Herzegovina - just as there are so many dilemmas
and challenges to which all of us need to respond in an
appropriate manner.

If things are as dire as described in the High
Representative's report, then one may justifiably
wonder what all of us together have been doing in the
recent past. On more than one occasion, I have
underlined that the international community is not a
mere observer, but an active participant in all processes
in Bosnian and Herzegovina.

I have said that my intention is not to debate the
report presented by the High Representative. However,
I feel a moral and professional obligation to note
certain details in the report that do not reflect the true
state of affairs.

For example, in paragraph 18 of the report, the
High Representative claims that over much of the
summer the Council of Ministers was unable to meet or
make decisions. Thus I feel an obligation, in my
capacity as the Chairman of the Council of Ministers,
to inform the Council that in the period from 1 June to
30 September 2009 the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Council of Ministers held 10 sessions during which
321 agenda items were discussed and 20 bills were
adopted. It is true that the Council of Ministers did not
sit in August partly because of the regular summer
break and partly because of a detail omitted from the
High Representative's report, which is the failure of
one of the ministers representing the Bosniak people to
attend one of the scheduled sessions.

In addition, I would like to use this opportunity to
inform the Council that I have recently forwarded the
decision to appoint the new Security Minister for
further procedures. I did so although I still hold that
appointing the key directors of State agencies is as
important as appointing the Security Ministers. I opted
to take such a step in the hope that the party, which
remained unnamed in the High Representative's report
and which has been impeding the appointment of the
directors of State agencies, will demonstrate a sound
sense of responsibility and unfreeze the process. What
cannot be overlooked, though, is the fact that the key
State agencies, which have billions of Euros at their
disposal, are managed by directors whose terms in
office expired long ago. I am of the view that we
should not allow any further degradation of vacancy
procedures or hindrance of the process.

On a number of occasions, when addressing the
Security Council, I have pointed out that the Republic
of Srpska can be a vehicle for the development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, not a threat to it. I fear that
the High Representative's report delineates the
contours of the latter. In the report, I could not find one
single positive conclusion concerning the Republic of
Srpska and its institutions, although it is known and
recognized in general that the Republic of Srpska is the
more functional and efficient part of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The opinionated tone with which the
report refers to the Republic of Srpska as an
obstruction and the federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as being in difficulties cannot but disturb
any objective observer.

I fear that the associates of the High
Representative who contributed to this report -
primarily the local staff - have fallen into the trap of
being superficial and unprofessional. The allegations
and statements about the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Srpska, Mr. Milorad Dodik, indicate that
he should wait for others in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
grow up politically and that he should wait for the
Office of the High Representative and the High
Representative himself to accomplish their tasks. That
situation has already produced unprecedented political
parasitism and threatens to undermine the credibility
not only of domestic institutions but of the
international community as well.
Constitutional reform has been a burning issue in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would first like to point out
that the issue of constitutional reform should in no way

be tied to the issue of the transformation of the Office
of the High Representative into the European Union
Special Representative. Specifically, constitutional
reform is not an established precondition for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative, while
the closure of the Office is a precondition for a new
phase in relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the European Union. That is the current message
from Brussels, with which I fully concur.

I do not deny the necessity of constitutional
reform, but I believe that the manner in which this
issue is approached must be designed more carefully. I
believe that it is only through a step-by-step approach
that the desired goal can be attained. It has been
pointed out on a number of occasions that when it
comes to constitutional reform, only solutions based on
evolution and not on revolution are possible in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. To that I would add, once again, that
whenever all-or-nothing principles have been applied,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has ended up with nothing.

I would like to thank the representatives of the
European Union and the Unites States of America for
the efforts they have invested and the interest they have
expressed in constitutional reform through the Butmir
process. However, I should also like to point out that
constitutional reform must be the fruit of internal
dialogue and compromise based on the Dayton Accords
and in no way a solution imposed from elsewhere. It is
quite clear that imposed solutions are, in the long run,
unreliable, and that they create potential instability.

I believe that the statute of the city of Mostar may
best illustrate that assertion. When, some time ago, a
former High Representatives imposed the statute of the
city of Mostar, it was believed that the problem was
resolved. And where do we stand now? More than one
year after the local elections, the city of Mostar has no
mayor and it is quite uncertain when it will have one,
given the city's statute.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is at a crossroads. In
order to make further positive steps and achieve
progress, what is needed is much less superficiality and
much more earnestness on the part of both domestic
stakeholders and the international community. Also, we
all need a new optimism, which can be attained only
through an internal dialogue, that will ensure further
progress on the Euro-Atlantic agenda. I urge the
Council to encourage the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to seek the best possible solutions through
dialogue, and I urge the High Representative to act as a
strong incentive to that dialogue.

I thank the Council for its kind attention, and I
am quite willing and ready to answer any questions
members may have.
