Ms. Strofova (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking Secretary-
General Kofi Annan for his opening statement and for
presenting his comprehensive report on the Middle
East, containing valuable observations and thoughts.
Thank you also, Mr. President, for organizing and
chairing today's thematic debate to discuss the recent
developments in the Middle East.

During the previous meeting on a ministerial
level in September, we witnessed a very useful and
constructive exchange of ideas on recent developments
in the Middle East. Slovakia feels strongly encouraged
by the prevailing opinion in the United Nations
Security Council on the need to revive the peace
process in the region and on the necessity to move
forward in promoting a comprehensive and lasting
settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict in general, and
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in particular.

Peace that is capable of promoting and delivering
stability, security and prosperity to the entire Middle
East is today more than ever a vital need. As the tragic
developments on the ground - notably in Gaza last
month - have once again proved to all of us - there
is no military solution to the many challenges and
problems of the region, with the Israeli-Palestinian
dispute at the core. We remain convinced that such a
settlement could and should be achieved only through
peaceful negotiations and full implementation of all
relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions
and the principles defined by the Quartet in the Road
Map.

In that regard, we welcome the agreement of last
week between Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas to
establish a mutual ceasefire in Gaza. That is a crucial
confidence-building measure and a vital step and
prerequisite towards a much-needed sustained period
of calm that could encompass the entire region. We
therefore hope and expect that both parties will
exercise their utmost restraint and do everything
possible not to jeopardize further possible progress and
promising prospects for peace.

In that connection, we express our deep concern
about any statements or efforts aimed at questioning or
denying the Holocaust, as well as the right of Israel to
exist. Such acts of clear incitement to hatred only
contribute to further destabilization of the entire
Middle East region and undermine the ongoing peace
efforts.

I take this opportunity to reaffirm Slovakia's
support for a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based on
all relevant United Nations Security Council
resolutions and negotiations between the two sides. We
are convinced that the Quartet still represents the most
appropriate mechanism for advancing the peace
process. The updated Road Map reflects recent
developments on the ground and is the most efficient
plan for achieving a lasting peace settlement to the
conflict. We welcome the ongoing efforts of Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas to form a Government of
National Unity. We hope and expect that such a
Government will be committed to Quartet principles
and that its political platform will enable an early
engagement as well as the continuation of dialogue
towards a solution to the Middle East conflict.

We also hope and reiterate our call for an
immediate end to violence by Palestinian factions and
attacks on Israel, notably the launching of rockets
against Israeli population centres, and for the release of
the abducted Israeli soldier.

We remain deeply concerned over the economic
and humanitarian situation in the West Bank and Gaza.
In this regard, we welcome the continuation and
expansion of the Temporary International Mechanism,
which enables the channelling of resources and
delivery of assistance directly to the Palestinian
people, thereby addressing their urgent humanitarian
and financial needs. To this end, we urge Israel to
resume transfers of withheld Palestinian tax and
customs revenues. We also call for full implementation
of the Agreement on Movement and Access and for all
border crossings be reopened and remain open.

At the same time, we expect the Israeli
Government to continue its commitment to peace in the
Middle East, based on principles laid out in the Road
Map, and to refrain from steps and activities that may
contradict the principles of international law. In this
context, we repeat our call for the immediate release of
Palestinian Ministers and legislators in Israeli custody
and for the freeze of all settlement activities.

Turning to Lebanon, Slovakia is very concerned
about the current developments in the country. We
confirm our strong support of the Lebanese
Government legitimately elected last year in free and
democratic parliamentary elections. We welcome and
support all efforts and steps undertaken by the
Lebanese authorities to regain control and authority
over the whole of its territory and to re-establish
stability and security within the country.

Lebanon needs stability. Only then can it be
reconstructed and further developed. We believe that
stability, reconstruction and development are in the
interest of all Lebanese parties, including Hizbollah,
which should act responsibly. The national dialogue
has to continue. We are convinced that all disputes
have to be resolved at the negotiation table and not on
the streets, where there is always a risk of provocation
and escalation of the conflict. That is dangerous.

Lebanon is currently going through a very
difficult time. We must work towards the diminution of
tensions and not their increase. All relevant actors in
the country and the whole of the region have to act
with utmost responsibility, keeping in mind the
consequences of a possible escalation of the situation.
We are convinced that an escalation would not serve
anybody.

Lebanon and its people have already suffered
enough. The international community should not allow
further destabilization of the country and of the whole
region. Lebanon's sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity have to be respected by everybody,
including all actors inside and outside the country,
Lebanon's neighbours, and countries such as Iran.

The national dialogue must continue with the aim
of reaching consensus on several important issues,
including disarmament of all militia in the country,
which, through their offensive acts, represent a
constant threat to the stability and security of Lebanon
and its neighbours.

The Lebanese Government has to become the
sole authority and must maintain a monopoly on the
use of force within its territory. In this respect, we
would also like to emphasize the importance of
ensuring full compliance with the arms embargo
imposed in resolution 1701 (2006) and of making
progress towards the normalization of relations
between Lebanon and Syria, as well as the delineation
of their common borders, including in the area of the
Sheba'a Farms. We are convinced that the resolution of
these issues would significantly contribute to the
stabilization of the situation in the region.

Last, but not least, we should also not forget the
need for the two abducted Israeli soldiers kidnapped by
Hizbollah on 12 July 2006 to be released. We also
understand the need to resolve the issue of the
Lebanese prisoners and we encourage the respective
authorities to make progress on that issue.

We fully understand that the situation in Lebanon
and the broader region is complicated and that it takes
time to make progress on certain issues. However, we
wish to underline that progress can only be achieved
through peaceful means and negotiations. As has
already been proven on several occasions, there is no
military or Violent solution to any conflict or dispute.
Reconstruction of the country and further development
can proceed only under peaceful circumstances. A
stable and prosperous Lebanon would significantly
contribute to the stabilization of the situation in the
whole of the Middle East region.

In conclusion, I reiterate our belief that there is
still a window of opportunity to reinvigorate the peace
process in the Middle East. That window of
opportunity should be seized by all concerned, and
especially the relevant parties, through concrete and
immediate action. We hope for and encourage
continuous engagements among all the parties to this
long and protracted conflict.

