The Secretary-General: I wish to express my
strong support for the draft resolution before the
Council. I can think of no issue about which I feel
more strongly as Secretary-General - and I believe
none should be more important to each member of the
Security Council - than the safety of those brave men
and women who serve the Organization in the places
where it matters most, that is, in zones of conflict and
danger.

It is of course a fact of life that much of our work
is done in dangerous places, since that is where it is
most sorely needed. But that only strengthens the
obligation on all of us to take every step in our power
to protect those working under the blue flag and to
bring to justice those who attack or harm them.
Regrettably, in recent years we have not lived up to
that obligation. Attacks on humanitarian workers and
on United Nations personnel have increased
alarmingly. Again and again, peacekeepers or unarmed
civilians who have voluntarily gone in to help their
fellow men and women have been deliberately targeted
by armed factions seeking to make a political point or a
military gain or to intimidate the international
community.

Last week's vicious attack on our headquarters in
Baghdad, with all its tragic consequences, has brought
that vital issue to the forefront of our priorities. It
shows us what we must expect if we allow the
impression to continue gaining ground that
international workers are a soft, cost-free target.
Impunity for those who commit such unpardonabie
crimes cannot stand. There must be action.

Once again, I urge Member States in whose
territories attacks against United Nations personnel
have been committed to take practical and effective
steps to investigate and prosecute those responsible for
such crimes. I also urge those States that have not yet
done so to sign, ratify and accede to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.

And, members of the Council, I urge you today to
adopt the timely draft resolution before you. I hope
very much that you will pass it unanimously and that
you will follow it up with action. In so doing, you will
send an unambiguous message to all those who
mistakenly believe that, in today's turbulent world,
they can advance their cause by targeting the servants
of humanity. And if you succeed in strengthening the
security of United Nations staff, you will not only do
what, in all conscience, is your duty; you will also
increase the authority and effectiveness of the Council
by making clear that you are determined to protect
those whom you send into the field to implement your
decisions.

