Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
warmly thank Mr. Annabi for the update he has provided
us this morning. I think we will all want to pay tribute to
what Special Representative Vieira de Mello has achieved
so far in East Timor and to commend the whole team of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) for what they are achieving there.

I think it is a sign of our confidence in that team and
that leadership that we assume that, in spite of the
difficulties in East Timor, things are going steadily and
inexorably in the right direction towards a stable
independence. But the briefing we have had this morning
and news we have had over the last couple of weeks, I
think, remind us that there are still some problems, some
quite serious problems in East Timor. I just want to cover
briefly three of them.

The first is the increasing criminality in East Timor.
We are all aware of it. It stems from an anarchical
situation in the recent past. The United Kingdom hopes
that the deployment of the rapid-reaction unit will help
with that particular difficulty. We pay tribute to Portugal
for leading on this front, and we welcome the stricter
controls in the whole area of police activity that
Mr. Annabi spoke about this morning. We also welcome
the opening of the East Timorese police training school
and the establishment of the Police Assistance Group,

 

which are both steps in the right direction. We hope that
these moves will help UNTAET bring unofficial security
groups, as they are called, under its control.

But my second point, I think, is even more serious.
This is the continued reports of militia activity in East
Timor. The recent outbreaks of violence actually sound like
the worst we have had since the deployment of the
International Force in East Timor last autumn. There have
been press reports - perhaps assumptions, maybe
evidence - that the Indonesian armed forces (TNI) have
been to some extent involved in these outbreaks of
violence. The Assistant Secretary-General said to us this
morning that it seems that elements of the TNI continue to
tolerate or even support militia activity in East Timor.
It is very good to hear that UNTAET has pressed this
issue vigorously in Jakarta. The Indonesian Government are
clearly aware of some of what is going on. They have made
it clear that they do not support and will not countenance
continued or residual complicity between the TNI and the
militia, but we must make sure that they follow up on their
promises.

I think the Council this morning should make it clear
that we find continued militia activity and any residual
complicity with it on the part of the TNI completely
unacceptable. UNTAET must be allowed to do its job and
bring this province through to independence without the
unwelcome attentions of those in West Timor who still feel
that they can affect the situation, or who indeed oppose the
Jakarta Government's interest in creating stability in East
Timor.

My third point is about the disbursement of funds. We
are a little concerned at the slow rate of disbursements from
the United Nations trust fund. In stark contrast with this is
the availability of funds from assessed contributions for the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor.
We would be grateful if the Secretariat could shed some
light on the reasons for this delay in disbursements from
the United Nations trust fund.

