Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Agius, President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their very comprehensive briefings.
France reiterates its gratitude and support to the
entire staff of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their efforts in
conducting successful judicial proceedings. Although
the ICTY is now in its final year of operation, it is
extremely important that it continue to be supported by
its entire team until the very end. As the Mechanism
strengthens, it is also important for us to ensure that
the model adopted by the Security Council and the
tools and resources provided to enable it to effectively
discharge its duties with reduced costs, are sustainable.

We commend President Agius's firm commitment
to staying the course and completing the work of the
ICTY in 2017. The confirmation of the very good
progress made in the most recent proceedings at both
the first instance and appeal stages, as well as the start
of liquidation-related activities, is in line with the
expectations of the Security Council when it extended
the Tribunal's mandate for the final time through
resolution 2329 (2016).

The Tribunal will close its doors this year. France
commends the ICTY for its tremendous work in
advancing reconciliation and peace - a process that is
still under way for the peoples of the region. An overall
review should also be conducted this year to assess
progress made and identify good practices and areas in
which improvements can be made in dispensing justice
more effectively. We know that the ICTY's experience
is vital. The ICTY would be the first Tribunal to
share its experience with other international judicial
institutions. The legacy of the ICTY must be preserved
and maintained in order to strengthen international
criminal justice, as a whole. France will participate in
the events planned for the closure of the ICTY, which
will be held in New York at the same time as the opening
session of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.

As the ICTY nears the completion of its work,
France reiterates that, now more than ever before,
States of the region are responsible for cooperating
fully with the Tribunal, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Such cooperation
extends to the Mechanism. We call on all States to do
their utmost to ensure that the eight fugitives indicted
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) are arrested. We support the efforts of the
Prosecutor to restructure his teams and to strengthen
cooperation with his partners. All individuals suspected
of committing crimes during the genocide in Rwanda
must be brought to justice. In that regard, France
recalls that cases referred in 2007 by the ICTR are still
ongoing and are the subject of regular discussions with
the Prosecutor of the Mechanism, as well as with the
Mechanism's specially appointed observer.

During this pivotal year, my delegation reiterates its
full support for the smooth transition to the Mechanism
and welcomes the fact that the ICTY and the Mechanism
assist each other, taking into account, in particular
the ICTR's experience in handing over functions to
the Mechanism. France welcomes President Meron's
determination to rely on the good practices of the ICTR
and the ICTY in prosecuting cases and in working
with the Mechanism. In that regard, my delegation
reiterates the importance of the recommendations put
forward by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in
the review of the ICTY conducted in 2016 and calls on
the Mechanism to follow those recommendations with
regard to its operations, developing a code of ethics
and establishing a disciplinary mechanism for judges.
France would also like to recall that the diversity of
legal systems, which we know President Meron holds
dear, is a factor in the success of the mission of the
Mechanism and of all international criminal courts.

Finally, France reiterates its support for the
activities of the ICTY and the Mechanism that seek
to build national judicial capacity. Such actions are an
invaluable contribution to the fight against impunity
and access to justice throughout the world. We welcome
the training courses envisaged in the Central African
Republic, which would bolster the Special Criminal
Court. We encourage the Mechanism to continue
those activities.

The Security Council decided to establish
international criminal tribunals in the 1990s because
it believed that the States concerned and their citizens
would be their primary beneficiaries through the
gradual strengthening of the rule of law, which ensures
the independence of the judiciary and acknowledges
full accountability.
