Lebanon is currently facing complex and severe challenges. The Beirut port explosion caused heavy casualties and property losses, exacerbating Lebanon's economic difficulties, social unrest and humanitarian crisis. Tensions in areas near the Blue Line have escalated again recently. At this difficult time, the international community's support for Lebanon is crucial and the role of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is even more indispensable. China appreciates UNIFIL's dedication to its duties and its positive contributions to maintaining overall calm in the area of operations and regional stability. We believe that the Security Council and the international community should attach great importance to the opinions and demands of Lebanon, consolidate political support for UNIFIL and ensure that it has the capabilities and resources required to perform its duties. Based on the abovementioned position, China has been deeply involved in UNIFIL's consultation on the draft resolution on the extension of UNIFIL's mandate, so as to push the Security Council to send a positive signal of support for peace, stability and development in Lebanon. China takes note of the UNIFIL assessment report (S/2020/473) and recommendations submitted by the Secretary-General on | June. China maintains that the Secretariat should, in accordance with the requirements of resolution 2539 (2020) and in light of the latest situation, fully consult with Lebanon, UNIFIL troop-contributing countries, and members of the Security Council, analyse, justify and make necessary adjustments to relevant recommendations one by one, and on that basis formulate a plan for their implementation and submit it to the Security Council for approval. I would like to emphasize that the Secretary-General's recommendations can be implemented only after they have been agreed upon by all members of the Council. China believes that maintaining the size of UNIFIL is essential if it is to fully perform its duties, play a deterrent role and handle tensions. China regrets the reduction of the maximum strength of UNIFIL and hopes that relevant adjustments will not have a negative impact on the deployment of UNIFIL on the ground and its actual operations. China expects the Secretary-General to assess the impact of the Beirut port explosion on the personnel, capabilities and operations of UNIFIL as soon as possible, in accordance with the requirements of this resolution, and offer suggestions on how to respond so as to ensure the continuity and effectiveness of UNIFIL operations. We are also concerned about the impact of the explosion on the Lebanese army and support UNIFIL in continuing to support the capacity-building of the Lebanese army to create conditions for its expanded deployment. As a member of the Security Council and a troop-contributing country of UNIFIL, China is ready to work with the international community to continue to make positive contributions to promoting peace and stability in Lebanon and the Middle East.
