Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank the President for convening today's debate on this important topic. I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings (see S/PV.8706). Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by the representative of Portugal on behalf of 27 European Union member States. Ireland, my country, remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution that ends the occupation that began in 1967, ending all claims and fulfilling the aspirations of both parties, including Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations to statehood and sovereignty, on the basis of international law, internationally agreed parameters and relevant Security Council resolutions. We know that such an outcome will greatly benefit both the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples and contribute significantly to stability in the wider region. This accords with the European Union's firm position, as set out on numerous occasions, and with General Assembly resolution 73/89 of 6 December 2018, onacomprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East, which my country, Ireland, was proud to introduce and which was overwhelmingly endorsed by a majority of Member States. Today's debate comes at a critical time. Three years have passed since the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), but we have seen no progress, and the situation on the ground continues to deteriorate. The acceleration of settlement activity, the continued occupation of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the maintenance of the Gaza blockade, as well as the constant threat of violence, extremism, terrorism and incitement, are eroding the very viability of the two-State solution and the prospects for peace. In December, the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, informed the Security Council that over 22,000 settlement units had been advanced or approved in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, in the past three years (see S/PV.8690). We are deeply concerned by that acceleration in settlement activity and by recent statements on the annexation of the Jordan Valley. Annexation would constitute a very serious violation of international law. We must not forget the deadly toll that this conflict continues to take. The past three years have seen the loss of hundreds of civilian lives, thousands of injuries to civilians and major damage to civilian objects, including due to airstrikes and to the indiscriminate firing of rockets into Israel. In Gaza, a shockingly high proportion of casualties have been children.Ireland's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Simon Coveney, again visited Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory in December. In his meetings with Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas, he reiterated Ireland's readiness to support efforts towards a two-State solution. He firmly conveyed Ireland's concerns about the impact of the occupation, including settlements and the blockade of Gaza, and met with communities both in Gaza and in Israel that are affected by the continuing violence. Minister Coveney reiterated Ireland's strong support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. He welcomed progress towards new Palestinian elections, which deserve international support. Those elections will constitute an important step towards intra-Palestinian reconciliation, giving a voice to Palestinians throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in Gaza. Minister Coveney's regular visits to the region reflect the high priority that the Irish people continue to give to the Middle East peace process. Long though this conflict has endured, we believe that we, the international community, have a responsibility to continue to hope and work for a solution. The Security Council has a particularly important role and we, as an aspiring member, will work to help ensure that it meets its responsibilities. Before concluding, I would briefly turn to the situation in Syria. We remain deeply concerned about the plight of the Syrian people, particularly in the north- east and north-west of the country. In the north-west, the Government offensive has led to a large number of civilian casualties and new displacement. We welcome the decision of the Security Council to extend the authorization for cross-border humanitarian assistance, but are deeply disappointed that authorization was not extended for all border crossings. Ireland strongly condemns all violations of international law in Syria. Those responsible for such violations must be held accountable, and we reiterate our call for the situation to be referred to the International Criminal Court. We also reiterate our support for the Commission of Inquiry and the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We welcome the recent decision of the General Assembly to provide funding for the Mechanism from the United Nations regular budget. As I conclude, I also wanted to say that, on Libya, Ireland welcomes the outcome of the recent Berlin conference and calls on all parties to rapidly agree to a ceasefire and move forward towards a much-needed political solution.
