Mr. Morejen (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to convey, on behalf of the
Government of Ecuador, our sympathy with the sisterly
nation of Turkey in connection with the earthquake that
took place yesterday and to express our condolences to
the families of the victims. We were also saddened to
hear of the passing of the heir to the throne of Saudi
Arabia, Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud,
and shares the sorrow of King Abdullah, the royal
family and the people of Saudi Arabia.

My delegation would like to express its views on
the situation in the Middle East and the question of
Palestine. I should like to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing. My country aligns itself with the
statement by the Ambassador of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The Government of Ecuador, which abides by the
norms and principles of international law, particularly
with regard to the pacific settlement of disputes,
wishes to express its concern at the length of time
during which the Security Council has been seized with
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict - seven decades. My
delegation is keen to support stability in the region and
has recognized Palestine as a State.

The developments that have taken place in recent
months, including the historic address by President
Abbas before the General Assembly, on 23 September;
the organizing of legislative and presidential elections
in Palestine; and the support of most States Members
of the United Nations for the recognition of Palestine
as a State are further evidence of the fact that the
Palestinian Authority is capable of governing itself as a
State.
Another positive step towards peace is the
prisoner exchange between Israel and Palestine, which
is taking place in stages. The international community
welcomed the freeing of the Israeli soldier and of 477
Palestinian prisoners on 18 October.

It is regrettable, however, that the progress
achieved through international efforts, including the
recent statement of the Quartet on resuming and
making progress in direct peace negotiations between
Israel and Palestine, has come to naught because of
Israel's lack of clear parameters on its settlement
policies. The Palestinian people suffer humiliation,
expulsion and violence at the hands of the continuing
Israeli occupation and are the victims of aggressive and
illegal actions. This has not changed and continues
with impunity.

In addition, the construction by the occupying
military force of the Wall in Jerusalem prevents
Palestinians from having access to hospitals, schools
and their places of work. The Palestinians also suffer
as a result of inadequate public services; schools are
few, and the economy is in ruins. Jerusalem does not
have a production economy, and Israel controls the
entire territory.

The international community must bring pressure
to bear in Israel to end the occupation. It is Israel's
responsibility to make progress with the negotiations
so as to achieve the two-State solution, in keeping with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and, of course, the
Road Map.

In that connection, we would remind the Security
Council of its historic responsibility to positively
analyse this issue, which for more than 64 years has
posed an obstacle to the achievement of peace and
security in the Middle East and in the eastern
Mediterranean region.

My delegation appeals for a dialogue between the
parties with the goal of ensuring that in the very near
future, the two States of Israel and Palestine can
coexist in the region, living side by side within secure
and recognized borders.

