Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Security Council for this opportunity
to brief the Council on the Secretary-General's
report (S/2017/764) on the situation in the Lake Chad
basin. Allow me to comment first on security and
political developments.

Thanks to coordination among affected countries,
we have witnessed encouraging progress in the
fight against Boko Haram. The Secretary-General
commends the Governments of the region for their
efforts, including through the Multinational Joint Task
Force (MNJTF). Without question, Boko Haram's
combat capacity has diminished, but to compensate for
that, Boko Haram has changed tactics by increasing the
use of suicide attacks.

We thank the Government of Switzerland and the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
efforts to the release of an additional 82 girls kidnapped
from Chibok in the north-eastern part ofNigeria in 2014.
The recent visit to Nigeria by the Deputy Secretary-
General and the Executive Director of UN-Women
served to shed further light on the plight of women
and girls in the Lake Chad basin. Unfortunately the
fight is far from over. One hundred and thirty attacks
attributed to Boko Haram in the four affected countries
in June and July resulted in 284 civilian fatalities - a
significant increase as compared to 146 attacks and 107
civilian fatalities in April and May. The most affected
countries remained Nigeria, followed by Cameroon, the
Niger and Chad.

In terms of political advocacy, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa and his Special Representative for Western
Africa and the Sahel, respectively, regularly visit the
affected countries to promote enhanced interregional
cooperation. They propose a regional strategy to address
the root causes of the crisis. Such a strategy should be
owned and supported by the affected countries as well
as the relevant subregional organizations, including the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Lake Chad Basin Commission.

The Oslo Humanitarian Conference on Nigeria and
the Lake Chad Region, held in February, and the visit
by the Council in March brought needed attention to
the long-neglected crisis in the Lake Chad basin. The
United Nations and international partners are working
to sustain the momentum generated by those events.
Last week in Berlin, the United Nations participated
in the first senior officials' meeting of the Oslo
Consultative Group on Prevention and Stabilization in
the Lake Chad Region. The meeting brought together
representatives of the affected countries, donors and
regional and subregional organizations. Discussions
focused on addressing the structural causes of the crisis
and included community stabilization, the restoration of
services, local governance systems and the prevention
of violence.

Turning to development challenges, I note that
the Lake Chad basin crisis has wreaked havoc on
basic infrastructure assets and Government services.
Insecurity has sparked large-scale unemployment
and left 1 million school-aged children deprived of
education. The substantial economic impact of the
crisis has reached nearly $9 billion across north-eastern
Nigeria alone. Poverty, the low legitimacy of the State,
human insecurity and climate change, among other
challenges, compound that dire situation. As is so often
the case, women and the youth are key risk groups.

Conflict and displacement have eroded, and
in some cases ruptured, the bonds between and
within communities. Intra-communal structures and
processes that traditionally regulated Violence and
resolved conflicts have weakened. We detect worrying
signs of social fragmentation as tensions emerge from
ethno-religious, social and other divisions, including
between internally displaced persons (IDPs) and host
communities. Unless robust peacebuilding efforts
are introduced, the reintegration of ex-combatants,
including from Boko Haram and Vigilante groups, risk
generating additional tensions and to heighten the risks
of secondary conflict. Furthermore, the report notes
the need for greater attention and funding to support
development interventions, including community
stabilization, economic revitalization and prevention,
so as to build community resilience and ensure
durable solutions.

Yesterday, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs concluded his first Visit to the Niger and Nigeria
to increase international visibility of the humanitarian
situation, discuss with the Governments and consider
practical steps to further strengthen the response.

Despite the significant progress made in reaching
the affected people in the Lake Chad basin, the
humanitarian needs in the region continue to be
staggering. Approximately 10.7 million people require
humanitarian assistance. With 8.5 million people in
need, north-eastern Nigeria is again enduring the worst
of the crisis. Funding continues to fall significantly
short. At present, the regional appeal requesting
$1.5 billion for 2017 is funded at only 40 per cent.

The region now faces the rainy season, when food
insecurity is at its worst, with thousands of farmers
having missed four planting seasons in a row owing
to conflict, resulting insecurity and displacements.
Across the region, 7.2 million people are severely
food insecure, including 5.2 million in north-eastern
Nigeria, where an estimated 50,000 people are at the
highest risk of famine. The crisis has displaced an
estimated 2.4 million people, including 1.5 million
children. New displacements are occurring alongside
the return of IDPs and refugees. Given the continued
insecurity and lack of basic services in many affected
areas, the involuntary and unsafe return of refugees and
IDPs must be avoided at all costs.
Concerning human rights, we are deeply concerned
about the continued violations by Boko Haram,
including killings, the forceful use ofchildren as suicide
bombers and sexual and gender-based Violence against
women and children. Perpetrators must be brought to
justice. The United Nations has also received numerous
allegations of serious human rights violations committed
in the context of counter-terrorism operations. The
United Nations continues to advocate strongly with
MNJTF to put forward a clear strategy to prevent
sexual exploitation and abuse, including by recruiting a
dedicated gender adviser within its civilian component.
The report notes our conviction that we must develop a
common understanding that human rights Violations are
among the root causes of instability in the Lake Chad
basin and that impunity will fuel the crisis. Investing in
traditional justice mechanisms at the community level
is essential to sustainable reconciliation and stability.
The prevention of terrorist activities, stabilization
and recovery initiatives must integrate the human
rights dimension.

Sexual violence remains appallingly widespread
in the region. It is a driver of forced displacement and
a particular risk in displacement settings, in which
conflict-affected women and children are exposed
to daily risks of exploitation. Those suffering from
acute physical or psychological trauma need urgent
medical and psychosocial care. The United Nations
is exploring options for the deployment of dedicated
expertise on conflict-related sexual violence to north-
eastern Nigeria.

The United Nations faces a serious funding shortage
to deploy human rights monitors across the region.
We reiterate our call on the international community
to generously contribute funds to enable the United
Nations to support the establishment of national and
regional mechanisms for the systematic monitoring and
reporting of the human rights situation.

Allow me to touch upon the issues of security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. The lack of a comprehensive approach
in addressing Boko Haram defectors, including clear
and transparent criteria that are human rights compliant
and in line with the international terrorism framework,
produces multiple challenges. Despite good faith, ad hoc
efforts result in thousands of persons being irregularly
detained and/or unpredictably processed. This situation
is not productive, sustainable or in accordance with the
rule of law, and justice is not served.

In our View, the efforts of the MNJTF remain
indispensable in resolving the crisis. However, the
heavy financial investment borne by regional countries
comes at a high cost: Governments have no choice but to
divert much of their national budgets from development
to addressing national and regional security. Within the
United Nations, Member States are careful to make
sure that we do not shift development and humanitarian
funds to peace and security work. We would hope
that the affected countries could attract the support
to do the same. We welcome the pledges already
made and encourage the further timely disbursement
of contributions to enable the MNJTF to address the
challenges it faces.

In conclusion, I note that the complex and
increasingly protracted nature of the Lake Chad basin
crisis calls for innovative and integrated solutions
that bridge traditional divides between humanitarian
and development strategies. The United Nations is
committed to adopting a new way of working that will
address the urgent needs of the affected populations
and the root causes of the crisis in a coordinated and
phased manner. I urge all partners to redouble their
efforts to provide lifesaving humanitarian assistance to
the affected populations, as well as early and longer-
term recovery. That is the basis to build resistance and
assure durable solutions to the crisis.

Once again, we encourage the affected countries to
jointly elaborate a regional strategy to address the root
causes of the crisis. We hope that the planned regional
conference on stabilization to be held in N'Djamena in
October will be the first step towards the development
of such a strategy.

We in the United Nations remain committed to
working with regional countries on ending the Violence,
protecting civilians, promoting human development
and alleviating the suffering in the Lake Chad basin.
We can prevent this crisis from growing, but that
would require greater political and financial support
to the Lake basin region. The side event to be held on
21 September at the margins of the General Assembly
session will be a key opportunity for the international
community to reaffirm its support for the region.

