Mr. Deng (South Sudan): It is a great pleasure and
honour to address the Security Council once again.
We welcome the Council's renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA), and we continue to reiterate our profound
appreciation to the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia for its enormous contribution to the
peacekeeping force and for its tireless efforts in support
of peace between the Sudan and South Sudan.

Abyei remains a source of ongoing tension between
our two countries and puts at risk our efforts in other
areas of cooperation. The case of Abyei has been on
the Council's agenda for years and is too well known to
require extensive background. However, I believe that
some historical highlights may shed useful light on the
issues under consideration.

While it is now well known that Abyei was annexed
to the north by the British in 1905 for administrative and
security reasons, what is perhaps not equally known is
that it was not the Ngok Dinka alone who were annexed
to the north. Several communities from Bahr Al Ghazal
and Upper Nile states, notably the Twich Dinka and the
Ruweng Dinka, were also annexed to the north at the
same time. Those communities were later returned to
their original provinces, leaving the Ngok Dinka alone
in the north as a conciliatory bridge between the north
and the south. It is ironic that an area that had been a
point of positive contact and cooperation between the
north and the south became the worst victim of north-
south conflict, leading to the devastating destruction of
the area and massive displacement of the population.

Successive Governments of the Sudan have failed
to honour virtually all agreements reached to bring
peace and harmony to the Area. The 1972 Addis Ababa
Agreement included a provision for the Ngok Dinka to
decide by a referendum whether to remain in the north
or rejoin the south. That was never implemented. The
frustration of the Ngok Dinka eventually led to a local
rebellion, which contributed to the resumption of the
second north-south war in 1983.

The Abyei Protocol to the 2005 Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA), which ended the second war,
provided for a self-determination referendum in Abyei
to be held simultaneously with the 2011 referendum in
the South, which resulted in the independence of South
Sudan. That agreement, too, was not honoured. The
Abyei Protocol also provided for the establishment of
the Abyei Boundary Commission (ABC) to demarcate
the boundaries of the Area and whose findings were to
be final and binding. While South Sudan accepted the
determination of the ABC, the Sudan rejected it.

After the May 2008 invasion ofthe Area by the Sudan
Armed Forces that razed Abyei town to the ground, the
two Governments agreed to take the issue to The Hague
Permanent Court of Arbitration, whose determination
was to be final and binding. The Court redefined Abyei
Area, ceding a third of the ABC-demarcated Ngok

land to the north and designating the remainder as the
land of the nine Ngok Dinka chiefdoms. Again, South
Sudan accepted the determination of the Court. The
Sudan initially accepted it, but then obstructed its
implementation.

In May 2011, on the eve of the southern referendum
and prospective independence, the Sudan staged
another devastating invasion of Abyei and occupied the
Area. The Ngok Dinka and the south refrained from
any action that might undermine the referendum and
prospective independence of the south.

The issue was eventually taken to the African
Union (AU), whose Peace and Security Council, in
partnership with the United Nations Security Council,
created the United Nations Interim Security Force in
Abyei, primarily for the protection of civilians, with
the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee (AJOC) as a
temporary management mechanism. The African Union
High Implementation Panel, under the chairmanship of
Former President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, was
mandated to mediate the negotiations between the
Sudan and South Sudan on the final status of Abyei.
After prolonged efforts that involved other envoys
and mediators, the Panel came up with a proposal that
stipulated that the Abyei referendum would be held
in October 2013. South Sudan accepted the proposal.
It was also accepted by the AU and supported by the
United Nations, but it was rejected by the Sudan.

Although the Peace and Security Council urged the
Presidents of the Sudan and South Sudan to negotiate
an agreement on the basis of the Mbeki proposal,
repeated meetings between them produced no progress.
Accordingly, President Kiir informed the AU that they
had reached an impasse and that there were no prospects
of an agreement on Abyei between him and President
Bashir. He therefore urged the AU and the United
Nations to assume the responsibility for ensuring that
the Panel's proposal was implemented.

In despair and desperation, the people of Abyei
decided to organize their own referendum, in
conformity with the proposal of the Mbeki Panel, in
particular setting October as the date of the referendum.
The choice of the month was important because it falls
during the rainy season, when only the permanent
inhabitants of the Area are to be found there. The
Misseriya were back in their own homeland, 125 miles
to the north. That is why the Sudan objected to the
referendum being held that month. President Salva Kiir
encouraged and supported the displaced Ngok Dinka
to return to their homeland, resettle, reorganize and
prepare for the October referendum. Since the Mbeki
proposal was not being implemented, and there was no
indication that the referendum would be internationally
conducted, the Ngok Dinka felt that they had to act on
their own and conduct a community-based referendum
in the month of October, as had been stipulated.

By all accounts, the referendum was conducted
in an impressively efficient, orderly, professional and
peaceful manner. A delegation of the AU Peace and
Security Council that was to visit Abyei a few days
before the referendum was prevented from doing
so by the Sudanese Government, on allegations of
security risks. Despite arriving after the referendum,
the delegation was able to confirm that Abyei was
indeed the land of the nine Ngok Dinka chiefdoms
and that the Misseriya, who only appear there during
the dry season in search of water and grazing lands,
were conspicuously absent. That is a fact that has been
repeatedly stated, but which the members of Peace and
Security Council had to witness on the ground to fully
appreciate.

When the AU delegation arrived in Abyei after the
community referendum and had an opportunity to talk
to all sides, they issued a press release on 6 November,
in which they "underscored the inalienable right of the
people of Abyei to self-determination in accordance
with the Abyei Protocol of the Comprehensive Plan of
Action of 2005." They also stated that they had

"listened to the expression of deep frustration,
anger and concerns, as well as the reasons for
the action of the Ngok Dinka community, and
stressed the need for continued efforts to resolve
the final status of Abyei within the context of the
AU High-level Implementnation Panel proposal of
21 September 2011."

The Peace and Security Council indeed renewed
"its appeal to the United Nations Security Council to
urgently support the proposal as the best way forward
for the solution in Abyei".

It is important that the cause of the Ngok Dinka
not be compromised by any adverse reaction to their
action. Fortunately, a violent reaction by the Misseriya
and the Government of the Sudan appears so far to
have been averted, although that may also be due to the
constraints imposed by the rainy season and the fact
that the Misseriya are not in the Area but in their own
homeland, far to the north.

The threat of violence still looms over the Area
in the dry season. Whatever international opinion
may be on the Ngok Dinka community referendum,
the population of that Area must be protected against
northern reprisals. Although the UNISFA is poised
to provide an appreciable degree of protection, much
more will be required to ensure the full protection
of the population against a possible massive assault
by the Misseriya and the armed forces of the Sudan,
as has happened repeatedly in the past. Under those
circumstances, the potential for resumed conflict
between the Sudan and South Sudan over Abyei is a
threat that must be prevented.

The Ngok Dinka community referendum should
be seen as a declaration of the people's aspiration
and identification with the south. The significance of
President Salva Kiir's encouragement and support for
the return of the people of Abyei to their land is that it
has opened doors for positive action in a situation that
had been frozen in negativity. That challenges the Ngok
Dinka and all those interested in their welfare to rebuild
their society, which has been shattered by decades of
devastating conflict. The fact that the Ngok Dinka were
able to organize the referendum so efficiently on their
own is evidence of their maturity and capacity for self-
governance.

Priority must be given to several transformative
measures. The process of return should continue to
be encouraged and supported. The security of the
population through UNISFA and other complementary
reinforcements must be guaranteed. Essential
humanitarian services should urgently be provided.
The Ngok Dinka should be assisted in the process of
reconstructing and rebuilding the Area, including
institutions for their self-governance. Programmes
for socio-economic development need to be urgently
initiated. The process of Ngok Dinka-Misseriya
reconciliation with a view to restorating peaceful
coexistence and cooperation, predicated on addressing
the case of the assassination of the Paramount Chief,
should be initiated and actively supported by the two
Governments.

In terms of interim arrangements, each community
should govern itself within its borders as defined by
the Comprehensive Peace Agreeement, as was the case
in the past, and the two communities should agree on
arrangements for managing matters of mutual concern.

If the measures I have referred to are put in place,
Ngok Dinka society could be stabilized and the issue
of the final status of Abyei could be more amicably
resolved in the mutual interests of the two communities
and countries in accordance with the AU High-level
Implementation Panel proposal.

Permit me to conclude with an anecdote. The
Deputy Paramount Chief of the Ngok Dinka, Deng
Abot, once said to me that Abyei was like an eye, which
is so small but sees so much. I now reverse the metaphor
to say that, although Abyei is so small, the eyes of the
world are watching over its safety and welfare. That
alone means major progress in the development and the
destiny of the Area and its people.

