Belgium aligns itself with the declaration submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex XVIII). I thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing. We particularly appreciate his work on the ground in a complex environment. We welcome the unanimity within the Council that led to the renewal of the European Union-led Operation Althea for another year. This mission contributes to the viability of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single, united, sovereign and multi- community country, and to the stabilization of the region. As a member of the European Union, Belgium will continue to give the country its full support. Twenty-five years after the signing of the Dayton Accords, Bosnia and Herzegovina has emerged as an independent State on the road to Euro-Atlantic integration. However, only by carrying out all the necessary reforms will it be able to realize its aspiration of one day becoming a member of the European Union. Strengthening the rule of law and the fight against corruption must be at the heart of those efforts. We call on Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt the necessary reforms to strengthen the judiciary and ensure its independence, including in the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council. In view of the local elections scheduled for 15 November, we call on all political actors to refrain from provocative rhetoric during the election period. After 12 years without elections, we welcome the agreement to hold local elections in Mostar on 20 December, thus enabling its inhabitants to finally exercise their right to vote. We stress that any electoral reform must be inclusive and in line with European standards. In that respect, we also call for ensuring the equality and non-discrimination of citizens and the full implementation of the judgments of the European Court of Human Rights, including Sejdic and Finci and related judgments. It is also essential to implement the recommendations of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Twenty-five years after the genocide in Srebrenica, the denial of genocide and war crimes and the glorification of war criminals continues. Let me be clear: there can be no room for the denial of genocide and war crimes. The International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and the International Court of Justice have ruled that the atrocities committed in Srebrenica 25 years ago constitute a crime of genocide. Continued denial only undermines reconciliation efforts and needlessly increases the pain of the survivors. That is unacceptable and must stop, in Bosnia and Herzegovina and elsewhere. We welcome the adoption of the Revised National War Crimes Processing Strategy. It is important that it be effectively and promptly implemented. We also encourage the adoption of an international law criminalizing the denial of genocide and war crimes. Genuine reconciliation is possible only if concrete measures are taken to fight impunity by ensuring the effective prosecution of war criminals and shedding light on the fate of victims. Victims and survivors must be at the centre of those efforts. Their rights and their meaningful participation in reconciliation efforts must be guaranteed. Survivors deserve truth, justice and reparations for crimes committed against their family members. While the path to reconciliation is long, it is the only way to achieve lasting peace.
