I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Under-Secretary- General Lacroix for their briefings. I welcome the presence of the Ambassador of the Sudan at this meeting. We are pleased to note that the situation in the Sudan and Darfur is generally stable. Sudan is at a critical stage of its transition. We welcome the positive developments in the Sudan peace process; the progress made has not come easily and is the result of common efforts. We commend the mediation efforts by South Sudan, the African Union and other regional partners. Meanwhile, we call upon the relevant parties in Darfur to take advantage of the window of opportunity for political progress and to respond to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. It is time to resolve disputes and differences through political dialogue and promote the peace process. At the same time, we also need to watch closely the impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic on the country and its people. Given the weak health and medical systems in the Sudan, we encourage the international community to provide assistance so that the Sudanese Government can strengthen national public health systems. I agree with the representatives of Indonesia and Russia that the unilateral sanctions on the Sudan should be lifted. International financial institutions should show flexibility with regard to the Sudan's debt and lend a helping hand. At this stage, China has donated plenty of medical supplies to the Sudan, including face masks, test kits and protection suits. We will continue to offer help in the future. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) played an important role in the Sudan peace process. China appreciates the great efforts of UNAMID personnel and commends their contributions. Under these special circumstances, we do hope to enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers. Regarding the follow-up presence of UNAMID, the decision should be made based on Sudanese views and positions, taking full consideration of the situation on the ground. We take note of the proposals in the special report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General (S/2020/202). Critical issues, including whether to establish a special political mission and what such a mission's specific mandate would be, should be addressed in a manner that fully respects the wishes of the host country and the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the Sudan. The role of the African Union and other regional organizations should be also recognized. China stands ready to work with the international community and to continue to play a constructive role in promoting peace and sustainable development in the Sudan.
