The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Spain.

My statement will be brief because almost all has
been said. I would like to convey three messages.

First, I thank Mr. Sidikou and Mr. Zerihoun. We
fully support their efforts and work. We know that this
is a very difficult time for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and for the entire Great Lakes region and
that is why their briefings and recommendations are
especially valuable to us.
My second message is an urgent one - there is no
time to waste. The Security Council has been committed
for decades to the situation and to restoring peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
the most recent proof of that fact was our visit to the
country. We are all very aware of the threat of political
instability looming over the country. That is why we
must redouble our preventive diplomacy efforts. Each
passing day counts. We must continue working until
an inclusive and comprehensive agreement is reached
among all of the country's political leaders. The date
of 19 December should not be a fatalistic one. If we
all work together, it should be a date on which we all
celebrate a peaceful political transition agreement.

My third message is one of support. In the Council,
we have supported each and every initiative to ensure
a peaceful transition of power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We support the appointment
of new Prime Minister Badibanga. We believe him to
be open, flexible, non-authoritarian and a man of good
will. He is a true bridge to dialogue with the opposition,
rather than an instrument of the Government or a traitor
to the post, as the most radical have set him out to be.
He is someone we must support if we wish to find a
good faith solution.

We must also support the Conference episcopale
nationale du Congo, which has done a remarkable job
and has recently overcome the significant obstacle of
having been rejected and accused as been exceedingly
unfavourable towards the opposition. We must continue
to support it because we believe it to be a key instrument
for inclusive dialogue and for reaching an agreement.
We also obviously support the unity of the Security
Council, as demonstrated once again in the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/18 earlier this
evening. The statement sends an appropriate message
and strikes a balanced tone. We also wish to join France
in thanking all delegations for their efforts towards and
commitment to achieving our success. The presidential
statement is not an end in and of itself, but rather one
more milestone in a sustained effort that the Council
must make in order for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to return to political normalcy.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

