Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes the
initialling in Dayton by the parties to the Bosnian conflict
of the package of documents on the peace settlement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. A major step has been taken
towards a comprehensive settlement of the most tragic
conflict to have taken place in post-war Europe. Russia,
the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany

 

and the European Union, acting in concert in the framework
of the Contact Group, have done some solid work. The
United Nations assistance at various stages of the peace
process was an important factor in achieving progress. We
would like to pay a tribute to the courageous personnel of
the United Nations Forces, who carried out their mandate
in extremely difficult circumstances.

Four years after the beginning of the tragedy in the
Balkans, we can conclude only that nothing has come of
this conflict but grief, suffering and devastation. There were
no victors in this conflict, nor could there be any. Everyone
has lost- the Serbs, the Croatians, the Muslims and
Europe as a whole.

We would like to pay tribute to the spirit of realism
and of profound responsibility to their peoples that was
displayed by the leaders of the States parties to the conflict.
They mustered sufficient strength and courage to rise above
their enmities and to make the difficult choice in favour of
peace - the only correct one.

What is now essential is for the parties to sign
forthwith the Agreement that has been reached and to start
faithfully to implement them. In this regard, they will be
answerable to their peoples and the international
community. Only by continuing political dialogue and
seeking compromise, taking account of the interests and
equal rights of all, can there be durable peace in this
region.

Before us lies the difficult process of implementing
the Peace Agreement, the final parameters of which still
need to be spelled out. In this connection, I would like to
recall that the Russian side, when initialling the Agreement
in Dayton, reserved its position regarding military
implementation. On this matter, Russia continues to
entertain serious doubts, in particular with regard to the
absence of the necessary political control on the part of the
Security Council over the military operation. But we will,
of course, be returning to this question.

As an active participant in the Dayton talks, Russia
intends to continue contributing to the development of the
peace process and will be prepared to continue discussing
the military aspect of the settlement both on a multilateral
and a bilateral basis.

We attach particular importance to the fact that
immediately after the initialling of the Agreement in Dayton
the provision of the draft resolution before us relating to the
indefinite suspension of economic sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) and the Republic
of Serbia should come into operation. This is an
extremely important step, albeit belated. We remain
convinced that the conditions for the final lifting of the
sanctions were met long ago, when the demands of
resolution 757 (1992) were met and Belgrade actively
joined in the efforts of the Contact Group on the Bosnian
settlement; it has now guaranteed the adoption of the
peace plan. While welcoming the end of the economic
blockade against Yugoslavia and declaring our readiness
to promote comprehensive cooperation between our States
to rebuild the region, we believe that this is all the more
timely since the humanitarian crisis there, of an
unprecedented scale, has worsened considerably in recent
months due to the influx into the FRY of hundreds of
thousands of refugees from Croatia and Bosnia, which
requires the adoption of immediate steps to relieve their
plight.

The draft resolution, of which Russia is a
co-sponsor, is a balanced document which envisages
various situations, including unfavourable scenarios in the
development of the situation, including the possibility of
the reintroduction of sanctions if there should be any
gross violation of the commitments made under the Peace
Agreement. To this end, it provides that reports be made
to the Security Council after joint consultations of senior
leaders of the international military and civilian structures
in Bosnia. The Security Council may take its own
decision, depending on who is responsible for such
violations.

The other draft resolution, on the lifting of the
military embargo, has certain merits. First and foremost,
this represents an even approach to all parties in the light
of the phased removal of restrictions on the supply of
weapons and also in the light of the fact that the text
includes, at our insistence, the obligation of the Security
Council to exercise control over measures to prevent an
arms race in the region. This should also be helped by the
work of the Sanctions Committee, to which the draft
resolution has issued corresponding instructions.
Nevertheless, despite these merits, this draft
resolution raises serious doubts and concerns for the
Russian Federation. This is because neither the spirit nor
the letter of the text follow the logic of the political
process, which is aimed at ending military confrontation
in the region. This has already been mentioned by several
of my colleagues today. We believe that the Balkans
should never again pose a threat to international security
and stability. Therefore, we are in favour not of an arms

 

build-up in the region, but of a restriction and reduction of
arms. Furthermore, we would have preferred the draft to
provide for a more clear-cut mechanism to operate in the
event the peace process should be derailed. We believe that
in this matter a more carefully considered and responsible
approach was needed, particularly since these are serious
matters whose significance goes well beyond the confines
of the region itself. Of particular importance in this
connection will be the reports from the Secretary-General
to the Security Council to the effect that the parties are in
fact fulfilling their obligations on arms limitation. We look
forward to such reports.

In view of the amendments made to the draft
resolution and the fact that it is an integral part of the
Agreement package approved in Dayton by the leaders of
Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the FRY, the Russian
delegation, although unable to associate itself with this draft
resolution, will abstain in the voting.

