I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. As others have done, I would like to say a few words about Lebanon. As Mr. Mladenov set out, the devastating explosion in Beirut has caused enormous suffering and damage. Our sympathies go out to all those who have been affected by this tragedy and who have lost loved ones. The United Kingdom stands with the Lebanese people in this hour of need. Our £25 million package of humanitarian support, as well as the deployment of our technical experts within days of the explosion, will help to address some of the critical needs of the most vulnerable in the country. Further, the deployment of one of our naval ships, the HMS Enterprise, on 10 August, complements these efforts. Our support for the Lebanese army as it endeavours to respond to the disaster is also critical. Turning to the topic of today's discussion, I would like to start by welcoming the announcement on 13 August, as set out by Ambassador Kelly Craft of the United States of America, of the normalization of relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and, in particular, the suspension of Israel's plans to annex parts of the West Bank. As my Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary have said, this is a historic step that contemplates the normalization of relations between two great friends of the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom has consistently made clear in the Security Council its firm opposition to annexation, which would have been contrary to international law, counterproductive to securing peace in the region and a severe blow to the prospects of the two-State solution. We therefore profoundly hope that this moment can be used as a step towards direct talks between Israel and the Palestinians, as there can be no substitute for direct talks in trying to reach a two-State solution and lasting peace. My Foreign Secretary is in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories today, encouraging both leaders to push forward on the momentum created by this announcement. The United Kingdom stands ready to support this endeavour. Despite this positive development, we are concerned by other negative trends on the ground. The number of coronavirus disease cases continues to rise across the region. Meanwhile, Hamas has been launching improvised explosive devices and firing rockets into Israel. Such actions by Hamas are unacceptable, and we call on it to cease them immediately. The current situation continues to have a particularly devastating impact on the people living in Gaza. As ever, dialogue can be the only way to address the situation. We call on Israel to lift movement and access restrictions and allow fuel to enter the Strip, which is vital to power hospitals, water delivery and sewage treatment. More broadly, we encourage the Palestinian Authority and the Government of Israel to urgently resume cooperation across all files - security, economic and civil - at this critical time. While the shadow of annexation appears to be lifted, we remain concerned about the potential for further settlement advancements, continued demolitions and evictions. We are also concerned by continued acts of violence and we were alarmed to hear of the shooting at the Qalandiya checkpoint on 17 August of a Palestinian who was unarmed and deaf. The use of lethal force should only be deployed as a last resort. I would like to finish by reiterating the United Kingdom's long-standing position on the Middle East peace process. We support a negotiated settlement leading to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State based on 1967 borders with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States, and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees. The United Kingdom remains committed to supporting such efforts towards peace in the Middle East. Second statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, James Roscoe I thank the President on his brief update to the Security Council just now, with which the United Kingdom concurs. I want to say a few other things. The first is that the United Kingdom remains resolutely committed to the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), through which the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) was endorsed in 2015, with a view to preventing Iran from developing a nuclear weapon, which is our priority. In order to preserve the JCPOA, Iran must return to nuclear compliance without delay. Along with its E-3 partners, France and Germany, the United Kingdom urges Iran to engage urgently and constructively through the dispute resolution mechanism. As E-3 Foreign Ministers set out in their statements on 19 June and 20 August, we do not support a move to snapback at this time, which would be incompatible with our current efforts aimed at preserving the JCPOA. With regard to the question of my Russian colleague on the letter set out by the United States on 20 August and your own summary, Mr President, I would like to align with the position expressed by France and Germany. It is the United Kingdom's opinion that the United States ceased to be a participant in the JCPOA following its withdrawal from the deal on 8 May 2018. Our position regarding the effectiveness of the United States' notification pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015) has been very clearly explained to the presidency and all Council members. I would like to also make clear that we share the United States' concern about the expiry of the arms restrictions on Iran in October this year. As E-3 Foreign Ministers have said, the expiry of the restrictions could have serious implications for regional security, given Iran's continued destabilizing activities. The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/531), which the Council discussed back in June (see S/2020/644), detailed how Iran has continued to violate annex B of resolution 2231 (2015), including through illicit arms transfers in the region, ballistic missile proliferation and attacks on its neighbours. The United Kingdom will continue to enforce remaining restrictions rigorously, including on the proliferation of arms to non-State actors covered by other Security Council resolutions, ballistic missile restrictions under annex B, and the European Union-United Kingdom arms embargoes that will remain in place until 2023. We continue to work with the remaining JCPOA participants and the Council to seek a path forward to address arms restriction expiry in October.
