Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to
congratulate the Russian presidency, China, Germany
and Indonesia for their flexibility in the negotiations.

The Dominican Republic voted in favour of
resolution 2489 (2019), on the understanding that it is
an appropriate text that supports the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for a full year. At a time when efforts for lasting peace
in Afghanistan seem uncertain, it is important that
UNAMA continue to play a leading role in supporting
the Afghan people in safeguarding and promoting the
economic, political and social gains achieved thus far.
Equally essential is the support that the United Nations
can provide to the various peace talks and opportunities
for dialogue taking place that address key issues in
reducing violence and promoting a ceasefire.

The success of the peace process in Afghanistan
requires not only political will, leadership and
representation from all sectors of Afghan society, but
also strong support from the international community
and the Security Council. In that regard, UNAMA
and all United Nations agencies firmly support efforts
towards reconciliation and the promotion of human
rights, especially the rights of women and children.
We urgently call for the implementation of initiatives
focused on the elimination of violence against
women, the implementation of the national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000) and the protection of
children's rights.

We want to emphasize the importance of an
inclusive electoral process that allows for the active
participation of women and youth and of ensuring
that all measures are taken to safeguard the physical
integrity of candidates and the security of polling
stations, especially hospitals and schools.

We urgently call on the Taliban to halt its offensive
on polling stations and electoral activities, as happened
today in Kabul and in Parwan province in an attack
on the campaign rally of President Ghani, at which
approximately 50 people died and 80 were injured.

Last but not least, we express our deep concern
about the high number of civilian casualties, displaced
persons, the severe humanitarian crisis, constraints on
access to vulnerable areas and the adverse effects of
climate change in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, a resolution such as the one we
adopted today reaffirms our commitment to achieving
peace for the Afghan people and acknowledges the
sacrifices and challenges that the personnel of UNAMA
face every day.

