Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): I would like to
join earlier speakers in thanking China for convening
today's open debate.

My delegation associates itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Singapore, on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General, the Acting President of the
General Assembly, the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the President of the International
Court of Justice for their Views on today's topic.

Malaysia firmly believes that all Member States
must remain united in our collective resolve to uphold
and respect the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. As prescribed in the
Charter, the United Nations has been and remains at
the forefront of various international and multilateral
efforts to combat challenges and maintain international
peace and security.

In its 73 years of existence, the global multilateral
system, underpinned by the United Nations, has paved
the way for Member States to make great strides in areas
such as multilateral trade, socioeconomic development,
poverty eradication, the promotion and protection
of human rights, countering terrorism and violent
extremism and addressing environmental concerns.
However, the evolving nature of the traditional threats
and non-traditional security challenges facing the
United Nations threatens to undermine many of the
gains that have been achieved. Despite various efforts,
the United Nations has not been successful in settling
some of the longest-standing issues to international
peace and security. For example, the struggle of the
people of Palestine for their self-determination has
remained unresolved for more than seven decades. The
longer that Palestinians are denied self-determination,
human rights and the rule of law, the more we are all
collectively guilty of not fully respecting and upholding
the Charter. The Security Council's approach to that
issue still stands out as an example of selective inaction
in implementing the purposes and principles of the
Charter.

Malaysia is a strong supporter of reform initiatives
with a view to strengthening the United Nations.
Although we have recognized the challenges associated
with the reform process, we strongly encourage
all Member States to work collectively to expedite
the process of ensuring that the United Nations
remains central to the multilateral architecture. If
multilateralism is to be effective, Malaysia believes
that only a reformed and strengthened United Nations
is the way forward.

