Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I wish to begin by thanking Judge Carmel Agius and
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their written reports
(see S/2019/888) and their informative briefings.

Belgium continues to fully support the proceedings
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, which plays a vital role in the process of
intercommunal reconciliation both in Rwanda and in
the countries ofthe former Yugoslavia. The Mechanism,
like the two International Criminal Tribunals from
which it took over, is part and parcel of the arsenal
of relevant measures in the realm of justice, broadly
speaking, that have been adopted by Security Council
for post-conflict transition.

The fight against impunity and ensuring that
justice is handed down for the most serious crimes
under international law are among the core obligations
that are incumbent primarily upon each State. For
that reason, it is of vital importance for all countries
to cooperate not only among themselves but also with
the Mechanism. In that respect, recent developments
are alarming. Indeed, one of the eight indicted persons
before the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
apparently remains at large.

Belgium recalls that all States Members of the
United Nations are duty-bound to cooperate with the
Mechanism, in line with its statute and the numerous
resolutions adopted by the Security Council. We
therefore thank South Africa for today's statement and
invite it to render all necessary assistance so that the
fugitive in question can be apprehended and transferred.

On the other hand, while we acknowledge and
commend the progress that has been achieved in
dealing with certain cases at the national level, the
Office of the Prosecutor pointed to persistent reports
regarding the denial of crimes and the glorification of
war criminals in all communities and all countries of
the former Yugoslavia. The same holds true vis-a-vis
regionaljudicial cooperation, which is at its lowest level
in years. These alarming observations reflect practices
that are at variance with the values and principles
that lie at the heart of both the United Nations and the
European Union. This trend must be promptly reversed
so that the perpetrators of war crimes do not remain
unpunished and so that an end can be put to hate speech
and any ideology advocating discrimination.

I wish to conclude by commending the efforts of the
President of the Mechanism to streamline its working
methods and thereby maximize its efficiency. At the
same time, Belgium encourages the General Assembly
to provide the Mechanism with adequate financing for
the forthcoming budget cycle. Lastly, we welcome the
fact that the President of the Mechanism is considering
possible amendments to the Practice Direction vis-a-vis
early release.

The challenges faced by the Mechanism are a
reminder of just how important its mandate is. The
memory of the hundreds of thousands of victims of
the wars in the Balkans and the genocide in Rwanda
must prompt us to continue to support it and other
mechanisms in the realm ofjustice, broadly speaking,
in order to prevent the recurrence of such atrocities.
