Mr. Biaboroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for having organized today's debate on the situation in
Iraq, in the light of recent developments and of the
activities undertaken by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the Multinational Force
(MNF). We should also like to extend our thanks to
Mr. Qazi for his presentation and to the delegation of
the United States of America, speaking on behalf of the
MNF.

The security situation in Iraq remains essentially
very worrying, in spite of developments in the political
process in this country, in particular with regard to the
establishment of the institutional framework and of the
organs that are charged with leading the various
institutions. It is true that encouraging initiatives have
been undertaken by the constitutionally elected Iraqi
Government with the support of Iraq's partners at both
regional and international level. My delegation
welcomed the complete formation of the Iraqi
Government and, in particular, the allocation of key
posts in the Ministries of Defence, the Interior and
National Security. We also welcomed the launching of
the Baghdad security plan which is currently in the
second phase of its implementation.

However, and unfortunately, violence and
violation of human rights among the Iraqi population
remain endemic. Today, Iraq is one of the most
dangerous places in the world. Each day brings its
share of murders, assassinations, abductions and acts of
intercommunity violence. In terms of violence, horror
vies with fanaticism to a point where the country is on
the brink of a widespread civil war which would,
without any doubt, undermine all the efforts
undertaken for Iraq's recovery and may well
discourage the international community.

That is precisely the aim sought by the
proponents of terror and of chaos. At this crucial
moment in Iraq's history, the international community
must provide itself with the means to support the
efforts undertaken by the Iraqi Government to gain
control over the situation as a whole, including
national reconciliation.

Only national reconciliation, particularly through
the seeking of consensus and by way of inclusive
dialogue, can offer a way out of this crisis, as no
military solution will bring peace or security to Iraq.
All the champions of peace and security in Iraq must
be fully involved and must engage fully and in good
faith in seeking to build national reconciliation and the
essential confidence-building measures. To that end,
my delegation urges the League of Arab States to
convene as soon as possible the proposed conference
on Iraqi national reconciliation.

The development and the presentation of the
International Compact for Iraq must also contribute
towards the restoration of peace and security. That
ambitious plan, co-sponsored by the Iraqi Government
and by the United Nations, deserves the firm and
resolved support of the international community for its

implementation. We look forward with interest to the
conclusions of the meeting on 18 September, convened
to that effect by the Secretary-General.

To conclude, my delegation commends the efforts
undertaken by the UNAMI and by the soldiers of the
MNF working in a very difficult situation.

