Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I should like to thank the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) for his briefing on the work of
the Committee and to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Grauls for presiding over that work.

Since December 2006, the Security Council has
adopted resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and
1803 (2008) on the Iranian nuclear issue. Those
resolutions reflected the collective concern of the
international community with regard to that issue and
were aimed at maintaining the international
6
non-proliferation mechanism in order to strengthen the
authority and role of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and to advance diplomatic efforts to peacefully
resolve the Iranian nuclear issue.

All States have the obligation to implement those
resolutions in a comprehensive and conscientious
manner. China attaches importance to and has strictly
fulfilled its obligations under those resolutions and has,
in a timely manner, submitted three reports on their
implementation. At the same time, we would like to
emphasize once again that the sanctions are not an end
in themselves and cannot fundamentally resolve the
Iranian nuclear issue. The best option is to resolve the
issue peacefully through diplomatic negotiations.

There is now a rare opportunity to resume the
negotiations on the Iranian nuclear issue. We hope that
the parties concerned will seize that opportunity,
demonstrate flexibility and work hard to help the
situation develop in a peaceful direction, seeking a
comprehensive, lasting and appropriate resolution of
the Iranian nuclear issue.

China has consistently supported maintaining the
international non-proliferation mechanism and opposed
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We do not want
to see any new turbulence in the Middle East region,
and we advocate the peaceful resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue through diplomatic negotiations. We will
continue to participate actively in the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We will support and cooperate with its
Chairman in relevant efforts and seek to ensure that it
plays a constructive role in properly resolving the
Iranian nuclear issue.

