Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General; the European External Action
Service Deputy Secretary General, Mr. Popowski; and
the Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations, Mr. Antonio. I thank you, Ambassador
Gasana, for convening and framing today's debate,
which could not be more timely. Rwanda knows of
what it speaks. Rwandans understand the importance
of getting peacekeeping right, having experienced the
catastrophic consequences of it going terribly wrong.

As we meet, regional organizations are playing a
more central role in peacekeeping than ever before,
particularly in Africa. They have proven swift and
nimble in responding to serious crises. They have been
willing to take on robust protection mandates. As we
have seen in the past 18 months alone, the African Union
(AU) and the Economic Community of West African
States have deployed to address the urgent burning
crises in Mali and the Central African Republic.

When African countries came together in 2002 to
form the new African Union, they decided that they
never wanted to stand by as atrocities were being
committed on the continent. They refused to accept
the arguments of those who said that such violence
was endemic to Africa, that their newly created Union
lacked the capacity or the authority to stop it, and that
it was not in their collective interest to intervene. They
knew that such atrocities could be stopped and that they
had the power and the responsibility to do so, so they
enshrined a commitment to non-indifference in the very
Charter establishing their new Union. They committed
not to turn a blind eye to atrocities.

Not only does the AU have the right to intervene in
the face of atrocities, but any member can request an
intervention when such horrors occur. The AU Charter
gives letter to the growing consensus that neighbours,
regions and the entire international community have a
profound stake in the security and stability of countries
in conflict. In every region of the world, we have seen
that conflicts do not respect borders, especially when
they are fueled by groups intent on targeting civilians
and sowing terror. Ignoring those conflicts can be
devastating not only to the countries and regions in
which they occur, but to all of us.

In order for mandates to protect civilians to be
effective, they must be enforced, and enforcement is
the key to deterrence. Warlords and militant take notice
of peacekeepers' willingness to stand up or to stand
by. The failure to uphold the commitment to protecting
civilians in one mission can undermine the legitimacy
of all of the others. That is part of why it is so troubling
that, according to a March report (A/68/787) of the
United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS), United Nations peacekeeping missions have
routinely failed to use force to protect civilians under
attack, despite the mandates under which they operate.
Of the 507 attacks against civilians that it reviewed
from 2010 to 2013, the OIOS found that peacekeeping
missions almost never used force to protect civilians
under attack. The Secretary-General has launched a
comprehensive review of peacekeeping, which needs
to tackle that grave challenge head on. It should draw
lessons from the leadership of Rwanda, as well as other
countries, such as Ethiopia and Nepal, with regard
to the protection of civilians. Rwanda's troops were
among the first boots on the ground when conflicts
metastasized in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan. Not only do Rwandans volunteer for
complex and dangerous missions but, because of their
commitment to protect civilians, the populations in
countries where the Rwandans serve trust them. Troops
from other countries who serve alongside them draw
strength from their fortitude, and aggressors who would
attack civilians fear them.

We recognize the many challenges to making
regional and international peacekeeping missions
work, namely, the challenges of training and equipping
troops, of airlifting them into theatre and ofmaintaining
their supply lines once they are there. We are therefore
investing greatly in regional missions and in the
capabilities of troop-contributing countries. The United
States contributed more than $500 million to the African
Union Mission in Somalia, and $166 million towards
equipment and training for the African contingents
deploying to the United Nations mission in Mali, as well
as logistical support to its African-led predecessor. We
are also providing up to $100 million in similar support
to the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic. The training and assistance
programme for our African contingency operations has
trained nearly 250,000 peacekeepers from 25 partner
countries since 2005.

Our support for regional initiatives is a clear
affirmation of our broader commitment to making
peacekeeping more effective, as well as to our
partnerships with countries that contribute troops to
critical missions. Next week, President Obama will
meet African Heads of State at the United States-
Africa Leaders Summit in Washington, DC, to discuss
how the United States can deepen its partnership with
countries that commit troops both to United Nations
and to regional peacekeeping and how we, along with
other partners, can help them to address persistent
operational challenges.

Such regional cooperation is in everyone's interest.
First and foremost, it is in the interest of civilians
threatened by violent conflicts. It is in the interest of
the United Nations because regional peacekeepers often
lay the foundation for United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping efforts and advance the core principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. It is in the interest of
countries that send troops whose stability is enhanced
by the investment in training and equipment that come
with such interventions and arises from their having
played a role in preventing deadly conflicts from
spreading across borders.

Perpetrators who commit atrocities are routinely
testing peacekeepers' limits. When the first killings
began in Rwanda in the spring in 1994, Romeo Dallaire,
the United Nations Force Commander there at the time,
appealed for reinforcements. He cabled United Nations
Headquarters and said that he could do more. He
needed more and better trained peacekeepers, he said.
He recognized that if he could send a clear message
early on, a wholesale massacre might be averted.

Regional organizations have shown that they not
only can do more but also are willing to do more. As
they step forward, it is not only the people whom they
protect who benefit from greater peace and stability,
we all do. We owe it to regional and international peace
and security and to the many civilians in harm's way
right now to give them our full support.

