Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like at the
outset to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for introducing the
Secretary-General's report (S/2016/589). I also thank
Ambassador Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; and
especially Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi, in
his capacity as facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for his efforts in addressing this
sensitive topic.

One year after the adoption of resolution 2231
(2015), establishing the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action agreed by the United States, the Russian
Federation, China, France, the United Kingdom, the
European Union, Germany and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, we commend and welcome the progress made
in the implementation of the resolution, the fruit of
extraordinary diplomatic efforts to achieve a broad,
long-term and appropriate resolution to the Iranian
nuclear issue. It was a political commitment among the
parties that must be recognized because it represents an
exceptional means of resolving conflicts that threaten
world peace.

The outcome underscores the importance of political
and diplomatic efforts to find a peaceful resolution
to this dispute, in line with Article 2 of the Charter
of the United Nations, showing that when parties are
committed to one another, peace and dialogue trump
the contentious rhetoric that breeds mistrust. The
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action and its strict enforcement ensure that the Islamic
Republic of Iran can exercise its sovereign right to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in accordance
with article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Similarly, its implementation
has contributed to establishing a climate conducive
to dialogue and understanding between Iran and the
States parties to the agreement, based on mutual trust
and respect, and a joint commitment to strengthening
international peace and security.

As for the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/589)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which
was introduced today, my delegation believes that it
should reflect a fundamental change in the way we
address this issue, based on the parties' willingness
to establish a new relationship with Iran through the
application of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
In the same vein, we believe that this first report should
have been guided by the principles of impartiality
and objectivity in order to avoid the introduction
of controversial elements that could lead to an
imbalanced treatment of the issues, in consideration
of the information submitted by the parties and Iran's
compliance with its commitments under the Plan of
Action, which has been verified by the International
Atomic Energy Agency in its report.

In like manner, any presentation of cases of
supposed non-compliance on the part of the parties
must be based on reliable, duly verified research in
order to ensure a clear understanding of the facts. We
must prevent future reports from containing elements
that are characteristic of a sanctions committee.
The mechanism that was established through the
adoption of resolution 2231 (2015) should facilitate the
implementation process - a goal to which we should
all be committed.

We also believe that elements that go beyond the
scope of resolution 2231 (2015) should not be included
in the reports. Aspects of the Secretary-General's
report that require clarification should not be used for
political ends to undermine the climate of trust that
has been coalescing following the adoption of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. The Islamic Republic
of Iran has reaffirmed its commitment to fulfilling its
obligations in the framework of its agreements with
all parties to the process. Likewise, we must bear in
mind that Iran has been working constructively with
other countries to reach negotiated political solutions
to the serious conflicts that afflict the troubled region
of the Middle East, which is an important step towards
building trust among the parties.

Despite the progress made in the implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and the
commitments and agreements on the definitive lifting
of the sanctions regime imposed on the Islamic
Republic of Iran, as well as other unilateral coercive
measures taken illegally in other arenas regarding
Iran's nuclear programme, we encourage the parties to
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action to act prudently
to put an end to all unilateral measures that continue to
affect the Islamic Republic of Iran. We also encourage
parties to refrain from adopting any policy that would
negatively affect the normalization of economic and
trade relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran and
thereby undermine the effective implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.

We should take advantage of this historic political
momentum and the positive dynamic between P5+1 and
Iran in order to focus on resolving differences through
dialogue and negotiation. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action is a model for success that could be
replicated in addressing, by political and diplomatic
means, other regional and international issues affecting
international peace and security, such as the search for
common positions among countries of the region and
the Council that would allow us to tackle the crises that
affect that important geographic zone, inter alia, the
Palestinian issue, the conflicts in Syria and Yemen, and
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism. We
also remain hopeful that this important step taken by
Iran and the other parties to the agreement will help
other countries of the region to refrain from engaging
in a nuclear arms race. We believe that the international
community should focus and demonstrate the political
will to establish a zone free of nuclear weapons in the
Middle East, in accordance with the decisions adopted
during the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference
and reiterated at subsequent conferences.

Finally, we reiterate our full support for the
implementation of this historic process in order to
ensure the well-being and progress ofthe Iranian people,
as well as to ease the tensions and contribute to stability
in the Middle East. We therefore urge the parties to
fulfil the agreement reached on the basis of good faith
and mutual respect and to avoid any action that would
jeopardize its effective implementation. All parties
should avoid inflammatory rhetoric and confrontation
and refrain from actions or acts of provocation that
affect the atmosphere of detente necessary to continue
implementing the agreement. The progress achieved in
fulfilling the agreement shows once again that, when
there is political will among the parties and respect
for legitimate mutual interests, the international
community can resolve the conflicts and crises that
affect international peace and security.

