Chile extends its regards to the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations, Nicolas de Riviere, and thanks France for putting the topic of utmost importance - children and armed conflict - on the Security Council's agenda. More than a duty, it is a moral imperative to protect children, who, without being given a choice, experience the wrenching and painful consequences of conflict as part of their daily lives. The figures showing that reality are appalling. This year, the United Nations verified more than 25,000 grave violations against children and a total of 13,200 children were separated from non-State actors and armed forces worldwide. We must not forget our commitment to the 7,000 children who were abducted, recruited by force or in exchange for money, employed as combatants, messengers or cooks or forced to provide sexual services when their place really should be in school and with their families, like many children around the world. Children also experience physical and psychological trauma that will scar them for life. The secondary impacts of conflict put them in situations where they might actually be left behind developmentally, physically and emotionally. The current 400 per cent increase in denials of humanitarian access to children does little to assist them. What is worse, the lack of protection, holistic resources for survivors and accountability mechanisms disincentivizes survivors, their families and witnesses from reporting violations. Meanwhile, restrictions put in place to mitigate the spread of coronavirus disease threaten to hamper efforts to prevent, monitor, report and respond to child rights violations. Chile strongly believes that there is an urgent need to address immediate threats while also incorporating preventive approaches in order to evaluate emerging challenges and conceptualize long-term solutions. To that end, we highly value the role of the monitoring and reporting mechanism, which allows a better understanding of the situation on the ground as a basis to guide effective action towards protecting children. Accordingly, we add our voice to those who call for the Secretary-General to initiate a rigorous and transparent procedure to ensure that, going forward, the annexes to the annual report accurately and consistently reflect the evidence collected by the monitoring and reporting mechanism. With regards to accountability, it is important to keep implementing the legislative and institutional arrangements in order to comprehensively address violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Naming perpetrators in the annex of the Secretary-General's annual report is an important step towards accountability for those who commit atrocities against children. Therefore, to ensure maximum accountability, we encourage the conduct of an independent, objective and transparent assessment of how the listing and delisting criteria set out in document S/2010/181 have been implemented thus far. But, most important, we owe it to these brave children to keep seeking solutions. We must continue to keep strengthening an integrated response that contributes to building resilient societies, supports children from the origins of a conflict to the end of the cycle of violence and seeks full, systemic reintegration. That needs to be done while consistently implementing the existing instruments that facilitate the protection of children, such as the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, the Safe Schools Declaration and the programmes for the reintegration of child soldiers.
