Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
extend our gratitude for the organization of this
meeting. We also extend our gratitude to Ambassador
Saikal of Afghanistan for his statement. I should also
like to thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing.
At a time when Afghanistan is experiencing
such severe hardships, what it needs most is further
robust and sustained international support. That is
of the utmost importance in order to respond to the
country's existing challenges, achieve lasting peace
and stability in Afghanistan and the region and promote
its sustainable socioeconomic development. As a
neighbouring country, Iran continues to contribute to
and support the promotion of Afghanistan's stability,
political-security conditions and socioeconomic
development. Certain efforts are under way to
ensure that such a contribution is carried out in an
institutionalized and sustained manner.

We also continue our endeavours to promote
regional efforts in support of peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan. In that regard, the
development plan for Iran's Chabahar port will indeed
have a significant impact on the promotion of trade and
economic cooperation with Afghanistan. Any attempt
to disrupt that vital project will play only into the hands
of those who do not want peace and progress for the
Afghan people.

Security remains Afghanistan's major challenge. It is
one of the main requirements for long-term stability and
socioeconomic development in Afghanistan. Therefore,
enhancing its security situation should be pursued as a
high priority. In that context, counter-terrorism efforts
must have the highest priority. The recent terrorist acts,
which claimed the lives of innocent civilians, further
prove that the threat of terrorist groups, including
Daesh, should not be underestimated. Iran will continue
to support Afghanistan's Government in its struggle
against terrorist groups. The need for sustained regional
and international support in countering terrorists in
Afghanistan is crucial. However, it needs to be achieved
in a realistic manner.

Another source of concern in the security field
in Afghanistan is the increase in civilian casualties.
That includes the targeting of Shia communities and
religious sites, resulting in high civilian casualties.
That trend needs to be thwarted.

To enhance democracy, political institutions and
national unity in Afghanistan, every effort should be
made to ensure that the upcoming elections are held
and result in success for the country. Iran will continue
its constructive role in that regard.
We continue to support and commend the dedicated
work of UNAMA and United Nations agencies in
providing development and reconstruction assistance to
Afghanistan. Sustained ownership and partnership with
the Afghan Government are needed in order to utilize
the best potential of UNAMA and the United Nations
system to deliver the necessary services in priority
areas, as advised by Afghanistan's Government.

Despite the progress achieved, there remain
challenges and threats in Afghanistan that need further
sustained international support. In that context, we
welcome the convening of the Geneva ministerial
conference on Afghanistan that is to take place in
November. The international community should
remain resolute in securing a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. In turn, Iran will continue its full support
to the fraternal people and Government of Afghanistan
in their endeavour to achieve lasting peace and
prosperity in their country. That is what they deserve.

The meeting rose at 6.10pm.
