Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing on the
progress made in recent months in Kosovo. I would
also like to thank Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku, Ambassador
of Kosovo to the United States of America, for their
interventions, which I welcome.

My delegation takes note of the resumption of
the European Union-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina on 18 July and separate talks
with Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, in Brussels on 7 September. We urge the parties
to continue the talks to promote the normalization of
relations, since ensuring security and stability in Kosovo
requires the commitment of both parties to continuing
the dialogue. We therefore encourage them to continue
to step up their efforts towards achieving stability on
the ground, while respecting the implementation of the
agreements reached.

Likewise, we note the possible agreement on
territorial adjustments on which the parties are working
in view of their commitment to reaching a final
agreement on Kosovo. We recall that the aforementioned
agreement should not only be in line with international
laws but also address all the concerns of the various
communities, as well as the disagreements that may
arise among them. In that regard, we encourage the
parties to continue to cooperate peacefully, to promote
political dialogue and respect for human rights, as
established in the Charter of the United Nations, and
to address their differences through direct, fair and
inclusive negotiations in order to find a lasting solution
acceptable to all parties.

We note with concern the decision of Pristina to
increase taxes on products imported from Serbia.
That decision does nothing but undermine regional
cooperation, increase tensions and damage overall
trust among the various communities. We therefore
urge the parties to step up their efforts to improve
regional cooperation and the rule of law, and to
promote development, peace and security in Kosovo,
while safeguarding the good relations of trust among
the communities there. In that regard, we call on the
competent authorities to clarify as soon as possible the
circumstances surrounding the murder of Kosovo Serb
politician Oliver Ivanovie in January.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Serbia and deems the legitimate Serbian
concerns on the question of Kosovo to be justified. We
thank Serbia for its continued efforts to seek a peaceful
and inclusive solution to the question of Kosovo.

Finally, we commend the excellent work that
UNMIK is doing on the ground and the support that
it provides to all of the communities in Kosovo and
the regional and international actors, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, in order to fulfil the mandates of
resolution 1244 (1999), which is the legal basis for ajust
solution in Kosovo.

