Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first of all to thank Mr. James Morris for the
very detailed briefing that he gave us on the food crisis
in Africa. We note that, unfortunately, that crisis is not
only continuing but, in some cases, getting worse.

In that context, even though we know that we
cannot completely control or overcome natural factors,
such as drought, disease, sanitary conditions and
pandemics, we can, and should, fight to eliminate the
structural factors that impede the work of the World
Food Programme, including, of course, war and its
consequences - such as problems associated with
displaced persons and refugees - as well as poor
administration, lack of governance, bad governance
and issues relating to world trade in agricultural
products. Such factors are the responsibility of
individuals, first and foremost leaders, who, in many
cases, are not located in Africa.

With respect to emergency situations in Africa,
which Mr. Morris described in great detail, we believe
that it is very important for donor countries to increase
their humanitarian assistance to the World Food
Programme intended to alleviate hunger in that
continent. We believe that, in the medium and long
term, African citizens themselves must generate the
policies and provide the leadership necessary to enable
their countries to emerge from the situations about
which we have heard today.

However, it is in that area that the international
community has a responsibility. It should provide the
necessary incentives for agricultural production in
developing countries to become viable and exportable.
We know that the current policy of subsidies, quotas
and customs tariffs in the farming sectors of developed
countries clearly distorts the prices of those
commodities and prevents developing countries from
being able to produce and export products in which
they have a clear comparative advantage over the
goods produced in developed countries. Obviously, I
am referring to food production.

The existing link between development and peace
has been underscored. In that regard, we believe it
extremely important that the international community
promote structural reforms in the rules of international
trade - for example, by promoting the Doha Round on
agricultural products, among other measures.

All that would be of help to the international
trade in the agricultural commodities of developing
countries.

In conclusion, we would like to ask Mr. Morris
whether the World Food Programme is considering
increasing investments in basic agricultural
infrastructure in Africa at both the micro- and macro-
economic levels. We would also like to know about the
existing relationship between the World Food
Programme and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations with regard to maintaining and increasing
food security, which is one of the fundamental goals in
the maintenance of peace and security on the African
continent.

