I would like to make four points. One is on the political crisis, one on gang- related violence, one on the police and justice sectors and the last point is on the work of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). I will start with the political crisis. Let me say, first of all, we are disappointed that Haitian stakeholders have still not reached a minimum consensus over a political agenda addressing the root causes of the problems that Haiti has been facing for a long time. We encourage all stakeholders to reach an agreement on the revision of the Constitution, on the implementation of reforms and on a realistic electoral framework for credible and transparent elections. We condemn in the strongest possible terms the assassination, on 28 August, of Monferrier Dorval. This has been a major setback, and we join the Secretary- General's call to the Haitian authorities to spare no effort to bring the perpetrators of this crime to justice. On gang-related violence, we remain highly alarmed by the resurgence of this kind of gang activity, which has a long and terrible tradition in Haiti. We are particularly concerned to learn that certain political actors and businessmen have close ties with criminal gangs. We strongly condemn all actions that undermine democratic processes and the rule of law, and we call on all stakeholders to refrain from acts that could contribute to instability. It is important that the Government continue to support the National Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration. We deplore, once again in this context, the scant progress made in pursuing accountability for human rights violations, such as the events in La Saline, Bel Air and Grand Ravine, and the same goes for corruption scandals. We encourage the Government to support the establishment of a standalone Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Haiti to safeguard continued collaboration with State authorities on human rights issues. My third point is on police and justice, on which we see some hopeful developments. We hope that these positive signs of the continued professionalization of the Haitian National Police, in an environment that is becoming even more challenging, will gain momentum. In this context, accountability for members of the police forces for their actions is of the utmost importance, as it will make confidence grow in the police as an institution. At the same time, we remain worried that the limited amount of resources provided to the Haitian National Police over the past several years is beginning to erode not only the organization's operational capacity but also public confidence in the country's sole functioning nationwide public safety institution. We are also concerned about the growing trend of polarization within the police forces, especially with regard to a violent group of mostly former, but also active, policemen named Fant6me 509. We are also worried about support for a group called "G9 an fanmi"'. Major challenges also persist in the justice and corrections sectors. It is most illustrative of this that the occupancy rate in prisons has risen 338 per cent, mainly owing to rising numbers of pretrial detainees resulting from bottlenecks in the judicial sector. We welcome the support provided by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund in order to achieve a reduction in prison and detention centre inmates in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic.My last point is on the work of BINUH. We reaffirm our continued support for the work of a mission and the 19 United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Haiti that are working and delivering as One United Nations. We are in favour of an extension of the mandate of BINUH, which will be negotiated over the next couple of days. All components of the mandate still remain relevant to us, and we, of course, continue to fully support the important work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Helen Meagher La Lime and her entire team on Haiti.
