Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank
Secretary-General Guterres and, of course, the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States for
their briefings. I would also like to extend a very warm
welcome to the Foreign Minister of Poland.

We very much welcome your initiative, Mr. President,

to discuss this issue here today at the Security Council.
During Germany's presidency of the Council seven
years ago in 2012, we convened a discussion on the very
issue at hand today (see S/PV.6841), in an illustration
of our long-term commitment to comprehensive
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in order to tackle
protracted conflicts. We believe firmly that stronger
ties between the United Nations and the League of
Arab States and greater exchange and collaboration
can make a significant contribution to preventing
crises and managing conflicts, improving human rights
situations, combating terrorism and mitigating the
plight of refugees and internally displaced persons in
the region. The list of conflicts and challenges in the
region is a long one, as we all know. Ongoing conflicts
such as those in Libya, Syria, Yemen and Sudan, as
well as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, present us with
complex conflict dynamics. I do not want to go into
all of these issues today in detail, but I would like to
highlight two issues.

The first concerns Syria. To echo several of my
colleagues, I would like to underscore Germany's
strong commitment to a negotiated political settlement
on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). We are currently
following the deadly escalation in the north-west of the
country with great concern, and we reiterate our appeal
to all actors to fully respect international humanitarian
law, which must prevail in all circumstances.

Secondly, I would also like to comment very briefly
on last night's security incident in the Gulf of Oman. We
strongly condemn the attack on two oil tankers in the
Gulf of Oman. Like every act of sabotage, it constitutes
another serious threat to the security and safety of
maritime traffic in the region, but such incidents could
also add to the tensions already present in the region.
That is particularly worrying and disturbing, and we
must closely follow the situation as a matter of great
concern.

The long list of challenges in the region highlights
the urgency of regional dialogue in order to address
the root causes of conflicts, such as underlying
grievances, and reconcile those conflicting interests.
Our organizations bear a particular responsibility
for constructively addressing and working towards
de-escalating such conflicts. The League of Arab
States can provide an important platform for promoting
enhanced regional dialogue. Such dialogue can facilitate
the identification of shared interests and opportunities
for political, economic and security cooperation within
the region, which ultimately helps to overcome existing
mistrust and tensions.

A particularly relevant area for cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States is
human rights. Presidential statement S/PRST/2012/20
notes the intention of the League of Arab Nations and
the United Nations to cooperate on the promotion of
human rights, freedom of expression and respect for
and promotion of the rule of law. Seven years later, we
note with some concern the trend in some countries
to restrict the space for civil society and human rights
defenders. It is a priority for Germany to defend human
rights worldwide. As we noted at yesterday's briefing
(see S/PV. 8546), we do not View human rights as
they are too often seen in the United Nations context,
namely, in a negative context. It is not just about
naming and shaming. We see human rights as a positive
element that can contribute to resolving the root causes
of problems. I think that is how we should approach
human rights. Equally, the promotion ofwomen's rights,
women's equal participation, the protection of religious
minorities and the promotion of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex rights are key to achieving fair
and prosperous societies.

In February, the European Union (EU) and the
League of Arab States held their first summit in Sharm
El-Sheikh. The key outcome was the joint commitment
to further develop a strategic partnership between the
EU and the League of Arab States through effective
multilateralism within the international rules-based
order, including increased cooperation with the United
Nations. In her statement at that meeting of Heads of
State and Government, Chancellor Merkel highlighted
the need for joint approaches to tackling shared
challenges, even where there might be disagreement on
particular issues.
In that spirit of strategic partnership between the
European Union and the League of Arab States, Germany
is also clearly supportive of stronger ties between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States. In that
regard, the Secretary-General mentioned the fact that
he was honoured to attend the Arab League summit
in Tunis in March. That is extremely positive, but we
would also like to emphasize that cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States is
most fruitful when it extends to all United Nations
bodies and forums. A comprehensive understanding of
processes, in particular on human rights issues in the
General Assembly and the Commission on the Status
of Women, is key to strengthening the multilateral
system, to which our organizations are committed. The
upcoming opening of the United Nations liaison office
to the League of Arab States in Cairo will play a key
role in deepening our institutional relations.

Before concluding, let me say that we greatly
welcome the draft presidential statement on this
important issue.

