Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr. Trujillo
Garcia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, whose
presence at today's meeting reflects the commitment
of the Colombian authorities to the peace process.
We congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ruiz Massieu, and Ms. Rosa
Emilia Salamanca, representative of Colombian civil
society, on their outstanding briefings.

My country takes note with satisfaction of the
encouraging results seen in the implementation of the
Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and the
Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed on
24 November 2016. However, this positive momentum
should not obscure the remaining challenges, as outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/265),
regarding security issues, socioeconomic reintegration
and traditional justice.

On the issue of security, my delegation remains
concerned at the resurgence of killings of social
leaders, members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia - People's Army (FARC-EP) and human
rights defenders. These assassinations and other forms
of sociopolitical violence seriouslyjeopardize the peace
progress, which has offered a ray of hope to millions of
Colombians. My country therefore urges the Colombian
authorities to redouble their efforts to further reduce the
level of violence and ensure better protection for leaders
and FARC-EP members in areas affected by insecurity.
In addition, in view of the upcoming regional and local
elections, my delegation welcomes the reactivation of
the National Commission on Security Guarantees, with
a view to developing a comprehensive plan of measures
aimed at ensuring the protection of all candidates.

Regarding socioeconomic reintegration, my
delegation welcomes the measures taken by the
Colombian Government to ensure access to land
ownership for former combatants, which is a key
element of the economic reintegration process. It is
also important to step up the process of approving
revenue-generating projects and of disbursing funds
to those that have already been approved. In that
connection, C6te d'Ivoire calls on donors and bilateral
partners to support the Colombian Government in
funding that programme, whose success will have a
positive impact on the peace process. It also urges the
Colombian authorities to take the appropriate measures
to ensure the social reintegration of former combatants
gathered in areas for training and reintegration areas,
which will be functional only until 15 August.

Regarding transitional justice, my delegation
supports the recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-General on the urgent measures to
be taken by all stakeholders in order to swiftly put in
place the statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and ensure the provision of adequate resources
to the Jurisdiction so that it can function efficiently
and autonomously.

To conclude, Cote d'Ivoire commends the
commitment and dedication of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia teams and of the
various United Nations agencies that are working
tirelessly to build peace in Columbia. It reiterates its full
support for the reconciliation process currently under
way and calls on all Colombian parties to work together
to overcome all obstacles and build mutual trust.

