Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to begin by congratulating you, Madam
President, on France's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month. We also thank you
for convening today's open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine. I
welcome the efforts of your friendly nation to revive a
peace process that guarantees Palestinian rights and the
establishment ofa sovereign Palestinian State, based on
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as it capital. We
reiterate that we will cooperate in those efforts.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia welcomes the
reconciliation agreement among Palestinians. We
look forward to the agreement's impact on the hopes
and aspirations of the Palestinian people by ending
divisiveness and achieving national unity. That will
empower our Palestinian brothers and sisters to enjoy
their legitimate rights, as outlined in the various
international resolutions. In that regard, we commend
the efforts of our Egyptian brothers and sisters, who
helped to make that step possible. We condemn Israel's
attempts to obstruct the agreement and call on it to
work in good faith to achieve a positive outcome.

The only path to peace is to return to the Arab
Peace Initiative, which my country presented more
than 15 years ago, to establish an effective international
mechanism to ensure that the Palestinian people reclaim
all their inalienable rights, within a specific time frame
and through the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on pre-1967 borders. Israel must withdraw from
all occupied Arab territory, including the Syrian Golan
and Lebanese territories, cease its illegal settlement
activities on Palestinian territory and halt all unilateral
measures taken in Jerusalem.

While regional efforts are being stepped up to
salvage the two-State solution and the international
community agrees that the main obstacle facing the
peace process is the Israeli occupation and settlement-
building, Israeli authorities pursue their expansionist
policies. In recent weeks, Israel has approved plans to
build thousands of housing units and begun to construct
2,600 units in East Jerusalem. This would result in a
settlement barrier separating Jerusalem from the rest
of the Palestinian territory. Israel has also continued
to build more than 30 units in Hebron - a grave turn
of events that could escalate tensions. Those units will
be built on the verge of the Abrahamic Sanctuary, on
territory that the occupying Power had previously
expropriated for illegitimate reasons. Plans have also
been adopted to build more than 12,200 housing units
in the West Bank.

Israel has also enacted a law legitimizing the
construction of approximately 4,000 residential units
in the occupied West Bank and allowing Israel to
expropriate Palestinian land and for new settlements
to be added to existing settlements at any time. That
is a clear and irrefutable indication that Israel's
settlement plans will undermine all opportunities
for the establishment of a viable Palestinian State.
Israel is maintaining its de facto policy to quash all
opportunities to achieve a genuine two-State solution.
We underscore that such illegitimate measures must be
decisively countered by the Security Council and by
international judicial bodies.

Israel's decade-long blockade of Gaza is one of the
worst manifestations oflsraeli occupation. It has led to
poverty and a deterioration of living standards, which
result in environmental and humanitarian crises that
threaten all areas of life.

The rights of the Palestinian people cannot be
curtailed. We will continue to voice our support of the
Palestinian people, rejecting all attempts by Israel to
impose control and continue settlement activities, and
opposing all unilateral actions to change the status quo
in Jerusalem and Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We also warn
against the risk of exacerbating the situation, thereby
leading to an escalation that could have implications
throughout and far beyond our region.

With regard to the Syrian issue, the King of Saudi
Arabia commends the work of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, the United States of America and the Russian
Federation to establish de-escalation zones in the
southern part of Syria. We hope that such cooperation
will lead to the establishment of no-fly zones in Syria,
thereby ensuring the safety of civilians and leading to
a ceasefire throughout Syrian territory, especially as
we witness the Syrian regime's continued killing and
forced displacement of persons with the assistance
of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and other
militias, including Hizbullah.

We also commend the progress of the Global
Coalition against Da'esh/the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. The King of Saudi Arabia is a partner in
the Coalition, which is aimed at liberating Iraqi and
Syrian territory from Da'esh. We emphasize that the
elimination of terrorism in all its forms will be neither
successful nor sustainable unless all foreign terrorist
fighters leave, including those who are fighting
alongside the Syrian regime and participating in the
gravest atrocities against the Syrian people. More than
10 million people are in need of assistance, including
more than 3 million who have been trapped in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas and face great peril. In that
regard, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reaffirms the
importance of the international community maintaining
its strong stance against all forms of besiegement and
the killing practiced by the Syrian regime and its allies.

We believe that the struggle of the Syrian people for
dignity and freedom must eventually achieve its end.
The stability of the region and the world depends on the
Syrian people realizing their dream. We call for joint
efforts and the establishment of a transitional authority
in Syria that will serve the Syrian people; help them to
achieve their aspirations to peace, security and justice;
and renounce extremism, fanaticism and violence. In
that context, we emphasize our support for the strategy
announced by United States President Donald Trump
with regard to eliminating the terrorist threat posed by
Iran in Syria and the region, in general.

Saudi Arabia has previously supported the nuclear
deal based on its belief that we must work towards
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, but Iran has
exploited the economic returns of the lifting of sanctions
and continued to destabilize the region, including
through developing its ballistic-missile programme and
supporting terrorism through its Revolutionary Guard,
Hizbullah and the Houthi militias. Accordingly, we
commend the vision of the United States Administration,
and its commitment to work together with allies to
confront Iran's aggressive policies.

