Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The report of the
Secretary-General documents numerous specific instances
of summary execution, rape, mass expulsion, arbitrary
detention, forced labour and large-scale disappearance,
allegedly carried out by the Bosnian Serb and paramilitary
forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It confirms beyond any
doubt that massive violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights have occurred in the
areas of Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja Luka and Sanski Most.
These despicable crimes have shocked the conscience of
the international community, and they deserve the
strongest condemnation.

It is most regrettable that, to date, the Bosnian Serbs
have refused to heed Council resolutions and presidential
statements calling for international access to Srebrenica,
Zepa and other affected areas. Sadly, it may no longer be
possible to secure such access now that the Serbs have
been allowed, under the Dayton Peace Agreement, to
keep these enclaves.

To compound this exasperating act of defiance by
the Serbs, we are now being asked to believe that the
gruesome massacres that took place in Srebrenica, Zepa
and other areas were the work of the Bosnian Muslims
themselves, who decided to massacre each other, for the
most incredible of reasons, as explained in
Mr. Jovanovie's letter, and that the Serbs who brutally
overran those enclaves had nothing to do with the
massacres.
This is as ludicrous as it is incomprehensible. If the
Bosnian Serbs are totally blameless, as is alleged in the
letter, why did it take Mr. Jovanovie so long to inform
the Council of these heinous crimes? The Bosnian Serbs'
denial to the international humanitarian organizations of
access to the affected areas, and the belated attempt to
"recreate" the events in these areas, can only confirm the
involvement of the Bosnian Serbs in these bestial crimes.
The international community must therefore dismiss with
contempt the heartless cynicism in Mr. J ovanovie's letter
and stand firm on its demand for access to all the affected
areas.

The work of the International Tribunal responsible
for bringing to justice those who committed these

 

violations of humanitarian law must be expedited. Persons
who have committed violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights must know that they
will not go unpunished. All cases of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights must be
fully investigated and those found responsible punished
accordingly.

The draft resolution before us calls upon all States,
particularly those in the region of the former Yugoslavia, to
cooperate with the Tribunal. We strongly support this
provision. We wish to underline the urgent need for the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to allow the establishment
of offices of the Tribunal on its territory. This will convince
everyone that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has met
the requirements for readmittance into the family of nations.

