The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of

Egypt.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis
for his useful briefing.

Egypt would like to express its concern about the
recent political developments in Iraq, in particular in
view of the difficult security situation prevailing in
that fraternal country. Egypt appeals to all political
blocs in the Iraqi House of Representatives to respect
and safeguard national institutions of the State, to
unify its national vision and make every possible effort
to overcome the current crisis, which could lead to a
political vacuum, the repercussions of which will be
felt by all groups in Iraqi society.

Egypt emphasizes the importance of supporting
the three leaderships and agreeing on a comprehensive
political reform programme, including, inter alia,
ending the quota system and fighting corruption. The
Security Council and the international community
must support every effort to strengthen the concept of
a national State.

We would also like to express our firm position
on safeguarding the unity and sovereignty of Iraq over
its national territory. We stress the pivotal importance
of the Arab character of Iraqi society, but also of the
need to preserve its ethnic, sectarian and confessional
character. That identity is the unifying element for all
the Iraqi people. It constitutes a safety valve to prevent
the Iraqi people from falling into the abyss of separatism
and division - sectarian trends that some forces in the
region are trying to foment.

Egypt would like to stress the importance of
ending the flagrant incursions by Turkish forces into
Iraq. I note Iraq's failure to date to heed regional and
international calls to withdraw Turkish forces from
Iraq. In that regard, Egypt calls on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq to follow-up once again
on the withdrawal of the Turkish forces from Iraqi
territory. We would also like to stress the importance of
Iran's refraining from interfering in the internal affairs
of Iraq by encouraging trends that would threaten the
unity of the Iraqi society.

We welcome the victories achieved by the Iraqi
army in the past few months by liberating many areas
and removing them from the authority of the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Sham. We stress the importance of
developing a comprehensive vision to achieve stability,
an approach that is not limited to the security and military
aspects but also includes national reconciliation, the
integration of Sunnis and reconstruction.

We emphasize the importance of concerted
efforts by the international community to assist Iraq
in demining activities, including when it comes to
explosive remnants preventing the return of displaced
persons to Ramadi and other liberated areas. The
Egyptian Ministry of Defence has already approved a
training programme for Iraqi forces in that regard.

Egypt has also provided the Government of
Kurdistan, Iraq, with humanitarian assistance for
displaced persons. Egypt underscores the importance
of the humanitarian aspect of the Iraqi situation, which
includes finding missing Iraqi prisoners of war and
returning Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, which have been the subject of many United
Nations resolutions. Those issues have also been
the subject of the requisite importance in numerous
statements of the Security Council. Egypt believes that
it is important that the Council continue to shed light on
those matters, in view of their humanitarian and legal
ramifications.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at I] am.
