Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Modibo Toure, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, for
his clear and precise briefing, which reminds us ofjust
how critical this point is for Guinea-Bissau. I also thank
Ambassador Mauro Vieira for his efforts as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and for his insistent appeal for support
to regional initiatives and for respect for the electoral
cycle in Guinea-Bissau.
France is concerned about the non-implementation
of the Conakry Agreement since October 2016. The
Agreement, which provides for the appointment of a
consensus Prime Minister, has remained a dead letter,
even though it provides a plan to resolve the conflict.
This political impasse has consequences on the ground.
There have been several clashes between the police
and opposition political parties. Respect for human
rights is also not assured in Guinea-Bissau. The latest
developments on the ground show that the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau no longer hesitate to limit the freedom
of assembly and the right to protest. The establishment
of a robust compliance framework with regard to
respect for public freedoms is an essential precondition
to the resolution of the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. We
therefore call upon the international community to be
particularly vigilant in that regard.

Due to the risk of a deterioration in the political
and security situation, it is high time for all parties to
honour their commitments to reach national consensus,
all the more so because the Window of opportunity is
narrowing, as legislative elections are slated for this
spring. In that regard, it is particularly important to
ensure that the legislative and presidential time table
is adhered to.

I would like to emphasize three essential points
with regard to the renewal at the end of the month of the
madate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).

First, we must increase our support for regional
initiatives. In that regard, France welcomes the
ongoing efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), especially the work of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau and the recent
adoption of the sanctions list of people obstructing the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement. That is an
important step forward and a clear sign to the relevant
local actors. We are convinced that the solution to the
conflict will require consultation among local actors
and the international community. In that connection,
the group of five international partners based in
Guinea-Bissau, which comprises the African Union,
the European Union, the United Nations, ECOWAS
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
provides a special coordination platform that ought to
be supported.

Secondly, it is crucial for the Security Council to
fully assume its role in resolving the current political
impasse in Guinea-Bissau. The Council should
increase pressure on local actors, particularly President
Vaz, and should direct the parties in Guinea-Bissau to
shoulder their responsibilities. Sanctions were adopted
in 2012 through resolution 2048 (2012), and additional
measures could be taken in conjunction with those
taken by ECOWAS.

Thirdly, it is essential to renew the mandate of
UNIOGBIS, which ends 28 February, and thereby signal
the commitment of the United Nations to continuing
to participate in the process of resolving the conflict.
We should also contemplate restructuring UNIOGBIS
following an assessment of the impact of its activities
on the ground.

It is time for the parties in Guinea-Bissau to move
from words to action. Their commitments must now
give way to concrete action.

