Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank Egypt for organizing today's debate.

Belgium associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

I will focus on three aspects: first, integrating a
long-term vision for a mission from its start; secondly,
the importance of ensuring that all support is inclusive,
especially with regard to the central role of women and
young people; and, lastly, the importance of keeping the
root causes of conflicts in view at every stage of action.

A lasting peace requires an overall vision. The
objectives to be attained should be defined at the very
beginning of an intervention in a country so as to
enable peace operations to withdraw as soon as those
objectives have been met. In that context, as soon as a
mission is launched it must begin to provide the tools
that will later enable the country to manage its security
alone. A reliable security sector is an important aspect
of sustaining peace. In many situations on the Security
Council's agenda, the security sector must be reformed
in order to strengthen a country's capacity to respond
to challenges to peace. At the beginning of next year,
based on its experiences in this area, including in Mali,
the Central African Republic and Somalia, Belgium
plans to launch an analysis drawn from the lessons
it has learned. Where it is possible, we welcome and
encourage more regular use by peacekeepers of joint
patrols with the local armed forces.

My second point concerns the role of women and
young people in creating lasting peace, which demands
everyone's participation in the decision-making
process, women as well as men. Too often, important
decisions in peace processes are still made by groups
of men alone. If we are to ensure that women's specific
needs and aspirations are taken into consideration, we
must enable them to participate in making decisions
about issues that are likely to have an impact on their
lives. Resolution 1325 (2000) paved the way in this area,
and Belgium is pleased to be launching its third action
plan on women and peace and security. Resolution 2250
(2015), on youth and peace and security, complements
it, underlining the importance of young people in efforts
to promote peace and security. In that regard, equal
access to an inclusive education and to decent jobs,
for example, are decisive factors. As the Peacebuilding
Commission's youth focal point, Belgium ensures that
the youth dimension is positively integrated into the
Commission's activities.
I would also like to stress the importance of the
link between mediation, including at the local level,
and peacekeeping operations. Belgium supports the
Secretary-General's efforts to increase mediation
expertise in missions and strengthen partnerships with
local and national mediation actors. The use of mixed
military, police and civilian teams, including for human
rights, is an important tool in that regard. It enables
missions to increase their contact with local authorities,
traditional and religious leaders and other relevant
actors on the ground, in order to prevent local tensions
from fomenting conflict and to consolidate peace more
positively through local reconciliation.

My third point is that we believe it is important
to pay particular attention to the root causes that give
rise to conflicts. Peacekeeping operations' mediation
and reconciliation activities, as I have said, are a key
element. Humanitarian and development interventions,
programmatic spending and rapid-impact projects
should be organized simultaneously with a View
to making the peace dividend for the population a
tangible thing while targeting those root causes as far
as possible. The aim is to support the authorities in
recreating a strong social contract through which the
State can provide basic services. Apart from that, the
various trafficking activities of armed groups often end
up becoming a conflict's raison d'etre. Peacekeeping
operations could play a more significant and proactive
role in combating such trafficking. Lastly, cooperation
with the country teams is crucial. Their work on
fundamental issues such as governance, the judicial
system, elections and transitional justice is essential to
sustaining peace and complements the peacekeeping
operations' efforts.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his efforts to improve the work of the
Departments of Political Affairs and Peacekeeping
Operations and to translate the approach of resolution
2282 (2016) into concrete action. My delegation looks
forward with interest to the report on peace and
security reform and the new proposals it will make to
go even further in implementing the recommendations
of the reports of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Architecture (S/2015/490) in order to
achieve lasting peace.
