Mr. Tarisse da Fontoura (Brazil): I welcome
Deputy Foreign Minister Pahad and thank him and
Ambassador Adekanye of Nigeria for their updates on
the mediation process for Cote d'Ivoire. Less than 30
days after his first meeting with the Council, Mr. Pahad
today reported on the positive developments that have
taken place since then. My delegation praises the South
African mediation, especially President Mbeki, for the
results achieved so far. Together with the Ivorian
parties, President Mbeki skilfully put together the
Pretoria Agreement, which paved the way for the most
recent determination with regard to the issue of
eligibility.

Brazil commends the African Union for its
increased leadership throughout the continent and for
the strong support it provides for resolving conflicts by
peaceful means. In so doing, the new organization
consolidates its legitimate role in the promotion of
peace and stability in Africa. Frequent and close
dialogue between the Security Council and the African
Union is proving to be extremely useful.

Let me turn now to developments in Cote
d'Ivoire. The news is encouraging, and we reaffirm our
hope that the political preconditions have been created
for the holding of elections next October and for the
return of peace, stability and normalcy in a reunified
country. The Ivorian parties have to act expeditiously
to enforce the decision allowing the participation of all
candidates. We welcome the fact that the principle of
the inclusion of all parties in the national reconciliation
process is being observed, wisely adapted to be
consistent with the text of the Constitution. These are
essential landmarks for reconciliation and legitimacy in
the years to come.

We are also very pleased with developments on
the ground. We welcome the reconvening of cabinet
meetings with the participation of ministers from the
Forces nouvelles. At this stage, the full engagement of
all political forces in the Government and in the
Administration is a prerequisite for the delivery of
services sorely needed by the population.

On the military front, we welcome the beginning
of the withdrawal of heavy weapons from the front line
as an important step. We strongly encourage the
National Armed Forces of Cote d'Ivoire (FANCI) and
the Forces nouvelles to make all possible efforts to
comply with the calendar for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process agreed in
Bouake.
Finally, my delegation would like to reaffirm its
belief that the Ivorian people and political parties are
on the right path towards peace and sustainable
development. The Council should continue to support
their efforts and provide all suitable assistance that
they may require to that end.

My delegation is ready to engage in negotiations
on the approval of a new mandate for the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire.

