Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is indeed a pleasure to see you, Madam President, presiding over the work of the Security Council today. First of all, allow me to congratulate Belgium on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of February and to thank you, Madam President, for taking the initiative to convene today's important open debate on transitional justice in conflict and post\ conflict situations, presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium (see S/PV.8723). I take this opportunity to thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, for her comprehensive and enlightening briefing. I would also like to thank and commend the other briefers for their important briefings. Justice and peace remain two fundamental and complementary United Nations principles. There can be peace only through the transformative power of justice. According to resolution 2282 (2016) and other United Nations resolutions, transitional justice is an integral part of a comprehensive and lasting peace. Transitional justice may be defined as having four essential pillars - the right to truth, the right to justice, the right to reparations and the guarantee of non-repetition - and on the basis of institutional reform it provides a number of mechanisms that a society in conflict or a post-conflict society can employ to restore calm and normality. We welcome today'sdebate to share our views on the issue and would like to emphasize the following points. First of all, reconciliation and peacebuilding are closely linked to promoting respect for the law in order to ensure the effective implementation of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Member States should develop national policies based on good practices to establish institutional bodies to work in the area. Accordingly, whatever mechanism is implemented, its success will depend above all on taking into account the specificities of the society in which transitional justice is to be implemented. National ownership is therefore key in that regard. Secondly, transitional justice mechanisms should involve the participation of women and children in reconciliation processes. The participation of women and children in transitional justice is key to breaking cycles of violence from generation to generation and to preventing future violations. Not only is the participation of children and women a right but it also contributes to strengthening their ability to participate actively as citizens. Thirdly, we believe that it is important to prioritize mediation and prevention. In that regard, the role of religious leaders and mediators must be highlighted. In traditional societies, such actors enjoy an influential voice and authority that should be used for the benefit of their communities in conflict and post- conflict situations. Lastly, I stress the need for all reconciliation processes to take place at both the national and local levels. To that end, it is necessary for dialogue at the local level to evolve into dialogue at the national level, thereby ensuring the inclusivity of the process and its national ownership.
