Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this debate.
I should also like to commend the Secretary-General
for producing a very comprehensive report
(S/2010/394) within a short space of time, pursuant to
resolution 1918 (2010). The report has provided the
Council with a detailed analytical account of the social,
economic and legal implications of the options for
dealing with piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia.

Let me also thank Under-Secretary-General
O'Brien for her opening remarks, which provided
further insights on the seven options proposed in the
Secretary-General's report. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Somalia for his comments. We join
earlier speakers in welcoming the new Ambassador of
Japan.

We condemn the attack on the Mona hotel, which
led to deaths and injuries. Our condolences and
sympathies go to the victims of the attack and to the
Transitional Federal Government.

The phenomenon of piracy is a symptom of a
wider set of problems and challenges affecting
Somalia - a country besieged with insecurity, a fragile
government structure and a dire shortage of resources.
Somalia presents fertile ground for criminality to
thrive. Despite the best efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government and all of its partners, the country
continues to reel under the weight of multiple
debilitating challenges.

We commend the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, the African Union Mission in
Somalia, the European Union's Operation Atalanta to
combat piracy, NATO's Operation Ocean Shield, the
United States Combined Task Force 151, the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and the counter-piracy
missions of China, India, Japan and the Russian
Federation, among other countries, for their efforts to
combat the piracy scourge off the coast of Somalia.
Together, they have significantly helped to reduce both
the frequency and rate of pirate attacks in the Gulf of
Aden and off the Horn of Africa.

While such concerted efforts are praiseworthy,
the scourge of piracy has not been eliminated, nor have
its consequences on the Somali people and the
international community been contained. Indeed, this
month, pirates seized the MV Syria Star, with its sugar
cargo, and the M. V Suez cargo ship in the recommended
shipping lane, both in the Gulf ofAden.

The extended geographical reach and increased
sophistication of the attacks demonstrate that more
must be done to effectively combat piracy. In this
situation, integrated preventive interventions are
necessary to address the root causes of poverty and the
conditions that fuel piracy. We recognize that
unemployment and economic disenfranchisement
transform piracy into an alluring economic alternative
in the minds of many young Somali men. The
international community must therefore join hands to
reverse this ruinous trend and provide viable entry
points to self-sufficiency and dignity. In our view, this
battle must be fought on multiple fronts. In addition to
rebuilding and rehabilitating Somalia's administrative,
economic and social structures, efforts must also
continue to re-establish the rule of law, end impunity
and establish effective policy and judicial mechanisms
to apprehend these criminals and bring them to justice.
On the judicial and penal question, the Secretary-
General's report has suggested seven options for
consideration. While the current structure to combat
piracy via national prosecutions by Somalia, Kenya
and the Seychelles has borne fruit, there are, however,
resource limitations. We note with concern that in a
number of instances suspects have been released by
patrolling naval States, due to the failure to find a State
willing to accept the transfer of suspects for trial. In
the light of that, we call for additional adjudication
options to alleviate the pressure on existing judicial
centres, which have shown tremendous leadership in
prosecuting and incarcerating pirates.

Considering the various options proposed by the
Secretary-General, we are of the opinion that, while it
could be an ideal outcome in terms of ownership and
participation, the establishment of a court of Somali
jurisdiction in a foreign territory must remain a long-
term rather than an immediate goal, given the
fragmented nature of Somalia's legislative and criminal
procedural framework. Instead, the United Nations
should play an active role, as a matter of priority, to
deal with a truly international problem. We believe that
United Nations participation is key to ensuring that any
judicial or penal process will be conducted in
accordance with international standards. In addition,
such participation will ensure burden-sharing by the
international community, given the global reach of the
problem. As we explore options, we should consolidate
international cooperation as a first step to increase
efficiency in addressing recurring juridical problems
associated with the investigation, transfer and trial of
suspects, as highlighted on page 19 of the report.

In the immediate term, we suggest that efforts
should continue to build a broader coalition of the
willing to share responsibility for prosecuting piracy
suspects in the manner of Kenya and the Seychelles. In
that regard, we are encouraged by the news that the
United Republic of Tanzania, Mauritius and the
Maldives are also considering undertaking such
prosecutions. We hope that other regional Powers and
States further afield will be persuaded to take similar
steps.

A long-term solution still eludes us. We need a
deeper understanding of the elements of the problems
that remain to ensure a response that is commensurate
with the task at hand. While an international tribunal is
a sound idea in principle, there are serious questions of
funding, forum and jurisdiction to be addressed.
Furthermore, we must seek to achieve a solution that is
sufficient and effective. Specifically, we propose that
these measures should incorporate United Nations
participation, collective burden-sharing in trial and
detention and timely implementation.

In the final analysis, we believe that each of the
Secretary-General's last four options offers the promise
of a more comprehensive judicial framework dedicated
to prosecuting these crimes. Although all depend on
agreement by the host States, we are convinced that the
assured participation of the United Nations will send a
strong message of unity and collective reserve to deal
with those who violate the law of the sea through
piracy.

Detailed consideration of costs and funding
sources remains to be undertaken. We trust that, with
sufficient political will and commitment, agreement
can be reached on a centralized structure to effectively
address these acts of criminality and put an end to the
culture of impunity that has arisen in the waters off the
coast of Somalia and, by so doing, contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Nigeria supports the presidential statement read
out by the President earlier this morning.

