Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I should like first to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
your new duties and to offer you my best wishes.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The acceding countries Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia, the
associated countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey and
the European Free Trade Association country member
of the European Economic Area Iceland align
themselves with this statement.

We welcome the participation in today's meeting
of the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Steiner, and we thank him for his statement.

We would also like to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Kolby of Norway for his comprehensive
report on the Security Council mission to Kosovo
(S/2002/l376), which took place towards the end of
last year. For the European Union, it is reassuring to
know that the Security Council is continuing to closely
follow the situation there and is still interested in and
very much committed to safeguarding its stability and
monitoring its development. It is only with the active
involvement and continuous help of the international
community that the area will manage to deal with its
many and pressing problems.

There is no doubt that the situation in Kosovo has
moved forward since the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999). Nevertheless, there is also no doubt that there
is still a long way to go before the province achieves
the goal of establishing stable and truly functioning
multi-ethnic and multicultural democratic institutions
which will allow full minority participation.

The full implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) remains the cornerstone of the
EU's policy on Kosovo, and the "standards before
status" policy provides the benchmarks which form the
basis for Kosovo's future. Responsible self-
administration and the consolidation of a climate of
peaceful coexistence among the ethnic groups are of
paramount importance in building a multi-ethnic and
multicultural Kosovo.

Despite the settlement of 1.5 million refugees and
internally displaced persons in South-East Europe,
more than 1 million people still remain displaced. That
constitutes a major humanitarian, social and political
challenge for all of us. Achieving the genuine and
sustainable reintegration of minority returnees is an
indicator of political and democratic maturity, as well
as of compliance with internationally accepted
standards. A Kosovo in which members of minority
communities are oppressed will face a bleak future of
self-isolation. All regional actors must spare no effort
in establishing the appropriate security and legislative
conditions which will make the returns feasible and in
allocating resources to ensure their sustainability and
the inclusion of the returnees in the economic recovery
process. Efforts should also focus on the real issues
facing the province: economic development, tackling
unemployment, attracting foreign job-creating
investment, privatization, education, health and the
fight against organized crime.

The EU supports the objectives of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner, in
tackling these challenges: laying the foundation for
economic progress; establishing a political culture
based on the rule of law, including the fight against
organized crime and violence; and building a fair and
just society with dignity for all. The EU calls on all
parties to cooperate fully with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR in pursuing those objectives.

Organized crime in particular is a scourge for the
region, threatening the very foundations of all our
efforts there. It nourishes corruption and ethnic
conflict, impedes the building and normal functioning
of democratic institutions, the rule of law and the
market economy and finances illegal armed groups. Its
elimination is of vital importance if any stability and
development is to be achieved.

Respect for and the protection of cultural
monuments and religious sites is another challenge that
we have to deal with. The European Union
unequivocally condemns all religious vandalism and
supports all efforts aimed at preserving and restoring
the cultural monuments and religious sites which are
the common heritage of the peoples of the region,
irrespective of their ethnic affiliation or religious
beliefs.

We have repeatedly said in the past that United
Nations authority throughout Kosovo is unconditional.
There can be no mono-ethnicity and no parallel
structures. We support UNMIK's intention to transfer
further competences to the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government. With power comes responsibility,
and responsibility means, among other things,
compliance with international obligations, including
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia.

On 25 November 2002, UNMIK took over the
north Mitrovica building that once housed the parallel
municipal administration in an effort to dismantle the
parallel structures which had been established there.
The European Union welcomes the extension of direct
administrative authority by UNMIK in northern
Mitrovica as an important step towards the future
normalization of the situation in Kosovo. It is a fine
example of the positive impact that close cooperation
between UNMIK and the authorities in Belgrade can
have on handling the many issues facing the region. We
welcome that cooperation and urge its further
enhancement in the future. We also believe that the
cooperation between Belgrade and the elected
representatives of the people of Kosovo will be
instrumental in creating conditions of security
necessary for the stability and development of the
whole region. All parties need to demonstrate that they
can carry out their commitments within the existing
framework. It is unacceptable for anyone to unilaterally
decide Kosovo's status.

Having touched upon the areas for which
benchmarks have been established, I would like to
reiterate the European Union's strong commitment to
the stabilization and association process for the western
Balkans as the cornerstone of our relevant policy.
Enriched with knowledge drawn from the recently
completed enlargement process, the stabilization and
association process, which is aimed at strengthening
the accession-oriented dimension, explores ways to
introduce the aim of economic and social cohesion into
European Union policies and to assess priorities,
eventually leading to European integration.

