Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also wish to express the readiness of my delegation to
fully support you in your endeavours.

Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate the
United States of America for its leadership last month.

We thank Ms. Bensouda for her support, pursuant to
Security Council 1970 (2011). We are deeply concerned
by the ongoing human rights violations committed by all
parties to the conflict in Libya. Abduction, the torture
and killing of civilians, as well as arbitrary detention,
continued unabated. It is also deeply troubling that
ordinary crime is widespread, primarily due to
lawlessness and the weakness of judicial institutions.

We recall the briefing delivered by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
Mr. Martin Kobler,just three weeks ago (see S/PV.7927),
on the current dangerous and uncertain situation in the
country, which forces the Libyan people to live in daily
fear for their security and safety. It is particularly the
vulnerable - including women and children, refugees
and migrants * who suffer tremendously due to the
ongoing crisis. All actors who continue to commit such
violations must be held accountable. Da'esh in Libya, in
particular, is responsible for abominable crimes, which
include summary execution of innocent civilians, and
it must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.

It is imperative to fight the widespread sense of
impunity in Libya through appropriate mechanisms,
and Ethiopia firmly upholds the principled position
of the African Union on combating impunity while
safeguarding the peace, security, stability, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Member States. In that
regard, building and enhancing the capacity of Libyan
State institutions, particularly judiciary and law
enforcement organs, to ensure the rule of law must be
a priority. The international community should support
all efforts that are anchored in the long-term strategy
of building State institutions and ensuring justice and
reconciliation, in order to foster an environment of
peace, security and stability.

It is our conviction that the continued and widespread
violation of human rights cannot be sustainably
addressed until all Libyan political actors find a lasting
political solution for the protracted crisis. While we
note the latest reports of meetings between the major
Libyan political actors as a positive step, we urge all
Libyan actors to work constructively towards concrete
progress to address obstacles to the full implementation
of the Libyan political agreement. It is also important
that all Libyans work coherently and in a united manner
as the African high-level committee continues to call
for a nationwide reconciliation process that could
complement and reinforce the political process.

In conclusion, the primary responsibility of
ensuring lasting peace and security in the country
remains in the hands of the Libyans themselves, and
we hope that all Libyan actors will seriously engage
with a sense of national vision, determination and in a
constructive spirit to end the crisis. We also hope that
the international community - including countries
of the region, the African Union, the United Nations
and other relevant partners - will continue to provide
coordinated support for those efforts.

