Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Uruguay would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on convening this thematic debate today
in the Council. It has made it possible for us to listen to
the views of many delegations for whom the working
methods of the Council is a matter of great importance.
We say this in the firm belief that for small countries,
those of us who can hope to sit on the Council only
after long periods off of it - indeed some delegation
has calculated that our period on the Council was likely
to fall every 50 to 99 years - the participation of
non-members of the Council must be treated as a
fundamental right of Member States. They have the
right to participate in negotiations and decision-making

by the Organization's bodies, in particular when they
have a direct interest in the outcome of discussions and
when those outcomes affect their citizens or their
highest aims. Believe me, even some of the smallest
countries, such as Uruguay, have, throughout the
Organization's existence, shown a firm determination
to meet the obligations of the Charter and thus require
the full exercise of their rights in every forum.

We have another general concern that we would
like to express before turning to some of the specific
thematic issues concerning the work of the Council:
when members discuss the matter of enhancing the
working methods of the Council, this is immediately
linked to the issue of reform of the membership of the
Council, as if those were two matters that were
indissolubly linked. But they are two matters that have
been inexplicably linked. They cannot serve as a joint
basis for negotiations. Some time ago, a group of
countries presented a draft General Assembly
resolution, A/60/L.49, which contained worthy
suggestions and proposals that could be endorsed today
by the vast majority of Members. The treatment given
this worthwhile proposal by some delegations has
been, if I may say so, almost mean, because in reality,
they allowed the issue of the Council's working
methods to turn into a discussion on the expansion of
the Council, which is a difficult matter, and almost
completely intractable because of its very nature.

Among the matters mentioned in the President's
concept paper and others we have debated over the
years on the subject, there are some of particular
interest to Uruguay, and I would like to comment on
them briefly.

With regard to consultations with troop-
contributing countries, we wish to reiterate the need for
troop-contributing countries to be fully informed of
fundamental developments in the relevant missions.
We welcome the improvements that have been
implemented with regard to better communication
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries. However, the meetings that are currently
held are merely informative in nature. We cannot say
that there is any real consultation with the troop-
contributing countries. Rather, in general, those
countries are informed of decisions that have already
been taken by Council members or by the Secretariat.
We, the contributing countries, would like to have a
real opportunity to express our views in such instances,
in particular when changes to mandates are under
discussion, as those can have consequences for the
safety and security of national contingents, equipment
and new configurations in the field of the forces in
question or for evacuations of troop contingents. It
would be appropriate for meetings with troop-
contributing countries to be held with sufficient notice,
to ensure that the consultations held can indeed be
reflected in the decisions adopted by the Council.

Subsidiary bodies of the Council should permit
interested Member States to participate in their
discussions, in particular in the case of the sanctions
committees. It should be possible for those States with
concerns regarding sanctions regimes to participate, so
that effective and timely consultations can be held,
pursuant to Article 50 of the Charter, with the relevant
sanctions committee.

We acknowledge that the improvements
implemented in the sanctions regime by the Council
have been steps forward towards an improvement in
the functioning of the varied and complex subsidiary
organs of the Council. But there is still a real lack of
direct access to appeal bodies, and there is no real
system for consultations in which countries could
participate with a reasonable expectation of seeing
their interests taken into account and of influencing,
with a View to advancing those interests, organizational
developments in each case. In addition, we
acknowledge what has been done to clarify the
committees' rules for listing and de-listing. We urge the
Council to continue to work on that matter and provide
maximum guarantees in that regard.

We do not wish to repeat the criticisms that we
have previously expressed on other matters, such as on
the Council's report to the General Assembly, or on the
need to undertake reforms aimed at achieving final
approval of the rules of procedure of the Council. We
have made those views clear, and we wish to conclude
on a positive note, looking to the future with optimism.

Let us once again consider the spirit of General
Assembly draft resolution A/60/L.49. We have already
approved a plethora of measures making it possible to
enhance the working methods of the Council without
waiting for a reform of the size and composition of the
Council because, again, we believe that those two
matters are independent, and on one of them, the
reform of the Council's methods, there is agreement in
principle.
