Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First,
we wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report.
We also thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Guehenno, for his briefing today.

The smooth holding of Assembly elections
throughout Kosovo was an important step in the
Kosovo peace process. We express our appreciation to
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the other parties involved
for their efforts. We are also gratified that the people of
Kosovo are actively participating in political life there.

We remain concerned about the situation in
Kosovo after the elections, particularly about the
security situation in Kosovo and of the minorities
there. The Secretary-General mentioned this in
paragraphs 21 and 23 of his report. In this regard, my
delegation believes that the observation made by the
Secretary-General in his report in paragraph 43
deserves our attention. We hope that UNMIK and
KFOR will continue to make efforts, based on those
being made.

We also expect that the parties in Kosovo will set
aside their differences and will work together to
establish a broad coalition government that will fully
reflect the interests of all minority communities. That
government should also devote itself to establishing
trust among all the communities and bring about
national reconciliation, in order to lay the foundation
for the economic recovery of Kosovo and long-term
stability in the region.

UNMIK is working on restructuring and
refocusing its work. We hope that all work can be
conducted smoothly. We also believe that the Security
Council should pay close attention to this process. At
this crucial time, the observations and
recommendations of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia should be heeded and adopted.

We concur with the Secretary-General in his
opinion that key to the success of the provisional
institutions of self-government is the establishment of a
professional and multi-ethnic civil service in Kosovo,
which should guarantee equal representation of
minorities. We hope that transparent and non-
discriminatory recruiting policies will be maintained so
that minorities will be provided equal recruitment
opportunities.

Finally, the Chinese delegation would like to pay
tribute to Mr. Haekkerup for his work. We believe that
his successor will continue his efforts for the full and
comprehensive implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and for the peace process in the
region.

