The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of China.

China thanks Assistant Secretary-General Wane
and Chairperson Mogae for their respective briefings.

Recently, thanks to the joint effort of the South
Sudanese Government and the relevant parties, progress
has been made in the country's political process. At
the same time, however, the overall situation in the
country remains complex and serious. It is facing
serious challenges in the political, security, economic
and humanitarian areas.

A political solution is the only way out of the current
situation. To achieve that requires, on the one hand,
stepped-up efforts on the part of the Government and
the people of South Sudan, and, on the other, increased
support from the international community. There has to
be synergy on both fronts. A settlement must be based
on the actual conditions of the country. It must tackle
the root causes of the situation and should aim at broad
support for a settlement.
First, priority should be given to speeding up the
political process in the country and maintaining its
stability. The South Sudanese Government has made
commendable efforts to maintain internal peace
and stability. President Kiir formally launched the
national dialogue in May and announced a unilateral
ceasefire, thereby establishing favourable conditions
for facilitating the political process.

At present, the South Sudanese Government has
reached an agreement with some of the opposition
groups, for which China expresses its appreciation.
China hopes that the international community will
continue to fully support the leading role that the South
Sudanese Government has assumed in addressing
internal matters; strengthen its communication and
coordination with the Government; and, at the same
time, continue to enhance its engagement with the
parties concerned and urge them to abandon the
military option and return to the political track. At the
same time, it is important to enhance the inclusiveness
of the national dialogue and resolve their differences
through dialogue and negotiations so as to enhance
mutual trust.

Secondly, it is important to continue to support the
leading role ofregional and subregional organizations in
carrying out their good offices. Regional organizations,
including the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), have brought to bear their unique
advantages and have intensified their good offices.
Recently, IGAD held a special summit and a meeting of
the Council of Ministers of South Sudan during which
they had constructive discussions on how to facilitate
the implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, and
came up with ideas and proposals. China expresses its
appreciation in that regard. China welcome's IGAD'S
holding of the high-level revitalization forum and hopes
that regional organizations will continue to strengthen
exchanges, communication and coordination with the
Government, send out a unified message to the outside
world, and work in synergy towards a political solution.

Thirdly, it is necessary to enhance humanitarian
and economic assistance to South Sudan. As a result ofa
protracted conflict, South Sudan's social and economic
foundations have been seriously damaged, and
economic development has been beset by difficulties
as a result of a long and protracted drought and other
extreme weather conditions. The country is now facing
the serious risk of famine. The international community
should enhance the targeted and coordinated nature of
its assistance, with priorities given to and focus on areas
involving critical infrastructure, such as agriculture,
irrigation and roads, so as to improve the conditions for
economic and social development as soon as possible
and raise the living standard of the local people to
promote a national reconstruction so as to gradually
resolve the root causes of the current conflict.

China commends the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in discharging its
mandate and for the important role that it has played in
maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan. We hope
that the Secretariat and UNMISS will strengthen their
communication with the South Sudanese Government,
properly resolve issues related to their cooperation and
enhance the functionality and effectiveness ofUNMISS
so as to better respond to complex situations.

The Chinese Government has all along supported
the peace process in South Sudan and provided
assistance to the country, within its ability, through
bilateral and multilateral channels. Several days ago,
through the World Food Programme, China provided
food assistance totalling $5 million to South Sudan, and
through bilateral channels, China has provided food
assistance totalling 8,750 tons and a total of ¥5 million
worth of anti-malaria medicine so as to help the South
Sudanese people respond to famine and that disease.

Recently, China dispatched more than 1,000
peacekeepers to South Sudan. Three hundred and thirty-
one rank and file members of the Chinese engineering
battalion and of the medical teams deployed in South
Sudan were awarded the United Nations Peace Medal of
Honour. China will continue to play a constructive role
to help the country achieve durable peace and stability
and sustainable development.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Mogae to respond to
comments and questions raised.

