Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Helen La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, and Ms. Marie Yolene Gilles, Executive Director of Fondasyon Je Klere, for their briefings. I thank the Secretary-General for his report on the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) (S/2020/123) four months after its inception, replacing the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti. BINUH has turned the page on 15 years of peacekeeping efforts in the country. The transition from a peacekeeping mission to a special political mission came at a critical time of difficulties and challenges related to the situation in Haiti and the aspirations of the friendly Haitian people. To ensure a successful transition, BINUH must receive full support and the necessary resources to achieve its objectives and make an effective contribution to stability in the Republic of Haiti. We monitor with concern the stressful political situation in Haiti, which has become increasingly complex since 13 January, given the constitutional crisis and the institutional vacuum in the country, due to a delay in holding the elections and the end of the Parliament's mandate, which has hampered the adoption of a budget and the regular functioning of State structures and institutions. Given that the political crisis is linked to major economic and social challenges, its continuation will have negative impact on the security situation in the country. It will fuel societal violence, encourage impunity and violate human rights. Consequently, the crises will compound the daily suffering of the Haitian people and the country will remain unstable. Against that backdrop, the United Nations and the Security Council have an important role to play in supporting Haiti with a view to breaking this vicious circle and achieving stability and lasting peace. In that context, my delegation believes that there is a need to encourage constructive dialogue between all the political and civil society components in order to address the root causes of the crisis and envisage the practical solution to overcome it. In that regard, we appreciate the tireless efforts of BINUH towards a convergence of views among the political parties, as well as regional efforts with a view to reducing tensions and encouraging parties concerned to start direct discussions and comprehensive national dialogue to resolve the crisis. Such efforts must be carried out with full respect for the sovereignty of Haiti and independence of its national decisions. We underline the important role of BINUH in continuing the critical work that was carried out by the United Nations. However, we note that its task does not include the peacekeeping element. That is why Haiti must now be responsible for maintaining security, implementing laws and promoting the role of national security institutions in order to realize security and stability. We also commend the efforts of the Haitian National Police in combating crime. We stress the need to address the logistical challenges that the police face by providing them with equipment and continued training programmes. In that context, the support provided by the United Nations and the international community is crucial. In order to make that effort more effective, there is a need to focus efforts on combating corruption and impunity by allowing access to justice and adopting the necessary legislation with a view to promoting the rule of law. We believe that one of the conditions for achieving stability in Haiti, in addition to comprehensive socioeconomic development, is success of the democratic transition. That is why the responsibility for resolving the current crisis in Haiti falls on the shoulders of the Haitians, regardless of their political affiliation. They must engage in political dialogue, reject violence and seek consensus. We reiterate our support for BINUH and its joint work with the United Nations country team in implementing the benchmarks in BINUH's mandate. We hope that its work will allow stability and security to return to that friendly country and that the aspirations of the Haitian people will be met.
