Mr. Nambiar (India): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Germany's assumption of the
presidency of the Council for April. I also congratulate
Ambassador De La Sabliere of France for his
stewardship of the Council during March.

It has been 10 months since we last had an
opportunity in the Security Council to consider the
situation in Afghanistan. This open debate takes place
in the wake of the international Afghanistan conference
that concluded in Berlin on 1 April. We are grateful to
you, Sir, for the briefing you have just provided, and
also to Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
briefing.

The Berlin conference was held at a critical
juncture. It enabled the international community to take
stock of the achievements since Bonn. More important,

it provided an opportunity to plan further consolidation
of these gains by facilitating elections, strengthening
security and political institutions and providing the
requisite base for Afghanistan's reconstruction and
development. India, as a participant of the Berlin
conference, welcomes its results and congratulates the

four co-chairs - the United Nations, Afghanistan,
Germany and Japan - for their role in securing this
success.

The successful conclusion of the Constitutional
Loya Jirga and the subsequent adoption of the new
Constitution were milestones in the Bonn process. We
congratulate the Transitional Government, led by
President Karzai, on the progress achieved since the
Bonn Agreement. We welcome the announcement by
President Karzai to hold the presidential and
parliamentary elections simultaneously in September
this year.

After decades of conflict and destruction, it will
take time and patience for a fully functioning
democracy to take root in Afghanistan. Until then it has
to be nurtured carefully. Consolidation and extension
of central authority requires a broad-based
governmental process, and the country must be free
from outside interference.

The international community's approach to
Afghanistan has to be realistic and must take into
account the complexities and difficulties on the ground.
Forward movement in the electoral exercise in
Afghanistan would depend much upon progress in
voter registration. A balance between speed and
stability is essential for the success of the political
process. Realism also demands a degree of flexibility
in dealing with situations.

The Berlin declaration of 1 April highlighted the
common resolve of the international community to
defeat terrorists who undermine security and
reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan. To objective
observers of the situation in Afghanistan, it is evident
that the peace and stabilization process there remains
fragile. The biggest threat to stability in Afghanistan
continues to emanate from terrorism, as currently
manifested in the incidents of violence in the country,
particularly in south and south-east Afghanistan.
Therefore, defeat of the forces of terrorism and
demolition of the infrastructure of terrorism must
necessarily be the first priority.

The report of the Council's mission to
Afghanistan in October and November 2003
(S/2003/1074) led by you, Mr. President, concluded
that the three main sources of insecurity in Afghanistan
were terrorism, factional fighting and drug production
and trafficking. Under the subheading "Terrorism", the
report also noted that

"In the provinces of the south, south-east
and east, insecurity is greatly exacerbated by
terrorist attacks from suspected members of the
Taliban and Al Qaeda, and supporters of
Gulbudin Hekmatyar." (S/2003/1074, para. 22)

Unfortunately, the situation is no different today.
Continuing terrorist attacks by regrouped Taliban and
Al Qaeda elements constitute the primary source of
insecurity in Afghanistan. These attacks are also aimed
at obstructing delivery of reconstruction assistance.
The assassination of the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees international staff
member Bettina Goislard in November last year and
attacks against United Nations agencies led the
Secretary-General to report to the Council on 30
December 2003 that "Attacks on international and
national staff of the assistance community and officials
of the central Government" had placed "much of the
south and south-east of the country effectively off
limits to the United Nations, the assistance community
and central Government officials ..." (S/2003/1212, paras. 6 and 7).

In his current report of 19 March 2004, the
Secretary-General states:

"Insecurity in the country continues to
follow a well-known pattern and has shown no
signs of significant improvement". "Attacks by
extremist elements on aid agencies, both national
and international, and on government officials
continue to occur, predominantly in the southern
provinces". (S/2004/230, para. 6)

Despite the continuing threat assessment, the
Secretary-General's latest report and the statement of
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, in his briefing to the Council on 24 March,
made scant reference to security threats by Taliban or
Al Qaeda terrorists, preferring to attribute such actions
to "extremists". As the general membership is not privy
to closed discussions between the Council and the
Secretariat, we would like to understand the reasons for
such downplaying of threats to Afghanistan from
terrorist groups, particularly in the south and the south-
east of the country.

Consideration of these recent reports of the
United Nations Secretariat brings to mind a number of
relevant questions. Is it the United Nations view that
these groups no longer represent a threat to
Afghanistan or are these reports and briefings in the
Council the product of some kind of compromise? Or,
did the absence of any reference to these organizations
imply that the work of the Security Council 1267
Committee concerning the Taliban and Al Qaeda had
achieved closure, at least in Afghanistan?

It will not be incorrect to say that the steady
dilution of reporting on Afghanistan over the past year
or so has not always been fully consistent with the
position on the ground. In our view, the reports of the
United Nations Secretariat must be objective, far more
discerning and reflective of ground realities.

Incidents of violence reported in other parts of
Afghanistan are also a matter of concern. However, it
is our expectation that the political process will
subsume these local pressures and interests. The
success of the Constitutional Loya Jirga is a significant
indicator in this direction. Leaders, with diverse
interests, from all parts of the country, participated in
the Constitutional Loya Jirga; they became part of it
and ensured that it did not fail. A democratic political
process in Afghanistan would absorb in its fold the
varying interests, as indeed happens in all democracies
throughout the world.

We agree that continued international presence is
essential to discourage the resurgence of negative
forces. However, long-term stabilization of the country
requires the building up of national security institutions
led by Afghans and entrenched in Afghanistan's
ground realities.

Unfortunately, this process has not moved so far
at the desired pace. India remains ready to contribute to
rebuilding Afghan security institutions, in whichever
way possible, in coordination with our Afghan and
international partners.

The steady rise in drug production and trafficking
is a matter of serious concern. Apart from undermining
the process of political and economic reconstruction in
Afghanistan, this has dangerous repercussions for the
region and beyond. The international community must
act quickly to curb opium cultivation by providing
Afghan farmers with economically viable and
sustainable alternatives.

In view of our historical ties of friendship and
cooperation with Afghanistan and the Afghan people,
India has made a substantial contribution to
Afghanistan's reconstruction effort. Despite our
constraints and the fact that we are not a traditional
donor, our present commitment adds up to $284
million, including 1 million tons of wheat aid. With the
implementation of a number of planned projects,
India's financial commitments for Afghanistan's
reconstruction would amount to around $400 million.

In partnership with the Afghan Government,
India has undertaken projects in a number of sectors.
We also have an extensive programme to rebuild
Afghanistan's institutional capacity. Our projects have
reached out to people in virtually all parts of the
country.

Our commitment of one million tons of wheat aid
has been operationalized and about one million Afghan
school children have been receiving a package of 100
grams of biscuits every day since the programme began
in November 2002. We are told this has contributed to
the back-to-school programme.

We have also attempted to encourage trade and
investment activity that would lead to enhanced income
generation in Afghanistan. In the coming period, we
expect to focus more on infrastructure projects, such as
work on the Zaranj-Delaram road, the Salma Dam
Project in the Province of Herat, and the construction
of a new parliament building and of the double circuit
transmission line from Put-e-Khumri to Kabul.

India's programme of economic assistance in
Afghanistan is guided by Afghan priorities and
ownership. Our relations are bilateral and direct. The
underlying principle remains our desire to see
Afghanistan emerge as strong, united, independent and
prosperous. We wish to see full consolidation of
authority by the central Government. Our efforts in
reconstruction and other sectors would continue to be
directed towards these ends.

The Berlin conference has correctly been referred
to as a milestone in Afghanistan's peace process. Its
success lay in galvanizing international support for
Afghanistan's political, electoral, economic and
financial evolution into an independent, responsible
and contributing member of the international
community. It is therefore all the more important that
the expressions of support made at Berlin be given
practical dimension in the critical months ahead.

