Mr. Malloch Brown (United Nations Development Programme): It was obviously a great honour for us all in
the United Nations community that the Vice-President of
the United States joined us this morning. Even in his
absence, I would like to thank him for having been here
in this Chamber on this issue at this time and to have
made the new commitments he did make.

We have all heard the statistics and also what can be
said in words of the human impact. HIV/AIDS in sub-
Saharan Africa accounts for 23.3 million of the 36 million
affected individuals worldwide - 69 per cent of the total
number of HIV/AIDS cases.

At a time when the industrialized world has relaxed
in the face of a declining incidence of new HIV
infections, Africa is under siege. Many times more people
are being killed by the disease in sub-Saharan Africa each
year than in all the world's wars. This is a new security
front line and I congratulate Richard Holbrooke for the
vision to go beyond old definitions to bring to this table
a discussion of the world's most dangerous insurgency.

HIV/AIDS has a qualitatively different impact than
a traditional health killer such as malaria. It rips across
social structures, targeting a young continent's young
people, particularly its girls. By cutting deep into all
sectors of society, it undermines vital economic growth,
perhaps reducing future national gross domestic product
size in the region by a third over the next 20 years. And
by putting huge additional demand on already weak, hard-
to-access public services, it is setting up the terms of a
desperate conflict over inadequate resources.

Today this is Africa's drama; unmet, it becomes the
world's. So there is real resonance that, at this first
Security Council meeting of the new millennium, it is
health - not war and peace - that brings us here. But
it does so because of the proposition that, in this new
globalized century, one will beget the other and that, in
the final years of the last, we woefully neglected the new
causes of conflict.

We must View this as a war on three fronts: first, the
classrooms and clinics of Africa; secondly, the families of

 

Africa; and, thirdly, international action - the critical
support needed to back Africa's front line.

An extraordinary depletion of the region's human
capital is under way. There are estimates that the number
of active doctors and teachers in the most affected countries
could be reduced by a third in the coming years. Yet
schools and clinics are not only at the heart of any
defensive strategy for dealing with the consequences of the
epidemic; they spearhead the offensive for cultural and
behavioural change. We see the possibilities. In Uganda,
there is now a real prospect of an almost AIDS-free
generation of high-school-age children. Countries are strung
out along a continuum from effective action at one end to
at least acknowledgement and awareness at the other. Yet,
even with better national awareness, in too many places
individual ostracism, and hence denial, still prevail,
confounding good tracking and management of the disease.

Behaviour change requires uncompromising, often
painfully embarrassing honesty, for there is too often a
lethal cultural double standard when it comes to AIDS of
too much unsafe sex and too little willingness to talk about
it or face its consequences. Change must begin by
confronting the region's troubled inheritance: extensive
migrant labour, social norms and gender inequality, making
it hard for women and girls to deny men sex, leading to
HIV incidence rates among girls three or four times higher
than those for boys.

Let me propose to this Council a set of actions. First,
we must support Africa's front-line efforts to combat the
disease. We can see that, where promoting awareness leads
to honest discussion, which leads to behaviour change, the
momentum can be broken. But there is no substitute for the
region's own opinion-makers - from state house to
community media to town and village - leading that
campaign.

Second, we must promote inter-country cooperation so
that Uganda's best practice is effectively transferred to
countries doing less well, and best practice means a strong
national plan and full community mobilization - nothing
less.

Third, we need resources. The United States, with
40,000 new cases annually, spends approximately $10
billion annually from all sources for prevention, care,
treatment and research, whereas approximately $165 million
are spent on HIV/AIDS-related activities in Africa, where
there are 4 million new cases a year. We must mobilize
more and today's commitment is a wonderful start
towards that.

Fourth, we need a coordinated response. I currently
chair the committee of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) co-sponsoring
organizations: the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA),
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), the World Health Organization
(WHO), the World Bank and the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP).
Together, we, the bilaterals, the private sector and non-
governmental organizations must do more at the country
and global levels. We applaud the formation of the
International Partnership Against HIV/AIDS in Africa,
which is a foot in the door to private-sector-supported
affordable care.

Fifth, UNICEF, WHO and the World Bank, together
with UNAIDS and a number of innovative foundations,
have begun to innovate new public-private partnerships
that, by guaranteeing a market for affordable vaccines,
will incentivize drug-company research and development.
The African market for international pharmaceuticals now
accounts for less than 1.5 per cent of the global industry.
This "pull" of new incentives must be combined with the
"push" of increasing basic public-health research
spending.

Sixth, we cannot lapse into a global two-tier
treatment regime: drugs for the rich; no hope for the poor.
While the emphasis must be on prevention, we cannot
ignore treatment, despite its costs. We must work with the
cooperation of the pharmaceutical industry to bring down
treatment costs.

Seventh and finally, we cannot break this epidemic
in isolation from the broader development context. Weak
government, poor services and economic failure translate
directly into failed vaccine and contaminated blood-supply
chains. More broadly, it means the failure of schools,
families, workplaces and economies to be able to meet
the challenge. In this region, where official development
finance is drying up, I find myself fighting to reverse
UNDP's own projection that our programme resources for
Africa next year will be only a third of what they were
five years ago.

So, amidst the good news of more help for
HIV/AIDS, progress on debt relief and some

 

improvement in private-sector flows, the overwhelming fact
is that the region's basic development needs are not being
met. There is a money gap and a governance and capacity
gap. Neither the finance nor the institutions and policies are
adequately in place.

Members of the Council, at this first Security Council
meeting of the century you have brought development into
your Chamber. You have elevated it from a long-term
economic and social issue to a current danger, a
vulnerability to be addressed as a matter of political
priority. HIV/AIDS is a particularly cruel manifestation of
the wider development challenge. It vividly demonstrates
the broader point: no other challenge can perhaps so shape
the overall direction of this new century, either towards a
globalization for all, or back to a century of walls and
fences.

