Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, it seems very important to me that
Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik take away from this
meeting the impetus to step up the implementation of
the package of measures of the February 2015 Minsk
agreements.

However, I would like to talk about something
slightly different. It is not fully clear to us why the
Ukrainian leadership initiated today's meeting. Nothing
constructive in terms of internationalmplementing the
package of measures has been heard from the Ukrainian
side. Now, ifit was their intention to exacerbate tensions
in order to launch a new military operation, we believe
that such a calculation has not been justified. We have
heard much here in terms of common sense and good
ideas, and we hope that the Ukrainian Government will
listen. They must stop the fighting and the shooting and
deal with the political settlement in a serious manner.

In that regard, we have heard it said that the Minsk
Agreements should be implemented; however, in the
spirit of transparency, that should be put down on paper.
Over 24 hours ago, we drafted a press statement for
adoption by the Security Council. Every member of the
Security Council should already have the document,
but I would like it to be circulated here once more, as I
wish to address it.

In the 24 hours since the draft was circulated, only
one delegation f the Ukrainian delegation - has
provided us with feedback. They said that the text was
unacceptable, but did not say why. Now, I would like to
have all members of the Security Council take a look
at the text so that we can adopt it. Although it is very
brief, it does contain two very important dimensions
of the situation. The most important is, of course, the
implementation of the Minsk greements. I will read out
the draft press statement.

"The members of the Security Council recalled
its resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed the
'Package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements', adopted and signed in Minsk
on 12 February 2015, and called once again for
the full implementation of the package as soon as
possible."

I would like to recall that paragraph 1 in the package
of measures calls for an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire. Much was said about that today, and many
expressed concern about the situation in that regard.
Such an appeal would be very appropriate at this stage.

With regard to the second paragraph, it will soon be
the second anniversary of the tragic events in Odessa.
As we have said, the investigation called for has not
been undertaken, and in Odessa there is much tension
in connection with that issue. There are statements that
various measures will be taken. The so called volunteer
battalions, including Azov battalion and other units
which are known for their atrocities in eastern Ukraine,
are being brought to the city of Odessa, and we would
like the Security Council to take some action, at least,
confirm the need to conduct an investigation, which
would perhaps calm the situation. Accordingly, we have
proposed the following second paragraph in our draft
press statement:

"The members of the Security Council also
recalled the tragic events in Odessa, Ukraine, on
2 May 2014, when dozens of civilians were killed
and hundreds were injured. They underlined the
need to speed up the investigation, while ensuring
its objectivity and impartiality, in order to bring
perpetrators of this reprehensible act to justice."
We have drafted the text in such a manner that it
would be impossible to protest the elements contained
therein. I would therefore call on our Ukrainian
colleagues to show some understanding of the current
situation, which is expected of them by many people,
including Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik, with respect to
the realization of the package of measures. How can
they have any objection to the text? We fully do not
understand, and we would therefore propose, in a spirit
of transparency, a vote on this draft text, so that the
President of the Security Council could read it to the
press at the end of our meeting.

