Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
It was necessary to extend the humanitarian provisions of
resolution 986 (1995). But, in the light of the report of the
Secretary-General, for which we thank him, and in the light
of the scope of the humanitarian disaster in Iraq, such an
extension is not enough. We should have gone further.
Some, including France, felt that it would have been
possible to broaden the existing machinery and substantially
increase the available funding. Several delegations did not
feel that the moment had come to improve resolution 986
(1995) despite the urgency of the situation and despite
public statements to that effect made here just a month ago.
We can be pleased, however, that everyone agreed at least
on the need to tackle this matter very quickly, within two
months. That time-frame will enable us to conduct a
thorough review of the matter and to consider it on the
basis of the proposals that the Secretary-General will be
making, which we trust will be as concrete as possible.

The draft resolution is clear. The Council would
welcome the report of the Secretary-General and would
note with appreciation the recommendations in that report.
The Council would then express its determination to avoid
any further deterioration of the current humanitarian
situation. The Security Council would then indicate three
main ways to reverse the trend.

The first of these is to improve the procedures of the
sanctions Committee. The Committee will be reporting to
the Council no later than 30 January 1998. It is truly
unacceptable that only 15 per cent of phase II contracts
have been approved and that 15 per cent of phase I goods
have not yet arrived at their destinations in Iraq. Admittedly
there has been some progress in the past few months: on
the initiative of the Secretary-General, the distribution plan
has been computerized; monitoring has been reorganized
and consolidated through the establishment of the Office of
the Iraq Programme, also on the initiative of the Secretary-
General. I note too that the procedures in the Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990) have somewhat
improved, permitting contracts to be approved more rapidly
under phase II than they were under phase I.

But much remains to be done. Transparency must be
increased, especially in the financial area and with respect
to the motives, or pretexts, for delaying the approval of
contracts. The Secretariat staff must be enlarged so that
more tasks can be delegated to it, as with the sale of Iraqi
oil, where most of the supervision is being carried out by
the overseers.

The second point outlined in the draft resolution is
that the procedures for authorizing and acquiring goods
could be significantly improved. The Council agrees. I am
certain that in his assessment the Secretary-General will
propose useful measures in this respect.

The third and last point is that an increase in
resources and thus in the oil income allocated to
humanitarian aid is indispensable. The Council would
clearly indicate that it is inclined to permit such an
increase. The aim would be to increase food rations and
improve the distribution of medicines and health supplies,
and also, as noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
to repair infrastructure. The condition of the infrastructure
is extremely poor; this is one of the main reasons for the
current lamentable health situation of the Iraqi people.
Very significant resources are required for this purpose.
The figure most often mentioned by the humanitarian
agencies and non-governmental organizations in Baghdad
is $4 billion, against the present $2 billion. I think that
figure is a reasonable one, pending consideration of this
matter by the Secretary-General.

It is good that the Council has been able on these
three main points to indicate clearly the course and the
spirit that should govern our consideration of the
supplementary report that will be submitted by the
Secretary-General.

The Council has also been able to demonstrate
pragmatism and realism on the distribution plan. As the
plan could not be prepared in time, the Council will agree
to propose a mechanism that will make it possible to case
this problem, for no longer than one month. During that
period, oil sales will enable Iraq to buy medicines, health
supplies and food without interruption. Also, to make the
system more flexible, the draft resolution would allow the
time frame to be reviewed. Specifically, we are thinking
of seeking more flexible formulas to avoid setting three-
month ceilings on oil sales, which create crises and
disruption on the oil markets.

The direction as set out in the draft resolution is
clear, but we must quickly draw the proper conclusions.
It is intolerable that the Iraqi people should continue to
suffer forever. These are no mere words; the suffering is
real. According to United Nations agencies, 11 per cent

 

of children under age five suffer from acute malnutrition
and 31 per cent from chronic malnutrition. The Secretary-
General observes that the food ration of 2,030 calories is
inadequate, and must be improved and increased. United
Nations observers report an exceptionally serious
deterioration in the health infrastructure, which is an
underlying reason for the high infant mortality rate. Let me
cite some information from the World Health Organization
and the United Nations Children's Fund. Infant mortality
went from 24 per 1,000 in 1990 to 168 per 1,000 in 1996,
a sevenfold increase. Deaths among children under five
years of age have tripled, going from 1,500 per month to
4,500 per month in 1996. Since 1990 the mortality rate
among those over 50 has tripled. I shall say no more.

Those are the facts. It is good that a consensus could
emerge on this perceptive and sombre diagnosis and on the
need to remedy the humanitarian situation. My delegation
will support the draft resolution, which reflects that
consensus. We hope that the consensus will hold in two
months' time when we will have to adopt the necessary
reform of resolution 986 (1995).

