Mr. Horna (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
also thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing.

Peru regrets the recent events in the Sudan and
their repercussions on the grave humanitarian and
human rights situation. We condemn in the strongest
terms the increasing repression and violence, which
have resulted in nearly 100 deaths since 9 April.
All that must cease and those responsible must be
brought to justice in accordance with the principle of
complementarity. The International Criminal Court
today provides an opportunity by complementing the
primary responsibility of the State to prevent the most
serious crimes from going unpunished. In that regard,
we reiterate our support for the work of the Prosecutor
and her team and encourage her to continue her efforts
in fulfilling her mandate and the principles of the
Rome Statute.

We also urge the authorities of the Transitional
Military Council to fulfil their obligation to arrest and
surrender suspects of crimes against humanity, war
crimes and genocide. We must ensure punishment for
the crimes of which former President Omar Al-Bashir
and other suspects against whom there are arrest
warrants - Abdel Hussein, Ahmad Harun and Ali
Kushayb - are accused. We also reaffirm the need for
States, including the Council members, to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court and its Prosecutor
in order to achieve justice for the crimes committed
in Darfur.

However, we regret that States parties to the Rome
Statute have not complied with the arrest warrants
of the Court against suspects who have entered their
countries. We remind them, as recently established
by the Court's Appeals Chamber in the Jordan case,
that they, like Sudan itself, must comply with the
Court's orders and ensure their timely and effective
cooperation. We also recall our support for initiatives
to provide the Council with specific procedures in
cases of non-compliance and lack of cooperation, with
a view to holding the States concerned accountable for
their inaction.

In conclusion, Peru believes that the mandates
and functions of the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court seek to fulfil similar
objectives, expressly aimed at achieving the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. The primary responsibility of this organ for
maintaining international peace and security and the
jurisdiction of the Court over the most serious crimes
must be understood and executed as complementary
and interdependent tasks. That is what the Sudan and
the victims of the atrocities in Darfur expect of us today.

