Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for
his briefing on the latest developments in Iraq and the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). Since that was his last briefing, we take
this opportunity to express our appreciation to him for
all his dedicated efforts and leadership as the Head of
UNAMI at a critical time in Iraq. We wish him all the
very best in his future endeavours. We also welcome the
appointment of Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head UNAMI.

We commend the people of Iraq on the completion
of their 2018 national electoral process, which paved
the way for the Government-formation process. We join
others in congratulating the people and the Government
of Iraq for their achievement. We highlight the holding
of the first session of the Council of Representatives
and welcome the election of the Speaker of the Council
of Representatives and of the President of the Republic
of Iraq and the appointment of the Prime Minister.
We welcome the peaceful transfer of power within the
constitutional timeline. We hope the new Government
will deliver on its programme in order to meet the hopes
and expectations of the Iraqi people. We recognize the
enormous challenge that Iraq continues to face. It is
vital that the new leadership and the Government build
on the important progress made in the past years to
rebuild the country.

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/975), we are also encouraged by the progress
made with regard to the relations between Baghdad and
Erbil, including the discussions between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
over outstanding issues. We also note the engagement
between Baghdad and Erbil on the political process
in Iraq, particularly in the new Iraqi Government-
formation process. We hope the federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government will further
capitalize on the recently generated positive momentum.

Despite the remarkable progress made recently,
we note that terrorism remains a serious challenge.
We commend the Iraqi Government and its security
forces for their continued efforts aimed at clearing the
remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
from the Iraqi territory, particularly from the north and
north-central parts of the country. We believe there
is a need for a comprehensive approach to addressing
the security challenges and ensuring durable peace,
promoting national unity, stability and reconciliation,
addressing the humanitarian situation and rebuilding
Iraqi economy and infrastructure.

In that regard, enhanced international and regional
cooperation is critical. We support the call of the
Secretary-General on the need to honour the pledges
made at the Kuwait International Conference for
the Reconstruction of Iraq. We commend the Iraqi
Government for its continued efforts to reach out to
neighbouring countries and other international partners
to strengthen bilateral relations and advance mutual
political and security interests.

In conclusion, we appreciate the role of UNAMI
in supporting and accompanying the Iraqi people and
the Government to ensure a smooth political transition
at this critical juncture in the political history of
the country. It is important that UNAMI continue to
lend its support to the new Government of Iraq as it
embarks on implementing its new programme to
address the many complex and difficult challenges
and put the country on the path of sustainable peace
and reconstruction. We hope that the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will build
on the good work done over the past three years and
nine months.

