Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

For over four weeks, the world has endured images
from Burma that we should never have to see. Much
more importantly, we have seen images of acts that
no person should ever have to endure. We have seen
terrified women and children fleeing from their homes
with only the clothes on their back. We have watched
people drown trying to cross rivers to safety. We have
seen bodies floating down rivers and villages burned to
the ground. We have heard reports of men, women and
children rounded up and detained, and some brutally
killed. We saw the haunting image of a young mother
and father cradling the body of their infant son, a baby
who died fleeing the violence in Rakhine State.

Secretary Tillerson has spoken with State
Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi. I also met with Burma's
National Security Advisor during the recent week
of high-level meetings at the General Assembly.
We have tried to engage the Burmese military at the
highest levels. We have supported regional efforts to
de-escalate the violence and expand humanitarian
access. And still the exodus of terrified, injured people
out of Burma continues, while the Government refuses
to acknowledge the seriousness of the situation. Now
hundreds of thousands of Rohingya refugees remain
in Bangladesh as they are in fear of returning to their
homes. Burmese leaders must come to terms with the
facts on the ground.

When we last met to consider the Burmese crisis,
I expressed our condemnation of the 25 August attacks
against security posts. I reiterate that condemnation
today. I also condemn reported violence against other
minority communities in Rakhine state. But what has
happened since then dwarfs those attacks with its
disproportionate, indiscriminate violence. We cannot
be afraid to call the actions of the Burmese authorities
what they appear to be - a brutal sustained campaign to
cleanse the country of an ethnic minority, and it should
shame senior Burmese leaders who have sacrificed so
much for an open democratic Burma.

The Burmese Government claims that it is
battling terrorists. If this is true, let it allow media and
humanitarian access to back up its claims. If terrorists
are the problem, let the military explain how killing
children and forcing families from their homes will
make Burma any safer. The Burmese military have
ignored calls to respond to such attacks by focusing on
identifying and prosecuting the perpetrators. Instead
what is taking place is a brutal assault that does not
advance justice in Burma. It puts the country further
out of reach.

The Government's response has undermined
Burma's security stability and its fragile democratic
transition. The Government has a responsibility to
restore the rule of law and prevent attacks by citizens
in its name. That responsibility holds regardless ofwhat
individual or group is the target of such attacks. An
already dire situation has been made even worse by some
of the rhetoric coming from official military channels
inside Burma, Worse, that language encourages ugly
views among the Burmese people. History has shown
us what happens when such views go unopposed. The
time for well-meaning diplomatic words in the Council
has passed. We must now consider action against the
Burmese security forces, who are implicated in abuse
and in stoking hatred among their fellow citizens.

The actions needed now to resolve this crisis are
very clear.

First, the Burmese military must respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Those who have been
accused of committing abuses should be removed from
command responsibilities immediately and prosecuted
for wrongdoing. Any country that is currently providing
weapons to the Burmese military should suspend such
activities until sufficient accountability measures are
in place.

Secondly, the Burmese authorities must
immediately allow rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for United Nations agencies
and other relief organizations. We have noted the
Government's decision to work with the International
Red Cross to distribute aid, but the Government has not
allowed other relief organizations meaningful access to
northern Rakhine state. If the Burmese authorities are
sincere about wanting those displaced to come home,
why would they not want food and treatment to get to
those people? The Government needs to work with all
partners who can help to get assistance to all affected
communities. Otherwise, there is a significant danger
that life-saving assistance will be delayed in reaching
those who need it the most.

Thirdly and finally, the Government must commit
to welcoming all displaced persons to return to their
original homes. We were glad to see the commitment
made by the State Counsellor during her state-of-
the-union address to allow those who fled the violence
to voluntarily return to their homes when it is safe
to do so. We will all watch to see if the Government
follows through on that pledge. We call on Burmese
officials to work with the Government of Bangladesh
to develop a framework for returns as agreed to by both
Governments, an idea that enjoys international support.

In the meantime, we have seen the generosity of the
Bangladeshi Government in accepting and sheltering
Burmese refugees. The United States is providing
$95 million to support urgent humanitarian needs in
Burma and Bangladesh, but, given the likelihood of
more people fleeing across the border, plus the ongoing
monsoon season and the humanitarian need already
present in Bangladesh, such generosity will not be
enough. The risk that the conflict will spill over to
other countries in the region is real. Additional support
will be needed to head off a wider conflict. What is
perhaps most frustrating about the conflict is the
fact that we should have seen it coming. The various
communities in Rakhine state have had periods of
peaceful coexistence, but they have also seen periods
of extreme violence and, between such outbursts, the
Rohingya have suffered discrimination and have been
denied basic rights as citizens of Burma.

In concluding my remarks, I would like to speak
directly to the Burmese people. I would like to appeal
to the goodness and hope for the future that exists in the
hearts of the overwhelming majority of them. So many
of them have sacrificed so much for a better country.
I know they are sickened by the images of violence
coming from Burma and being seen around the world,
but the goal of an open, democratic Burma is still
possible. We urge them to hold fast to that vision, not
to give up on it and not to be satisfied with leaders who
give up on it either. Every Burmese man, woman and
child is a child of God with equal moral standing. They
should stay strong in that belief, and they will have the
future they dreamed of - the future they deserve.

