Mr. Thaci (spoke in Albanian; English textprovided by the delegation): I am very pleased to report today on
the latest progress achieved in Kosovo, a new country
now recognized by a majority of Member States.

At the outset, allow me to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zarif, for
his work in Kosovo. He represented the United Nations
in the course of the new situation in Kosovo following
the declaration of independence of the Republic of
Kosovo, the International Court of Justice opinion on
the declaration's legality and on General Assembly
resolution 64/298 of September 2010, which definitively
closed the issue of the status of Kosovo by starting
European Union-facilitated talks on the normalization
of relations between the State of Kosovo and Serbia. As
the same time, I would also like to welcome Mr. Zahir
Tanin of Afghanistan to his leadership of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
Afghanistan was one of the first countries in the world
to recognize the independence of Kosovo.

In recent months, Kosovo has faced some of the
most difficult challenges ofthe past few years. However,
as the Council is aware, those challenges have also
provided Kosovo with opportunities to demonstrate its
transformation from an importer of security resources
to an exporter of stability and peace initiatives in the
region. I wish to inform the Council that the Parliament
of the Republic of Kosovo has now voted to amend the
country's Constitution to create a specialist court that
will adjudicate the alleged crimes cited in the report of
the Council of Europe. The vote in our Parliament was
overwhelmingly positive and consensual. As Deputy
Prime Minister and the President of Parliament's
largest party, I worked with my colleagues to convince
fellow members and the greater public to establish this
unusual legal instrument so that trials can be conducted
in a credible, independent and internationally managed
fashion.

It has been 17 years since the war in Kosovo began
in 1998. Our resistance was a true case of David versus
Goliath. I reaffirm that no Kosovar, myself included,
will stand idly by and allow our specialist court to
equate the genocidal acts of Slobodan Milosevic and
the State of Serbia with the later acts of desperate
individuals from the community of the oppressed,
committed during or after the war. Serbia's war against
Kosovo was conducted with the involvement of the
army, police and paramilitary units, and backed by
Serbian intellectuals. It was a war of fascism, pure and
simple. We in Kosovo will not allow our history to be
rewritten to blur the differences between hunter and
prey. We will protect the legacy of our war - Kosovo's
freedom and independence. Kosovo has now established
an instrument that is far more credible than those used
in trials of the courts in other Balkan countries.

We wish to thank those individual Member States
that have noted and welcomed Kosovo's initiative, and
I hope that the Security Council will also recognize
the mature efforts of the Kosovo Government to deal
with all crimes committed in the years of conflict. I
also wish to invite European Union member countries
to sign, without delay or prevarication, the Stabilization
and Association Agreement in September. Any political
delay in the signing of the Agreement or that on visa
liberalization will be a strong setback to the dialogue
process in Brussels.

As recently featured in the media, several Kosovar
andinternational artists organizedanevent,the Thinking
of You art exhibition and installation, to pay homage to
the women raped by Serbian forces during the 1998-
1999 war in Kosovo. The World Health Organization
has concluded that 20,000 women f I repeat, 20,000
Albanian women - were raped and assaulted by the
forces of the Serbian State during the war in Kosovo in
1998 and 1999. Fifteen years after the war, sadly, the
tragedy of the rape of these women as a war crime in
Kosovo has not been addressed by the mechanisms of
international justice - neither by the United Nations
nor by the Council of Europe.

The time has now come for international justice for
the Kosovar women who were victims of a genocidal
crime committed directly by the Serbian State. I
therefore call on all members of the Security Council
to support the petition signed by more than 150,000
citizens ofKosovo - all the people ofKosovo - seeking
international justice for the Kosovar women raped by
Serbians during the war. International humanitarian
law, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination Against Women and United Nations
resolutions on that matter clearly state that issues of
sexual violence in conflict cannot remain unrecognized
and unpunished. Kosovo calls for justice.

Last winter, a huge number of Kosovars left Kosovo
to seek asylum in European Union member countries.
I am happy to report that we took strong measures
to significantly lower the numbers of emigrating
Kosovars. While the number of Kosovars claiming
asylum in Germany reached 11,147 in March, by June
the number had fallen to 1,373 and in July the number
was in the hundreds and no longer in the thousands.
Similarly, while the number of Kosovar asylum seekers
in Hungary reached 14,000 in March, in June the
number was below 300.

Our efforts to inform the Kosovo people were aided
by European police forces that started monitoring the
Serbian border with Hungary, where the illegal flow
of immigrants was most rampant. Kosovo may have
stemmed our numbers, but we are concerned about the
fate of tens of thousands of Syrians who have left their
country in the most tragic of circumstances. Kosovo
is a country in which almost half of the population
has experience as a refugee, and we sympathize with
the plight of those who are seeking freedom and now
filling the roads of our countries in search of it.

Part of our success to curtail the flow of asylum-
seekers leaving Kosovo was due to some good news on
the economic front. A French consortium won the bid to
build a €400-million ski resort in Brezovica, which will
greatly aid the resident Serbian community and bring
fresh investments to Kosovo as a whole. We have also
agreed to investments in our energy system, and with
the help of the World Bank and the United States Agency
for International Development, we are completing a
transaction for over €l billion in new power generation
that will create employment and exports from Kosovo.
That project was started many years ago, but as complex
negotiations draw to a close it will become a pillar of a
new stage of economic development.

Today, Kosovo is the country with the highest
average economic growth in the Western Balkans
in the past seven years, and with the lowest debt-to-
gross domestic product ratio in all of Eastern Europe.
Yet while continuing to face enormous challenges, we
are bravely seeking to translate our political freedom
into greater economic opportunity for all the people of
Kosovo.

Allow me to highlight the other key development that
the Council has heard about today. Kosovo has applied
for membership of UNESCO. We initially requested
that New York transfer our application to UNESCO as
the UNESCO secretariat had initially advised, but we
understand that the United Nations does not want to
play a role in exchanging correspondence and has left it
to the UNESCO States members to decide the merits of
Kosovo's membership. We have heard several questions
posed here today. Allow me to answer a few of them.

Is Kosovo eligible to become a UNESCO member
before becoming a United Nations Member? The answer
is a resounding yes - Kosovo is eligible to become a
UNESCO member before becoming a United Nations
Member State, provided that it exerts its maximum
effort to secure a two-thirds majority of the votes in the
General Conference. The voting takes place upon the
recommendation of the Executive Board. We will learn
of the final outcome of the vote in November. Many
countries, from Austria to Viet Nam, became members
ofUNESCO long before theyjoined the United Nations.

The second question is: Would Kosovo's
membership of UNESCO endanger the ongoing dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia on the normalization of
relations? Kosovo is already a member of two United
Nations specialized agencies: the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund. UNESCO would
therefore not be the first agency or organization that
Kosovo has joined since the initiation of the technical
dialogue with Serbia in March 2011. Despite Serbia's
claims, Kosovo's membership of international bodies
will only advance stability and strengthen the dialogue
for normalization. The continued isolation of Kosovo
will certainly not promote normalization between
Kosovo and Serbia. Beyond that, Serbia's attempt to
block Kosovo's membership is completely at odds with
the agreement signed in Brussels in April by Kosovo
and Serbia, as represented by Mr. Dacic' and myself.

Thirdly, I must answer the question about the
safety of the UNESCO World Heritage sites in
Kosovo. I can confirm in all conviction that they are
safe - indeed, safer than they have been at any time
in the past 1,000 years. They are protected by a very
consolidated and modern legal framework approved
by United Nations Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari,
endorsed by the Secretary-General and adopted by the
Kosovo Parliament. Our local police authorities protect
95 per cent of the sites of the Serbian Orthodox Church.
NATO forces have entrusted us and are satisfied with
the safety of the sites. Thousands of tourists, from
Japan to Rwanda, are visiting the sites today and they
provide good income for the people of Kosovo. I invite
Council members to visit Kosovo as soon as possible to
witness, themselves, the positive and safe situation. Our
Government has also engaged in interfaith dialogue,
which the Secretary-General has characterized in
several of his reports as a positive contribution to
reconciliation.

I address the issues related to our UNESCO bid at
length because we are gravely concerned over Serbia's
methods as it seeks to deny our membership and keep
us isolated from opportunities in education, science
and culture. Serbia's ambassador to UNESCO, Darko
Tanaskovie, was recently interviewed by a Russian
radio station, where he called for a "wider Christian
front" against Kosovo's membership. That language
completely inappropriately calls for clashes between
faiths and has clear racist undertones. The Kosovo
war was not a religious conflict. It was a genocide
committed by the State of Serbia against the people of
Kosovo. It destroyed lives in three countries and led
to three different armed conflicts, as well as to the
genocides in Croatia, Srebrenica and Kosovo that were
directly committed by the State of Serbia.

We expect to have a clash of arguments with
Serbia on the merits of our membership, but we refuse
to engage in a lowly and unacceptable discourse that
promotes discord between religions and increases
religious intolerance. We call on all members of the
Security Council to support Kosovo's bid to UNESCO
membership. Council members can do so even without
having yet recognized Kosovo. We will also seek
and are working intensively towards and deserve
membership of INTERPOL and the Council of Europe,
two vital tools to promote and protect human rights and
human lives.

I have heard some harsh words on the part of
Minister Dacie today. I understand that he is taking
part in an election campaign in his country and may
therefore need to use nationalist language, but the
dialogue with Serbia has continued and is continuing to
ensure the normalization of relations in the context of
the European integration process.

Next week, Kosovo and Serbia will again meet in
Brussels and I hope that we will agree to conclude a
package of important agreements. The first agreement,
regarding telecommunications, will ensure that Kosovo
obtains an independent international dialing code,
which will save millions of euros as we currently use
Monegasque, Serbian and Slovenian codes. The second
agreement, on energy, is meant to definitively stop the
parallel distribution system in northern Kosovo that
was set up by Serbia. Kosovo law will now prevail in
creating a competitive distribution market in the entire
territory of Kosovo and taxes to Kosovar authorities
will be finally paid. The third deal will ensure that a
barricade constructed in the north, which is called a
"peace park", will no longer hamper the freedom of
movement. The fourth deal is expected to establish the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
envisaged in the Ahtisaari plan. I assure the Council
that the association will not have executive powers.

We have a highly decentralized municipal
Government that will form the basis of our civic
democracy. We hope to sign those deals next week so
that the leaders of the Western Balkans can meet in
Vienna for the next summit of our nations in the context
ofthe Berlin Process. All leaders ofthe Western Balkans
will meet and discuss practical forms of cooperation,
either through joint infrastructure investments, youth-
to-youth exchanges or the demarcation of borders.
Kosovo will continue to play a role in several key
processes, including the promotion, with Serbia, of a
new highway that will link Serbia with the Albanian
and Montenegrin coast via Kosovo highways. The so-
called Pristina-Nis project will connect important parts
of the Balkans. In the coming days, Kosovo will also
sign a border demarcation agreement with Montenegro,
which will soon become a NATO member. Kosovo
will thereby complete demarcation of three quarters
of its borders, the most of any country of the former
Yugoslavia. No other republic has managed to resolve
such painful challenges with its neighbours, as we have
done.

The decision of the Russian Federation to allow
Kosovar sportsmen to use Kosovar passports when
travelling to Russia will also help improve the
movement of Kosovars. Brazil also recently allowed
all Kosovars to use their passports when travelling to
Brazil. As Kosovo recently became an Olympic nation,
that is a welcomed move in the lead-up to the Games in
Rio de Janeiro. We hope our world judo champion, the
Kosovar athlete Majlinda Kelmendi, will win our first
gold medal there.

In conclusion, allow me to call on you, Mr. President,
and members of the Council to recognize the progress
achieved. Are there still problems in Kosovo? Yes, there
are, as there are in each ofthe former Yugoslav republics
in our region. But is Kosovo safe today? Yes, according
to INTERPOL statistics, it is safer than 80 per cent of
other European capitals. We are combating extremism,
and we are a champion in the region in that regard. We
are cooperating with the international community. We
are part of an anti-corruption coalition. We are trying
to build a prosperous democracy.

I know that still more needs to be done, but as
someone who witnessed war for himself, members
of the Council should be proud of themselves for the
success in Kosovo. That is why the mandate of the
next Special Representative of the Secretary-General
should include serious discussions on how the Council
can transfer the resources spent in calm Kosovo to the
people in the Middle East and elsewhere, who today are
facing the direst existential threats.

Kosovo is working on its aspirations to be a member
of the European Union, NATO and the United Nations
very soon.

Before I conclude my remarks, please allow me
to respond to several issues that Mr. Dacic' mentioned
here. I would like an opportunity to reply to them before
this organ.

Mr. Daeic' began his election campaign today
from the floor of the Security Council. I would like to
remind him, however, that according to Kosovo itself
and according to our relations, the issue of Kosovo is
the eighth or ninth most important issue to the people
of Kosovo. The most important issues for the people
of Kosovo are terrorism, corruption, non-respect of
minorities, the creation of a legal State and others.

Mr. Dacie mentioned that he was born in Kosovo.
That is true. Kosovo, with its constitution that is in
accordance with Martti Ahtisaari's document, offers
dual citizenship, and I have offered dual citizenship to
Mr. Dacie. He is welcome to take up that offer. He was
born in Kosovo, but his family actually came to Kosovo
as colonizers between the two World Wars.

I would also like to refer to the propagandistic
brochure that was disseminated here in the Security
Council. That is a desperate and unfortunate act. The
crimes that were sponsored and committed by the State
of Serbia happened in the global spotlight.

Not enough words suffice to express the crimes and
genocide that Serbia committed throughout Kosovo,
again citing the genocides in Croatia, Srebrenica and
Kosovo. What Mr. Dacie is attempting to do today
is again unfortunate and desperate. The images that
he has brought here does not change the fact that
Kosovo will continue to be a champion in the war on
extremism and fundamentalism. He knows that his own
intelligence services created the graffiti that he referred
to. The intelligence services were installed as parallel
institutions in Kosovo and have been working against
Kosovo using the old ways.

In Kosovo alone, the political and military
machines of the State of Serbia have destroyed over 300
religious sites. Serbia burned half of Kosovo from 1998
to 1999. Serbia removed more than a million citizens
of Kosovo from the country. Serbia committed ethnic
cleansing and killed 15,000 people as the State of
Serbia. Serbia has committed genocide. And more than
that, it has destroyed lives. Serbia has killed women, the
elderly, destroyed people's lives, raped women. Serbia
committed genocide in Kosovo and it will be taken to
suit for that issue. Once and for all, I must say Kosovo
will not obtain Serbia's permission on any issue. It is
now a sovereign country.

Albanians were always the majority in Kosovo.
History cannotbe rewritten by political and propagandist
brochures and materials. The citizens of Kosovo can
live in their homes and communities irrespective of
their ethnicity - the Serbs, the Montenegrins all the
other communities. I am one of the leaders who has
continually worked in that direction. I have visited
minority families and I have worked with minority
Government officials for the past 16 years. Mr. Dacie
must understand one thing: the Serbian army and police
and the Serbian Administration will never return. His
dream has ended once and for all. Serbia can continue
the war. That is its practice. It is used to that. But Serbia
will lose again.

