Mr. Norstriim (Sweden): Thank you for the
opportunity to address the Council today.

First of all, since Ambassador Holbrooke is not
here, I would like to ask the American delegation to
convey to him the European Union's warm thanks for
his contributions in putting the HIV/AIDS issue high
on our agenda, as well as for his dedication and efforts
in highlighting the problems of Africa and for all the
other issues he has put his heart into. We wish
Ambassador Holbrooke the best of luck in all of his
future endeavours.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union-
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area- Iceland and Liechtenstein- align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union is very pleased to participate
in this meeting today on the subject of HIV/AIDS and
the follow-up to resolution 1308 (2000), and welcomes
in particular the efforts by the United States and by
Ambassador Holbrooke personally.

We participated in the Security Council debate
led by the Vice-President of the United States, Mr. Al
Gore, a year ago. We also supported resolution 1308
(2000), which was adopted by the Council in July last
year. The Council is today once more sending a strong
message that HIV/AIDS is a global crisis that, if
unchecked, may threaten international peace and
human security. The European Union fully endorses
this message. The Union also recognizes the evolution
of the HIV/AIDS epidemic from a health crisis to a
severe development crisis and a potential security risk.

Attempting to describe the long-term effects of
the HIV/AIDS crisis is beyond the scope of a statement
like the one I am making today. The epidemic causes
tremendous human suffering, especially in those
developing countries that lack sufficient resources for
treatment, care and support. HIV/AIDS is also
destabilising entire societies through systemic damage,
threatening development itself.

The spread of HIV/AIDS is alarming. The latest
update published by the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), in December
last year, states that in the year 2000, 5.3 million
people were infected with HIV. The number of people
living with HIV/AIDS in the world today is
36.1 million. These numbers are 50 per cent higher
than the predictions made by the World Health
Organization in 1991. However, we must recall that it
is possible to do something to stop the spread. The
critical situation is an urgent call to implement the
plans of actions regarding HIV/AIDS that already
exist.

The European Union recognizes that there is a
Vicious circle involving AIDS, poverty and armed
conflict. Movements of people resulting from conflict
fuel the spread of HIV/AIDS, but the epidemic itself
also causes social and economic crises that can threaten
stability and security. The Security Council clearly has
a role here. Fighting the spread of HIV/AIDS is
directly linked to preventing armed conflict.

Resolution 1308 (2000) addresses peacekeepers'
health and the danger of spreading the disease, but also
their advocacy role as promoters of responsible
behaviour. The European Union is convinced that
peacekeepers can contribute to the work of prevention.
Furthermore, we welcome the ongoing discussions in
the United Nations system on the ways in which
conflict and humanitarian situations sometimes bring
about an elevated risk of HIV transmission for refugees
and host communities, as well as for the personnel of
the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations.

National Governments carry the prime
responsibility to make sure that peacekeepers are
adequately trained and educated. Moreover, the
European Union considers national strategies as crucial
to coping with HIV/AIDS and encourages the
development of long-term national strategies. Those
national strategies should include education,
prevention, voluntary and confidential testing, and
counselling. Increased cooperation among Member
States is imperative. The United Nations should
support the creation of national HIV/AIDS
programmes wherever such are not already in place.

The European Union strongly supports the
coordinating work of UNAIDS and urges all United
Nations bodies to cooperate fully and at all levels with
UNAIDS. The entire United Nations system must act
on a global scale and in a holistic manner.

The European Union commends UNAIDS and
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) for
their efforts in the area of HIV/AIDS and
peacekeeping. The cooperation framework presented to
the Council today is an important step forward and
constitutes a clear result of resolution 1308 (2000).
Intensified coordination in the area of HIV/AIDS at
both Headquarters and the field mission level is of
utmost importance to fighting the epidemic and
reducing its spread. The international community bears
a responsibility to fight this epidemic that knows no
borders.

The European Union notes with satisfaction the
broad approach taken by UNAIDS and DPKO by
addressing military and civilian peacekeeping
personnel as well as humanitarian workers and
vulnerable populations. We also welcome the wide
range of areas of cooperation and the emphasis on a
multisectoral approach in the proposed framework.

The European Union wishes to express its firm
commitment to the preparation for and holding of the
General Assembly special session on HIV/AIDS this
June. The special session will provide an excellent
opportunity to talk frankly and in depth about
HIV/AIDS in a broad perspective, notably together
with representatives of civil society. We are pleased to
have on the agenda such issues as prevention and care,
the long-term consequences of the epidemic, the
situation of individuals and how the international
community should move forward.

It has been proposed that one of the round tables
to take place during the special session should be
devoted to a discussion of HIV/AIDS as a security
issue. Today's important debate, as well as earlier work
done by the Security Council on this topic, will provide
an essential input for our deliberations in June.

