Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Before I deliver my statement on this agenda item, allow me to start by addressing points related to the procedural vote earlier. We regret that this particular issue had to go through a procedural vote. While we acknowledge the positions of members of the Security Council with regard to the proposal to invite Mr. Jose Bustani as a briefer at today's meeting, we also believe that this method should have been discussed constructively among Council members and that we should have also shown greater flexibility. Indonesia believes that any proposal to include a briefer in Security Council briefings must be based on a comprehensive consideration vis-a-vis the possible added value it might make to the ongoing discussion without adding more complexity on the issue. At the same time, my delegation appreciates any effort aimed at ensuring an extensive discussion of the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) by having a variety of briefers or sources in order to make progress on this dossier. We sincerely hope that we can continue the discussion more constructively in future, with the aim of supporting the full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). Flexibility and wisdom are needed on the part all parties, and the most important thing that we should be focusing on is the substance of this issue. I now turn to the agenda item. As always, I would like to thank Under-Secretary- General Nakamitsu for her briefing. We recognize that it is not easy for her to brief the Council every month with only a few new elements - or sometimes no new elements - to report. However, we also understand that both the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Syrian Arab Republic are continuing their coordination in order to make progress and close this file, which is something that the Council needs to continuously support. This dossier is indeed a delicate matter. We all know the dynamic in The Hague and in New York. It is in this context that I wish to highlight the following points. First, it is urgent for all relevant parties to redouble their efforts towards making progress on this dossier. It has been seven years since resolution 2118 (2013) was adopted, in September 2013, and we now have before us the eighty-fourth report of the OPCW Director General (S/2020/961, annex). Sometimes I wonder how many more reports we should expect to see. Again, we acknowledge that this is a very complex technical process. We note that the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) continues its efforts aimed at clarifying all outstanding issues with respect to the initial declaration, and that the Syrian National Authority has provided more information with regard to the outstanding issues. With the ongoing engagement and current deployment of the DAT in the Syrian Arab Republic, we hope that we will be able to hear about greater progress at our next meeting. Secondly, besides the technical aspects, this issue will also need tactful and careful diplomatic handling. It is imperative for all parties, including the Council, to be cordial and considerate with each other in discussing this particular file. Concrete steps based on constructive engagement are needed if we want to make progress. Thirdly, my delegation notes the ongoing activities of the Fact-Finding Mission in Syria (FFM) with regard to various incidents, and, as Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu said, the FFM recently issued two reports. We also note that the Investigation and Identification Team is continuing its investigations. Indonesia would like to re-emphasize that it is crucial for all investigations to be conducted in a comprehensive, impartial and conclusive manner, based on verified and credible sources. We appreciate that the OPCW secretariat is continuing its mandated activities in relation to the Syrian chemical-weapons programme, despite the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic. It is therefore more important than ever to ensure the safety and security of the personnel on the ground. In conclusion, Indonesia condemns in the strongest possible terms the use of chemical weapons and the use of toxic chemicals as weapons by anyone, anywhere, under any circumstances and for whatever reasons.
