Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to welcome the Minister
of State for the Commonwealth, the United Nations
and South Asia, His Excellency Lord Tariq Ahmad of
Wimbledon, and thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for the excellent initiative to convene this
important debate. I also wish to thank the Secretary-
General and our other briefers today, Mr. Alpaslan
Ozerdem and Ms. Ilwad Elman, for their comprehensive
and enlightening presentations. We would also like to
commend the Peacebuilding Commission for its support
in post-conflict situations, as well as its role assisting
in the prevention of conflicts.

Among the various approaches to conflict
prevention and resolution, our delegation believes
that the promotion of social reconciliation is a
strategic means of preventing and resolving conflicts.
Therefore, we believe that it is necessary to harness
political instruments to promote social reconciliation
initiatives, such as establishing peace commissions,
fostering dialogue, raising awareness through the
media and advancing reconciliation among young
people and women.

It is for that reason that, under the successful
initiative of His Excellency Mr. Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, President of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, my Government periodically
holds national dialogues between all established
and recognized political parties in the country. They
serve to provide a broad forum for discussion and
interaction among all political stakeholders on a wide
variety of aspects concerning the political, economic
and sociocultural life of the country. Those dialogues
underpin the sustained climate of reduced tensions
and national harmony that has prevailed in the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea for the past 40 years,
thereby guaranteeing participatory and sustainable
development in infrastructure, education, health,
energy and water supply, to mention but a few. These
matters are addressed at the economic conferences that
are also held periodically in the country.

The establishment of peace commissions, which
serve as grass-roots organizations to mobilize local
leaders and community members, helps to prevent
outbreaks of violence and foster tolerance. Their work
can involve a series of tasks, such as countering rumours
and exaggeration, advocating non-violent solutions
to conflicts, providing education for peace through
community programmes and acting as mediators for
conflicting groups. In the appropriate conditions and
where requirements are met, peace commissions can
facilitate communication among different groups and
engage with opposition parties to reduce violence
and promote a degree of tolerance. Consequently,
peace commissions have become the focal point of
institutional strengthening efforts aimed at capacity-
building and ensuring some uniformity in practice
and procedure.

Finally, resolution 2419 (2018), on youth and peace
and security, reminds us that the inclusion of young
people is key to advancing national peacebuilding
processes and objectives, while ensuring that the needs
of all segments of society are taken into account. In
that regard, we believe it is crucial to consider the
active participation and inclusion of young people in all
aspects of peacebuilding.

Promoting reconciliation among young people could
serve as a strategic way of building on peacekeeping.
Young people suffer psychological wounds caused by
the trauma that they or their families have personally
experienced, which breeds bitterness and mistrust
vis-a-vis their communities. Reconciliation with young
people fosters restoration and rebuilds societal relations.

Along the same lines, efforts to ensure public
education for young people, such as media campaigns,
can help to dispel the rumours and propaganda spread
by extremists, which fuel social and political tensions.
It is also important to take heed of the role that
women can play in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
through reconciliation.

Let me conclude by saying that we wish to pay
well-deserved tribute to the Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Mr. Abiy Ahmed, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, for
his efforts at reconciliation with Eritrea. They have
established a new dynamic of a calming of tensions in
the Horn of Africa.

