Ms. Willson (United States of America):
Contrary to the statements that the Council has heard
again this morning, the United States has taken a
number of actions with respect to the Luis Posada
Carriles case. In taking these steps, the United States
has acted consistent with international law as well as
with our domestic legal framework that provides for
due process and various constitutional safeguards. As
with democracies around the world that follow the rule
of law, these safeguards provide that an individual
cannot be brought for trial or extradited unless
sufficient evidence has been established that he has
committed the offence charged. In the United States,
this standard is described as "probable cause". Let me
give the Council a brief overview of the steps the
United States has taken with respect to Posada within
this legal framework.

Posada entered the United States illegally in early
2005. Posada was detained by immigration authorities
in the United States on 17 May 2005, and he was, in
accordance with United States law, placed in removal
proceedings. The immigration judge who handled the
removal proceedings ordered that Posada be removed
from the United States on 27 September 2005. That
order remains in effect. The United States has been
seeking ways to implement it consistent with the terms
of the order and United States regulations that
implement the obligations of the United States under
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

Specifically, at the time the immigration judge
ordered Posada removed, the immigration judge also
determined that Posada could not be removed to either
Cuba or Venezuela as it was more likely than not that
he would be tortured if he were so transferred. As a
matter of United States immigration law, the United
States is not in a position to remove Posada to either
country.

Moreover, the United States sought and obtained
a criminal indictment charging Posada with violations
of our immigration laws. Although the federal district
court handling that case dismissed the indictment, the
United States appealed the decision and, on 14 August
2008, a federal appeals court agreed with the
Government and reversed the district court decision.
The case now goes back to the trial court for further
proceedings.

Posada also remains under investigation for past
activities. In the meantime, Posada remains subject to
the order of removal issued by the immigration judge
and is without legal status in the United States. He is
also subject to an order of supervision from the
Department of Homeland Security, Immigration and
Customs Enforcement, which imposes certain
restrictions on Posada, including reporting and
monitoring requirements. In sum, the United States
continues to be engaged in an ongoing series of
actions, consistent with our legal requirements and due
process with respect to Posada.

A reference was also made to five Cubans who
are incarcerated in the United States. In the case of the
five Cubans accused of spying, the facts of the case
help to address the misrepresentations issued by the
Cuban Government and others in relation to that case.
The five Cubans were tried in United States federal
court and received all guarantees of due process
provided under the United States Constitution. They
were ultimately convicted for being unregistered
agents of the Cuban Government. Three of the
defendants were also convicted of attempting to obtain
non-public national defence information, and one was
convicted of conspiracy to commit murder. In fact, the
defendants never denied that they were covert agents of
the Cuban regime.

The defendants have made full use of their
extensive due process rights, benefiting from their vast
procedural protections and the provision of
Government-funded legal assistance. The defendants
continue to take advantage of their rights as guaranteed
under the United States Constitution. Millions of
Cubans on the island have been waiting for a half-
century for the rights that these defendants were
afforded in the United States.

On 4 June 2008, a panel of the United States
Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit decided on
all remaining issues raised by the defendants. The
Court of Appeals affirmed the convictions of all five
defendants, holding that all of the legal arguments
challenging their convictions were without merit and
that sufficient evidence supported each conviction. The
panel vacated sentences for three of the five defendants
and remanded their cases so that new sentences could
be imposed. The panel affirmed the sentences of the
other two defendants, including the life sentence of the
defendant convicted of conspiracy to commit murder in
connection with the Brothers to the Rescue shootdown.

The five convicted Cuban spies are serving
sentences in federal institutions throughout the United
States. They are held among and have the same
privileges available to them as the general prison
population. Under Federal Bureau of Prisons
provisions, inmates are allowed visits by immediately
family members and other approved relatives, friends
and associates with pre-established relationships, as
well as their attorneys and Cuban consular officials.

All prospective visitors other than immediate
family members may be subject to background check
and approval by the institution's staff. The five
convicted Cuban spies have received numerous,
lengthy visits from eligible family members. However,
not all applicants who seek such visits are eligible for
visas. According to State Department visa reports,
relatives of the five have been issued visas on more
than 100 occasions for visitation purposes.

