Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Mr. President, let me
begin by thanking you for chairing this very important
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. I also
would like to convey our appreciation to Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for
his insightful and comprehensive briefing this morning.

I also wish to state that the delegation of
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of Egypt and Tajikistan on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.
In addition, I wish to briefly make certain points that
Bangladesh believes to be of importance.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, has always been a major concern
for the international community and the United
Nations. A durable and sustainable resolution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, including the issue of Palestine,
which is the core of the long-lasting crisis, must
therefore be our collective strategic objective. All
Member States should pledge complete commitment to
this objective and throw their full moral, diplomatic,
political and economic support behind its early
realization. Bangladesh is always ready to play a
constructive role in this collective endeavour to
achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East based on the two-State principle.
Bangladesh joins with the international community in
reaffirming its full support for the Palestinian people in
its just and legitimate struggle for self-determination
and freedom from continued occupation.

The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental rights to self-determination and to live
freely in their own land. Displaced Palestinians have
been denied their right to return home and live in
dignity and safety. Unfortunately, it appears to have
been a collective failure on the part of the international
community and, even more so, of the people of Israel,
who despite having endured deprivation and sufferings
has failed to rise to the occasion and guarantee the
people of Palestine its fundamental rights to self-
determination and a sovereign State of its own side by
side with Israel.

In order to achieve a lasting solution in the
Middle East, it is very important to address the key
issue, which is the prolonged and illegal occupation of
the Arab territories by Israel. The solution requires
Israel's complete and unconditional withdrawal from
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and all other occupied Arab lands.

We are nevertheless heartened to see a new
beginning in the peace process. It is encouraging that
President Mahmoud Abbas met with the Israeli Prime
Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, last month and started
direct talks, which had remained stalled since 2008.
Let us hope that their meeting is a step in the right
direction towards the two-State solution. Let us hope
that they will adopt a mindset conducive to lasting
peace and that Israel will stop its illegal eviction of
Palestinian residents and end its settlement projects as
steps towards the realization of the two-State solution.

The international community is eagerly waiting
for a breakthrough. Can we be optimistic that this
modest beginning of direct talks will end up in
consolidating the peace process? My delegation
believes that direct negotiations will only be successful
if there is sustained regional and international support
for the talks, the parallel process of Palestinian State-
building and the pursuit of a just, lasting and
comprehensive regional peace, as envisaged in the
Fourth Geneva Convention, the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), and
425 (1978), the principle of land for peace, and the
Madrid terms of reference, which provide for Israel's
withdrawal from all occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories back to the 4 June 1967 line, the Road Map
and the Arab Peace Initiative, which are the best guides
for achieving a two-State solution and for guaranteeing
Israel's security and stability.

The two sides should, as soon as possible, settle
the core issues including the status of Jerusalem and
the return of the Palestinian refugees. Let me urge the
international community, especially the Quartet, to
ease the financial burden of the Palestinian Authority.
There should be renewed commitments to increase
financial assistance to the Palestinian people.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Bangladesh's long-
standing position that the continued illegal occupation
of Palestine over the past six decades is the root cause
of the violence, unrest and destabilization in the

region. Let me also reiterate our full support for a
lasting peace for all inhabitants of the region, both
Arabs and Israelis, and our strong commitment to the
realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living side by side and in peace with all its neighbours,
including Israel.

