Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2015/942), as well as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Nicholas Haysom, for his detailed
briefing this morning and for his continued good work
in the country.

The one common thread running through the report,
the briefing and the statements today is the deteriorating
security situation in Afghanistan. As the Secretary-
General states in his report, the temporary capture of
Kunduz by the Taliban was a result of the formidable
security, economic and political challenges facing by
the country. Continued international support therefore
remains critical. Pakistan, for its part, has condemned
the violence and rising number of civilian casualties in
Afghanistan. Nothing justifies indiscriminate killing.
We have vowed our full support to the Government of
Afghanistan with a view to improving the situation, but
it is the Afghan people itself who must put their house
in order.

The two possibilities for ending instability in
Afghanistan, in our view, are the military option or the
negotiated peace process. There is clear international
consensus that the use of force alone may not achieve
peace in the country. A robust and meaningful
reconciliation process, if pursued seriously, is the only
sustainable way to achieve our common objective. It
was in that spirit that Pakistan, in good faith and at the
request of President Ghani, facilitated the first-ever
direct talks between the Afghan Government and the
Taliban. We stand ready to play a similar role again.

No one, however, should cast aspersions on
Pakistan's sincerity. After Afghanistan, Pakistan and
its people have suffered the most from the 35 years of
wars, violence and terrorism in Afghanistan. Pakistan
is the primary victim of terrorism. Our resolve to root
out the scourge of terrorism from our territory is clear
and visible. We have targeted, and continue to target,
all terrorist groups. We have made substantial progress
in cleansing our country of terrorists. However, these
objectives will not be fully accomplished until the
sanctuaries and safe havens of those terrorists who
have fled our operations to Afghanistan have been
eliminated. We cannot allow our people to be the target
ofcross-border attacks launched from those safe havens.
When Pakistan initiated its counter-terrorism operation
in North Waziristan, we called for coordinated action
from Kabul to prevent the escape of terrorists into
Afghanistan and their resort to cross-border attacks
from Afghan territory. That cooperation is still absent.
I would like to reiterate our call for that collaboration.
We cannot achieve diplomacy through statements. We
have to resolve our issues through dialogue.

The successful holding of the fifth ministerial
conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, in
Islamabad on 9 December, was another manifestation
of our commitment to stability and peace in
Afghanistan. The conference provided an opportunity
for the ministers of the region and beyond to agree on
a broad-based Islamabad declaration. We believe that,
if implemented with sincerity, it will pave the way for
a peaceful neighbourhood, which is a foreign policy
objective of Pakistan. The conference was inaugurated
jointly by the President of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani,
and the Prime Minister, Nawaz Sharif. The two leaders
also had a constructive bilateral meeting thereafter,
their second in 10 days. The first was in Paris on
the sidelines of the Climate Change Conference. A
number of Afghan-focused bilateral, trilateral, and
quadrilateral meetings were also held in Islamabad.
While recognizing Pakistan's role and commitment to
facilitate peace talks, those meetings helped to reach
consensus on several areas.

First, peace in Afghanistan is vital for the region
and beyond. The focus of the international efforts
should therefore be on regional and international efforts
to achieve peace and stability in the country. Secondly,
closer collaboration and coordination between Pakistan
and Afghanistan are essential to promote peace in
Afghanistan and to effectively combat terrorism.
Thirdly, reconciliation through a politically negotiated
settlement is the only viable option for promoting long-
term peace in Afghanistan. The Islamabad declaration
also commits to the return of Afghan refugees to their
homes with dignity and honour, and the international
community's support for their smooth resettlement.
Pakistan is considering the extension of the tripartite
agreement at this stage. That, however, would be with
a clear road map to ensure the return of refugees with
dignity.
Regional connectivity will be key to the economic
development of Afghanistan and the region. The ground-
breaking ceremony for the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-
Pakistan-India pipeline earlier this month and the work
on the CASA-lOOO and other similar projects augur
well for that endeavour. The pipeline project alone,
for instance, would create tens of thousands of jobs in
Afghanistan. We agree with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan that these
are the kinds of objectives and activities on which the
region should focus its energy.

For decades, the peoples of Afghanistan and
Pakistan have confronted the common threat of
terrorism. Pakistan has made notable gains in its
counter-terrorism campaign through its military
operations and the comprehensive national action
plan. We sincerely hope that in working together, the
two countries will, fulfilling the expectations of their
peoples, cooperate closely to defeat all terrorists and
establish lasting peace in the region.

