Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to express our confidence that you
will guide the deliberations of the Council with the
outstanding skill and wisdom you are known for. I
would also like to thank your predecessor, His
Excellency, the Ambassador of France, for the most
able manner by which he presided over the Council
during the last month.

The Security Council convenes again today to
discuss yet another grave crime committed by Israel -
regrettably, under the direct supervision of the highest
authority in its Government - against Mr. Abdel Aziz
Al-Rantisi in occupied Gaza two days ago.

I would like to express my Government's
strongest condemnation of that assassination. That
crime reminds us all, again, of the brutal nature of
Israel's policy of organized assassinations and
extrajudicial executions. That crime will only lead to
the escalation of violence in the region and to further
deterioration of the already dire situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, that is due to the
irresponsible and illegal actions of Israel.

Furthermore, that crime represents a direct threat
to the security and stability of the entire Middle East
region.

We call upon Israel to desist completely from the
escalatory and inflammatory policies and actions that it
deliberately carries out, and call upon it to work in
good faith towards restoring calm and stability in the
occupied Palestinian territories. We call on the Council
to immediately undertake its responsibilities and to
provide the necessary protection to the Palestinian
population under occupation in accordance with the
Fourth Geneva Convention, and to force Israel to desist
from the assassination policies which it declares it will
continue.

My country views the current deterioration that
has befallen the peace process with the utmost concern
and calls upon all parties and the United Nations,
through its various bodies and organs - including this
Council - to work towards reviving the Middle East
peace process on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1397
(2002), 1435 (2002) and 1515 (2003), and on the basis
of the Arab peace initiatives and the road map and its
vision of a final status solution based upon two States,
including an independent Palestinian State on the
entirety of the West Bank, and including East
Jerusalem and Gaza, that would live side by side, in
peace, with Israel.

