Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Let me begin by saying
how pleased the Bangladesh delegation is at seeing you,
Mr. Minister, once again chairing a meeting of the
Security Council. We also welcome in our midst the
Minister for External Relations of Angola. Let me also
begin by commending the delegation of Canada, and
particularly Ambassador Fowler, for convening this
meeting on Angola sanctions. It is right for the Council
to focus on the situation in Angola in general and the
sanctions imposed against UNITA in particular, and the
initiatives of Ambassador Fowler and his colleagues have
the full support of our delegation.

We recall our discussion a little over a month ago on
the report of the Panel of Experts on the sanctions
imposed against Angola. We commended the work done
by the Panel, as we found it useful, not only in the
context of the Angola sanctions, but also for the
implications the recommendations would have on the
current thinking of the Council in terms of general issues
relating to sanctions.

There is no doubt that the sanctions have not been
working, and the Panel, in its report, has pointed out why.
It is for the Council to decide how best it could deal with
the recommendations of the report in order to make the
sanctions more effective. The approach that the Council
took was to implement most of the recommendations. The
draft resolution that we shall adopt later today will be
doing just that. There are other issues raised in the
recommendations that need further study and call for the
collection of information, and perhaps those issues which
may not have been pursued adequately by the Panel for
want of time or other reasons should also be looked into.
We therefore agree that we need a mechanism to meet
this requirement, a mechanism which would be geared to
this purpose. We feel that the mechanism would do well
to look at the working methods of the Panel and improve
them. This would not only result in a better product, it
would spare it some criticism. We would look forward to

 

its reports, which should provide valuable information to
the work of the Council in this regard.

The Angola situation as it stands today is the result of
complicity, corruption and greed. The country, with a great
potential to develop, is currently rated the most horrific
place on earth for a child. UNITA bears the primary
responsibility for this. There is no military solution for the
problem, and a political dialogue must be started between
the concerned parties. The sanctions are aimed at making
it difficult for UNITA to pursue its military campaign.
However, all-round cooperation is needed to make that
happen.

We welcome the decisions of some of the countries
cited in the Panel report to set up commissions of inquiry
and other mechanisms to investigate the allegations. Others
should follow that example. The results of these inquiries
are valuable tools for the sanctions Committee's future
work. We hope the Committee will be able to use the
information in its dialogue with the States concerned.

The draft resolution covers most of the
recommendations relating to arms, diamonds, financial
assets, travel restrictions, et cetera. The recommendations
are far-reaching and bold, we know. We have worked out
a draft resolution which goes far enough, within the bounds
of practicability. It is our view that since we now know the
reasons, modalities and mechanism behind the large-scale
flouting of the measures imposed against UNITA, we
should be able to act to stop it. Political will to do so can
overcome many of the impediments that might stand in the
way. The role of diamonds in this continuing war is clearly
known to us today. All concerned, including the industry
and the Government of Angola, should do their part in
putting in place appropriate mechanisms to observe the
sanctions measures. The same holds for the other areas
covered in the draft resolution. We would urge all parties
concerned to extend cooperation for the development of
more effective mechanisms to ensure observance of the
measures imposed.

We are encouraged by the positive response to the
recommendations by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) countries. We support their resolve to
shoulder their responsibility. It remains for the international
community to support and assist them in their endeavour to
take all steps in containing the situation in Angola in
accordance with all existing Council resolutions in this
regard.

Before concluding, I would like to touch upon the
humanitarian situation in Angola, essentially a product of
the protracted war which has exacerbated the already
precarious humanitarian situation. We welcome the
Secretary-General' s observations in his latest report on the
situation in Angola and agree that the efforts of the
Government of Angola in providing basic social and
economic services to the people should be supported.
In closing, we hope that the draft resolution that we
adopt today will go a long way towards ensuring that the
sanctions are respected and that their purpose is served:
achieving the greater goal of peace and stability in
Angola.

