Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting. I would like to
preface my comments by saying that I apologize to the
President and the Council members for the lateness of
the aide-memoire, which I hope was useful, late as it
was. We also note that we have sent the members of the
Council documentation and statements from the Papua
New Guinea Government in the past several weeks.

My delegation appreciates and thanks the
Security Council for the opportunity to open
consideration of an agenda item of the greatest
importance to the people and Government of Papua
New Guinea: the peace process and the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea. I
deliberately refer to the item as one for consideration,
rather than debate, as it concerns matters on which
there are no significant differences among members of
the United Nations or the parties involved in the peace
process on the ground.

There are three issues that I will cover. The first
one is verification, the second is regional support for
the peace process, and the third is preparations for
autonomy, restoration and development.

In terms of verification, the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) has judged
that implementation of the agreed weapons disposal
plan contained in the Bougainville Peace Agreement
has progressed to the point at which it can verify that
stage II of the plan has been achieved. Stage II is
defined as the time when weapons are held in secure,
double-locked containers, with the containers
supervised and one of the keys held by UNPOB.

Ambassador Sinclair submitted his report
verifying and certifying that achievement to the
National Government on Tuesday, 29 July 2003. The
presentation took place at the National Parliament
House of Papua New Guinea, in Port Moresby, in front
of the acting Prime Minister, Hon. Bart Philemon,
ministers and members of Parliament, diplomats
accredited to Papua New Guinea, senior officials and
media representatives who came to witness and report
on the event. Consistent with the requirements of the
new Part XIV of the Papua New Guinea Constitution,
which gives legal effect to the Bougainville Peace
Agreement, the responsible minister officially then
advised the Governor-General of Papua New Guinea
that the report had been received.

The notice bringing the new Part XIV of the
Constitution and the new organic law on peace-
building in Bougainville into full operation is expected
to appear in the National Gazette later this week. I note
that Ambassador Sinclair also mentioned that in his
presentation.

The framework for the establishment and the
gradual assumption of increasing responsibility for the
exercise of powers, functions and control over
resources and the day-to-day operations of the
autonomous Bougainville Government will then be in
place. So will the guarantee for a referendum among
Bougainvilleans on Bougainville's political future in
another 10 to 15 years, when certain agreed conditions
apply. The referendum will include a separate
independence for Bougainville as an available option.
The outcome will be subject to the final decision-
making authority of the National Parliament of Papua
New Guinea.

A significant feature of the new constitutional
arrangements is that they can be changed only if a
proposal for change is supported by a two-thirds
absolute majority of members of the National
Parliament of Papua New Guinea and by the
Bougainville legislature set up under those
arrangements.

As Ambassador Sinclair has recognized in his
verification report, the changes that follow the
verification report mean that "relations between the
National Government and Bougainville become
transformed for all time".

The readiness with which the parties involved in
the Bougainville peace process agreed to make
UNPOB responsible for initiating such critical
constitutional changes was a mark of the faith all of
them had in the neutrality, independence and integrity
of the United Nations and its representative on the
ground, Ambassador Sinclair and UNPOB. The
reception the parties gave the draft report, when the
Chairman, Ambassador Sinclair, presented it to the
Peace Process Consultative Committee (PPCC) on 25
July, showed that they continue to have similar
confidence in the United Nations, UNPOB and
Ambassador Sinclair. The way in which all the parties
have maintained such confidence at a critical turning
point in the peace process, when uncertainty is
otherwise likely to rise, is very much to the credit of
the United Nations bodies and officials involved in this
process. It is also a product of the verification process
itself.

As members of the Security Council will recall,
Papua New Guinea has always believed that
verification should be based on the widest possible
consultation. Our position has been endorsed by all of
the parties involved in the Bougainville peace process.
UNPOB has applied it with energy and care. Genuine
verification cannot just be a matter of counting the
number of guns handed in, or of comparing that
number with an uncertain estimate of the weapons at
large previously or now.

As Ambassador Sinclair rightly observes in his
verification report, the Bougainville Peace Agreement
is intended to lay a solid foundation for the creation of
a society characterized by genuine peace and the
restoration of civil authority under a democratically
elected autonomous Government. The foundations of
such a society can only be feelings of mutual security
and confidence within and among various communities
of Bougainville. The weapons disposal plan is an
essential element in promoting a secure foundation for
the required feelings of mutual security and
confidence.

It was accordingly appropriate - indeed
necessary - for Ambassador Sinclair to proceed on the
basis of consultations, after consulting widely at
community level around Bougainville with former
combatants and political leaders of all major factions
and with the Transitional Consultative Council, in
which leaders of the main political bodies representing
the people of Bougainville consult with each other and
the National Government of Papua New Guinea.
Ambassador Sinclair was also willing to provide
clarification of his verification report, when requested,
to the Government of Papua New Guinea.

The final step in the process, before Ambassador
Sinclair formally submitted the final report to the
National Government, was the presentation of the
report to the PPCC, where the parties involved in the
Bougainville peace process could receive and review it
together. The only significant absentee from the
consultations was Francis Ona and his remaining
supporters outside the peace process in the so-called
"no-go zone", around the Panguna Mine site.

The consensus of the parties involved in the
peace process and the PPCC meeting on 25 July was
that the report is balanced, comprehensive and frank.
This view was reached in light of a number of
considerations, including the way in which
consultations had been conducted all around
Bougainville, the report's acknowledgement of the
work still to be done to rid Bougainville of the fear and
threat of the gun, and UNPOB's careful assessment of
the risks involved in deciding whether and when to
verify and certify that stage II has been achieved.

In basing its assessment on the evidence provided
both from practical weapons disposal and through
widespread, in-depth consultations, UNPOB
acknowledges that it alone is responsible for making
the final judgment on verification. That is the basis on
which the parties agreed that UNPOB should verify
and certify stage II of the agreed weapons disposal
plan. The Government would have it no other way.

The most significant gap in practical weapons
disposal and the Bougainville peace process as a whole
arises from the way in which Francis Ona and his
remaining supporters close to Panguna have chosen to
remain outside this process. But even here, progress is
being made. In practice, those who continue to remain
outside the Bougainville peace process have generally
respected the peace which has been achieved.

As the verification report recognizes, citing a
letter from Francis Ona to Ambassador Sinclair, the
Me'ekamui Defence Force does not intend,

"to enter into any unnecessary conflict or war.
The war is well and truly behind us as our
military objectives have been achieved and our
struggle must, as it has, progressively move on
into new directions and areas."

In such circumstances, it is indeed distressing to
see various documents circulating in Bougainville,
purportedly expressing the views of Francis Ona and
the remaining hard core of Me'ekamui supporters that
there is a conspiracy to undermine the Bougainville
peace process or undertake other unwelcome activities
in Bougainville. The alleged conspiracy is variously
said to be between the Government of Papua New
Guinea and others - sometimes a mining company or
companies, and sometimes the United Nations. The
circulation of such untrue and implausible ideas is, at
best, a sign of isolation.

For this reason, the Government of Papua New
Guinea and other parties involved in the peace process
continue to call for reconciliation, and the active
involvement of Francis Ona and Me'ekamui in
practical peace-building. Now is the time for them to
play a direct part in shaping the future Government of
Bougainville. The Government of Papua New Guinea
continues to recognize the positive contribution Francis
Ona and his group have made to the Bougainville
peace process by not deliberately disrupting it on the
ground.

Meanwhile, the Government continues to urge the
Bougainville parties to meet and decide on the final
fate of the weapons without further unnecessary delay.
I am therefore pleased to be able to inform the United
Nations that the PPCC has agreed that the meeting will
be held on Nissan Island, in the Bougainville province,
as soon as the necessary arrangements can be made,
probably in a few weeks.

The Government of Papua New Guinea firmly
believes that destroying the guns at the earliest
practicable opportunity is the only truly effective
option and the only way in which guns will be removed
not only physically, but from the minds of the people in
Bougainville. It is also the best way by far of ensuring
that scarce human and financial resources are not
wasted on providing security for guns and containers,
but rather used to support the economic and social
recovery for which people around Bougainville and the
rest of Papua New Guinea continue to work, hope and

pray.

Thus, verification and certification of stage II do
not mark the end of UNPOB's role and responsibilities
on the ground. In citing the initiatives UNPOB is
taking to promote further practical weapons disposal,
the report recognizes this reality. Not only does
UNPOB remain responsible for supervising and
holding one of the keys to each stage II container, it
has a continuing role in relation to the making and
implementation of the decision at stage III of the
agreed weapons disposal plan. If the parties do not
reach a mutually acceptable agreement at stage III,
then UNPOB has a further possible role and
responsibility in relation to determining whether or not
elections for the autonomous Bougainville Government
should go ahead or should be deferred, in which case it
will have a say in the length of any deferral.

UNPOB's ongoing role and responsibilities
underline the urgency of holding the stage III meeting
between the parties to the Bougainville Peace
Agreement and implementing its outcome. This means
that UNPOB will still have a great deal of very
important, indeed critical, work to do in order to
complete its agreed assignment under the Bougainville
Peace Agreement by the end of this year.

I turn now to regional support for the peace
process. The Bougainville peace process has benefited
from the generous support not only of the United
Nations, but of Papua New Guinea's friends in the
region and development cooperation partners around
the world.

The neutral regional Truce Monitoring Group
(TMG) was established first, in late 1997. It was then
replaced by the similarly neutral regional Peace
Monitoring Group (PMG), when the agreement
implementing the permanent and irrevocable ceasefire
was signed on 30 April 1998. Both the TMG and the
PMG consisted of personnel from Australia, Fiji, New
Zealand and Vanuatu. The men and women who served
in the ranks, both civilian and military, were unarmed.
From a peak of just of over 300 personnel at the start,
the PMG has gradually been reduced in size as the
peace process gathered strength and become
increasingly capable of sustaining itself on the ground.
As members of the Security Council will recall,
all of the parties involved in the Bougainville peace
process were concerned when it was announced that
the PMG would cease operations on 30 June 2003. The
gap it would leave would be experienced directly by
the people who gained confidence from its continuing
presence. It would also be felt by UNPOB, which
relied on the PMG for logistical and other forms of
support.

I am therefore pleased to report that the
contributing countries have agreed to provide a
Bougainville Transition Team (BTT) to support the
peace process until the end of this year.

The BTT, consisting of 17 civilian personnel from
Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Vanuatu, will be
much smaller and have a more narrowly focused
mandate than the PMG. It will, of course, continue to
be unarmed. In view of concerns expressed when the
Security Council previously considered the
Bougainville peace process and UNPOB, I am pleased
to advise that the protocol establishing the BTT gives it
the explicit function of cooperating with United
Nations observers, on agreed terms and conditions.

Papua New Guinea is grateful for the positive
way in which the BTT contributing countries have
responded to the request by the National Government,
on behalf of the parties, for the continuing availability
of a neutral regional body to support the peace process
and assist UNPOB logistically and in other ways.
Ambassador Sinclair has mentioned some of the ways
it is assisting.

Finally, I would like to turn to the preparations
for autonomy, restoration and development. Weapons
disposal and the full operation of new constitutional
arrangements lay the foundations for progress in other
areas, but they do not build peace on their own. Given
our experience of the challenges involved in
implementing major constitutional changes of our own
and our close observation of peace processes in other
countries, Papua New Guinea is only too well aware of
the many diverse and, often, complex challenges which
have to be met and overcome.

That is why the Government is working closely
with leaders and officials in Bougainville to finalize
immediate arrangements to improve policing and
access to courts and increase the availability of
correctional services in Bougainville. We are also
consulting on plans for the medium and long term.

In every case, the Government is conscious of the
need to maintain consistency with the letter and spirit
of the Bougainville Peace Agreement, including the
consultations and cooperation which are the agreed
keys to implementation.

Other steps towards creating conditions in which
the autonomous Bougainville Government can be
established and begin operating include consultations
on the development of the Bougainville constitution.

The Government is trying its hardest, in difficult
economic and budgetary conditions, to allocate funds,
personnel and other support to facilitate progress
towards self-sustaining peace and the transition to
autonomy in Bougainville. In doing so, we continue to
rely on the support of our development cooperation
partners. Australia, the European Union, Japan, New
Zealand and others should know how much we
appreciate the resources they provide.

Among members of the United Nations family of
organizations, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) stands out for the strong and
effective support it provides for practical weapons
disposal, community development and the training of
former combatants, in particular. The UNDP-
coordinated cocoa and coconut rehabilitation project is
an especially noteworthy and successful instance of an
activity which facilitates both economic and social
recovery, as well as the reintegration of former
combatants, by providing large numbers of rural
smallholders with employment, incomes and hope
based on self-help.

The United Nations Children's Fund provides
support for restoration and development across a broad
range of activities, including immunization, HIV/AIDS
awareness, malaria control, education, child protection
and trauma counselling.

Other areas in which Papua New Guinea will be
seeking advice and other forms of assistance include
public sector reform and other preparations for the
establishment of the autonomous Bougainville
Government.

Priorities include the provision of opportunities
for training, re-training and upgrading the skills of
public sector personnel and potential recruits. They
also include support for capacity-building and
institutional strengthening, both in Bougainville and at
the national level, so that the cooperation necessary to
give full effect to the joint creation embodied in the
Bougainville Peace Agreement can receive the support
it requires at both ends.
As development cooperation partners work to
integrate their activities in Bougainville into national
projects and programmes, the Government requests
them to continue giving appropriate attention and
priority to the particular character of the post-conflict
situation in Bougainville. The need to reintegrate
former combatants and their communities remains a
major concern.

As my remarks have, I believe, made clear, the
peace process in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea,
remains a national priority, pursued on a bipartisan
basis. Papua New Guinea is accordingly grateful for
the support the international community continues to
provide.

The Government has accepted, and acted on,
UNPOB's verification report and certification, as the
constitutional amendment implementing the
Bougainville Peace Agreement requires.

As UNPOB's host, Papua New Guinea will
continue to fully support its efforts to fulfil its agreed
responsibilities under the Lincoln, ceasefire and
Bougainville peace agreements and, in doing so, help
to secure lasting peace by peaceful means.

