Ms. Rice (United States of America): I should
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/102) and Special Representative Staffan dc
Mistura and his staff for their exceptional service and
performance every day in Iraq.

I also want to thank Ambassador Al Bayati of
Iraq for his important remarks and to congratulate his
Government and the people of Iraq on the important
and positive progress that they have achieved of late.

With our shared strategic interests at stake,
thousands of brave Americans in harm's way, and the
future of millions of Iraqis in the balance, Iraq remains
an issue of great importance to the United States, but
one on which the new Administration will steer a new
course. The American and coalition troops, the

international diplomatic corps, aid workers and the
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), who are all focused on building a future of
peace, security and stability in Iraq, have performed
magnificently, and we salute their accomplishments
and sacrifices.

Iraqi and American interests alike will best be
served by the safe and responsible redeployment of
United States forces from Iraq, by support for Iraqis as
they assume full responsibility for their sovereign
nation, and by the encouragement of other nations to
join in helping to stabilize the region and to deploy a
broader array of tools to eliminate the ongoing threat
of Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorism.

With the end of the coalition's mandate on
31 December, we marked a new beginning with Iraq as
a friend and a partner working to establish open and
democratic rule and to advance peace and cooperation
with its neighbours and the wider world. Even so, a
sovereign Iraq continues to look to the international
community for support in these areas, and we
encourage Member States to help Iraq to strengthen its
democratic institutions, bring its displaced citizens
back home, strengthen its democracy and respect for
the rule of law, and deepen its productive relations with
all of its neighbours even as it works to continue to
strengthen and build its economy.

The United States will never forget the enormous
price this institution paid in Iraq. We will always
honour the ultimate sacrifice made by Sergio Vieira de
Mello and his colleagues, who gave their lives in the
attempt to build a new Iraq and who dedicated
themselves throughout their careers to the fight for a
more peaceful, lawful and decent world.

We salute the critically important role that the
United Nations continues to play in Iraq. Under the
leadership of Special Representative De Mistura and at
the invitation of the Iraqi Government, UNAMI has
expanded and enhanced its presence in Iraq. Its work is
as far-ranging as it is important - advancing national
reconciliation, helping to resolve disputes over internal
boundaries, ensuring that Iraqi elections are free and
fair, and helping those, including refugees and the
internally displaced, whose lives have been upended by
the turmoil of war. On behalf of the United States, I am
proud to offer our full support to UNAMI's work. The
United States is grateful to Special Representative
De Mistura and his staff for their accomplishments and
resolve.

Let me spend a few moments on one development
in which UNAMI's efforts have been particularly
helpful. Iraq, as we have just been discussing, recently
held provincial elections in which the nation's voters
chose new councils in 14 of Iraq's 18 provinces. That
free and peaceful vote, with its widely respected
legitimacy, was a heartening moment in the evolution
of Iraqi democracy. Voter participation was high,
candidates from all of Iraq's major parties and
communities ran hard, and the elections were unmarred
by boycotts, significant violence or major disruptions.
The Independent High Electoral Commission rose to
the challenge here, and UNAMI played an important
supporting role, providing technical assistance and
advice rooted in long United Nations experience.

We most importantly congratulate the
Government and people of Iraq, who deserve the
greatest credit for this stirring demonstration of
peaceful political change. I was personally moved by
the sight of the Iraqi police officers who helped to
secure the polling places and to protect ordinary voters
determined to cast their ballots. We hope that, with the
help of UNAMI and the international community,
Iraqis will be similarly encouraged by the national
elections that are to be held later this year.

I would like to draw particular attention today to
an area in which more work and a greater sense of
urgency are required from all of us: the plight of
millions of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced
persons, who constitute one of the largest refugee
populations in the world today. Iraqi refugees face
increasingly difficult circumstances in their host
countries: rising food prices, rents they can no longer
meet, and dwindling personal resources. All these
conditions have heightened the spectre of poverty and
despair.

Thus, even as we commend host countries for
their generosity, we urge the international community
to intensify its efforts to take in the desperate and the
vulnerable; to ensure that non-governmental
organizations, host countries and others can provide
dignified lives and sheltering havens to those already
in their care; to help the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF and the
World Food Programme to provide additional aid to the
needy; and to help the Government of Iraq to develop
the capacities and conditions that will let those
uprooted by war return home in peace.

The United States will support Iraq's continuing
development as a democratic country in which all
communities can join in shaping the political, social
and economic life of a nation that protects the human
and civil rights of all of its citizens - a nation that
lives in peace with its neighbours and the international
community. The United States will move responsibly
and safely to reduce our military presence in Iraq. Our
bilateral security agreement with Iraq will frame the
path ahead, and the process of redeploying our combat
troops will be conducted in consultation with the
Government of Iraq and with its support.

This carefully managed commitment to ending
the war in no way diminishes the United States long-
term support for a sovereign, stable, democratic and
prosperous Iraq that is a force for peace in a turbulent
region. Indeed, we have already signed a broad
agreement with Iraq that sets out a long-term
programme for cooperation in fields ranging from
education to trade, technology and common efforts to
meet the energy challenges of the new century. The
United States and the Government of Iraq are already
working to establish a strong foundation for future
cooperation and an ongoing partnership that benefits
both of our free and sovereign peoples and the region.

Our approach to Iraq must indeed also be
understood in a larger regional context. The
responsible draw-down of United States forces in Iraq
will give us additional flexibility in Afghanistan. At the
same time, the United States will vigorously pursue a
comprehensive strategy in the Middle East. That
strategy will address the security needs of Israel and
the legitimate political and economic aspirations of the
Palestinian people. It will seek an end to Iran's
ambition to acquire an illicit nuclear capacity and its
support for terrorism. It will aim to encourage both
Iran and Syria to become constructive regional actors,
and it will deepen our ties with our partners in the
region to pursue common efforts to secure a broad and
sustained peace.

This is a new course, but it is the right one for the
future of Iraq, for the stability of the region and,
ultimately, for our shared security and well-being.

