Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Mr. Darusman for his
informative briefing. We really commend the dedicated
and meticulous work of the independent international
fact-finding mission in Myanmar, and we believe it was
important that his report, establishing the facts and
circumstances of the crisis, in particular Rakhine state,
could be presented to the Security Council today.

We have been actively seized with the situation in
Myanmar since we joined the Council in January 2017.
In the beginning, our engagement was in a preventive
spirit, including to support the Secretary-General. There
were worrying reports and the situation grew worse. I
want to quote from the report of the fact-finding mission:
"What happened on 25 August 2017 and the following
days and weeks was the realization of a disaster long
in the making." (A/HRC/39/64, para. 31). Despite these
early warning signals, there was resistance, and too
little was done too late to prevent this crisis of immense

proportions from evolving. There should be important
lessons to draw from this for the Council.

Since the peak of crisis in August last year, the
Council has succeeded in taking some small, but
important, steps. In November, we unanimously adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22, setting out a
road map to address the crisis, and in April the Council
undertook an unprecedented visit to Bangladesh and
Myanmar to follow up on the implementation of the road
map. However, as all previous speakers have underlined
today, too little real progress has been achieved on the
ground. While some rudimentary architecture for the
repatriation ofrefugees has been put in place, the security
and human rights situation in Rakhine is still far from
being adequately addressed. More than 100,000 people
have been confined in camps for internally displaced
persons since 2012, and the Government has failed to
close the camps in a sustainable manner. Freedom of
movement is still restricted and media is not allowed
access. Rohingya continue to flee to Bangladesh in the
hundreds every month.

The Myanmar Government claims that it has
implemented most of the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, formerly led
by the late Kofi Annan. Some steps have indeed been
taken, but what is absolutely clear is that the vision
set out in this important report remains distant. Most
importantly, a genuine process towards resolving
the issue of citizenship in a way that fully satisfies
legitimate rights is still absent. Continued action by the
Council with regard to the crisis in Rakhine is therefore
needed, and I would like to highlight four areas.

First, the United Nations and humanitarian partners
must be allowed full and unhindered access to Rakhine
state. While some limited access has been granted,
including to carry out assessments in a few villages,
broader access for assessment and protection is urgently
needed. The memorandum of understanding with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development
Programme must be fully implemented.

Secondly, conditions must be created to ensure that
all those who have fled can return to their places of
origin in a safe, voluntary and sustainable manner. For
this to take place, refugees need dignified conditions to
return to, where they can begin to rebuild their lives, free
from fear and with confidence in the future. This will
require real change on the ground. We need a new deal
in Rakhine, as the late Secretary-General Kofi Annan
stated at the Arria formula meeting in October last year.
The Annan Commission report provides the framework
for such a new deal. The genuine implementation of its
recommendations is urgent.

Thirdly, all avenues must be pursued to ensure
effective accountability for the crimes committed.
Today's presentation by the United Nations-mandated
fact-finding mission has provided the Council with
solid and credible evidence. The Rohingya population
and other groups in Rakhine state have been subjected
to systematic and widespread human rights violations.
Many of these violations undoubtedly amount to the
gravest crimes under international law. We note in
particular that the fact-finding mission report includes
crimes against humanity and even genocide.

The report presented to the Council today should
be a turning point. The Council must now take
meaningful action on accountability. We should pursue
consultations on a Security Council draft resolution,
including a referral of the situation to the International
Criminal Court. It is for these kinds of situations that
the Council has been given the authority to make
referrals to the Court.

Fourthly, the refugee camps outside Cox's Bazar in
Bangladesh need continued and enhanced support. More
funding is urgent. Only less than half of the response
plan has so far been covered, seriously hampering
humanitarian efforts. Protection in the refugee camps
must be improved, not least for the most vulnerable.
Particular attention should be given to survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence - women and men,
girls and boys.

The fact-finding mission report also sheds important
light on the violations of international humanitarian
law and violations and abuses of human rights law
that are being perpetrated by the Myanmar military in
other parts of the country, most notably in Kachin and
Shan states. Indiscriminate air strikes, mortar shelling
and the use of land mines have a devastating impact
on civilians in these regions, and humanitarian access
continues to be limited.

These conflicts are among the longest ongoing
armed conflicts in the world and are at risk of further
escalation. To stay true to our commitments to
preventing and sustaining peace, we should be actively
addressing these situations with a more proactive
United Nations engagement. The military and the
Government must redouble their efforts to advance the
peace process. Such a process needs to be inclusive,
with the meaningful participation of women. To
achieve lasting peace, a political solution is needed
that addresses the aspirations and grievances of all
Myanmar's ethnic minorities and ends the culture of
impunity in the country, as forcefully underlined by
Mr. Darusman today.

Myanmar is at a crossroads and now has a historic
decision to make. Either it chooses the path towards
more repression and growing international isolation, or
it chooses the path ofjustice, peace and prosperity. If it
chooses the latter, the international community stands
ready to support it. Regional actors have a critical
role to play. The Special Envoy's positive engagement
to build trust is needed and should now be translated
into concrete steps forward. The United Nations
and its partners have the capacity to support peace,
humanitarian and longer-term development efforts.

We cannot expect the Government to solve
everything overnight, but steps are urgently needed
to demonstrate commitment and gain credibility in
the international community. One such simple step
would be to immediately pardon and release the two
imprisoned Reuters journalists. Myanmar should
further recognize the gravity of the crisis, take needed
measures on accountability and improve the situation
in Rakhine. Only then will conditions for safe and
voluntary return of refugees be in place.

