Mr. Rock (Canada): I have the honour today to
speak on behalf of Australia and New Zealand as well
as Canada. I thank members of the Council, and in
particular the United Kingdom, for convening this open
meeting on the protection of civilians. May I first
express our strong support for the statements made and
the positions advanced by the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Jan Egeland, and by the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Jacques Forster.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2005/740)
effectively outlines the main trends in civilian
protection. It makes sadly evident to us all that the
picture presented is a grim one. The deliberate death
and displacement of civilians remains an active aim of
combatants in a significant number of conflicts.
Impunity for violations of human rights and
humanitarian law, including acts of sexual and gender-
based violence, are leaving a painful legacy for war-
torn societies to manage. In some instances, such as in
northern Uganda, there is an urgent need for Council
action. Once again, we call on the Council to place
northern Uganda on its agenda. I note the
recommendation in that regard by Jan Egeland in his
presentation this morning.

Security Council resolution 1296 (2000) and its
companion text, resolution 1265 (1999), ushered in a
new and important Council idiom. In each, emphasis
was placed on addressing the legal and physical
protection needs of civilians in international peace and
security deliberations, and on the commitment of the
Council to ensure that those issues are at the forefront
of its decision-making and of its action.

And so, five years on, how should we assess the
work of the Council? Our delegations would
respectfully observe that there are areas in which the
Council must do more. On the one hand, the Council
has made significant strides to build and strengthen the
repertoire of actions that it can take in support of
civilian protection. Peacekeeping missions have been
given express mandates to use force when civilians are
under attack. Targeted sanctions have been applied
which take into account humanitarian considerations.
Fact-finding missions to regions of interest have been
undertaken. The Council has made a referral of a
particular case to the International Criminal Court
(ICC). And greater emphasis has been placed on issues
related to humanitarian access.

But on the other side of the coin, the Council
remains reluctant to engage in countries where we
believe there are good reasons for the Council's
involvement. That reticence is frustrating to those of us
who wish to see greater use of preventive diplomacy.
What is more, when the Council does indeed engage
and where troops have been deployed, the Council and
the United Nations membership as a whole sometimes
fail to ensure that missions are adequately equipped
and resourced to fulfil their assigned tasks. We are
concerned as well that the Council has been
inconsistent in the messages it has sent in response to
war crimes and crimes against humanity, as well as in
the monitoring and enforcement of its own resolutions.
The continued impunity of militias in Darfur is a
serious challenge to Council credibility.

In resolution 1265 (1999) the Council committed
itself to respond to situations where civilians were
being targeted or where assistance to them was
deliberately obstructed. Our delegations firmly believe
that, where such a response is justified, the Council's
engagement must be timely, its monitoring must be
vigilant and its political will must be sustained so that
it can draw upon the full range of measures at its
disposal in support of civilian protection, including,
ultimately and as a last resort, the use of force where
diplomatic efforts have proven futile and where States
are not able to meet and discharge their responsibility
to protect their own populations.

Indeed, the United Nations Charter confers on the
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. This is why our
leaders made a strong commitment at the world summit
to respond, through the Council, to fulfil the collective
responsibility to protect. As such, we urge Council
members to take up the mandate conferred by the
world leaders, especially as the Council looks to adopt
a new resolution on civilian protection. Our
delegations believe that a resolution should not only
reinforce the Council's commitments under resolution
1265 (1999), but should also further clarify the
Council's resolve to act, including through
enforcement action under Chapter VII, in response to
serious violations of international humanitarian law,
including genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, should peaceful means be inadequate and
should national authorities manifestly fail to protect
their populations. We also call on the Council to make
greater use of its power to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court and to make every effort
in organizing its work so that such issues do not
become the basis for political controversy. Clearly,
accurate information is essential to assist the Council
in that regard. The Secretariat must move quickly to
improve its reporting, as promised by Mr. Egeland last
December and as noted in paragraphs 50 to 52 of the
report of the Secretary-General.

We would also like to see the implementation of
existing protection-of-civilian mandates more
systematically monitored by the Security Council and
the Secretariat. The aim must surely be to consistently
draw lessons and good practices and to improve our
collective effectiveness. Indeed, in a workshop hosted
by Canada last week on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) with members of the Council,
the Deputy Force Commander in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in MONUC, it
became clear that greater attention has to be given to
ensuring that missions can focus on their protection-of-
civilians tasks without being overburdened with
multiple other responsibilities, and that training
programmes should be developed to help troops and
police better understand what it means to participate in
a civilian-protection mission.

The workshop also reinforced the need for
national Governments, United Nations agencies and
troop-contributing countries to develop strategies to
prevent and respond to instances of sexual and gender-
based violence while the Council considers how
peacekeeping missions can enhance the physical
security of women and children at risk.

While the Council has increasingly been attentive
to the needs of the displaced, we wish to emphasize
that such attention must go from words to deeds. In its
previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 1208
(1998) and 1296 (2000), the Council noted the value of
technical cooperation in support of host countries in
instances where refugees and internally displaced
persons are threatened by combatants. We regret that
the Council has not yet promoted such efforts in a
specific context. Our delegations encourage the
Council to draw upon that option. Identifying ways to
improve the protection of displaced persons in northern
Uganda is a specific case the Council must urgently
explore, as more must be done politically to address
the tragic cycle of displacement and violence.

The deteriorating situation in northern Uganda
has also resulted in an upswing in attacks on aid
workers, not unlike other crises currently on the
Council's agenda, such as Darfur. Neither the Council
nor the General Assembly has ever declared that an
exceptional risk exists in a given country. Thus our
delegations warmly welcome the agreement on an
optional protocol to the 1994 Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel, which
will lead to greater legal protections for United Nations
and associated personnel. We call on all countries that
have not done so to ratify the Convention without
delay and to sign and ratify the optional protocol to
bring it into force. But pending its entry into force, we
call on the Council to make the exceptional risk
declarations in situations where doing so is justified.

(spoke in French)

As we have stated on previous occasions, we
would like a new Security Council resolution to
address other issues as well. Those include support for
greater cooperation between the Council and regional
organizations dealing with the protection of civilians;
issues relating to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; more pro-active engagement on the issue
of natural resources and conflict; and reinforcement of
the fundamental importance of access to humanitarian
aid. We would also like to see the Council commit
itself to strengthening its enforcement and monitoring
mechanisms on arms embargoes and other targeted
sanctions. In that regard, it is important that a new
resolution should endorse the guidelines developed by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on the humanitarian impact of sanctions
regimes.
In conclusion, we strongly urge the Council to
adopt a stronger resolution that goes beyond what we
achieved five years ago and that focuses not on narrow
national priorities but on the needs of populations
affected by conflict. We are aware that we have made
very significant demands of the Council and the entire
international community in our statement today. Our
respective countries are resolutely committed to
contributing to the collective success of our efforts. We
look forward to working to that end with the entire
United Nations system.

