Mr. Corr (Ireland): May I first express the thanks
of my delegation to you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's public meeting on strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations system and Central Africa.
May I also, again on behalf of my delegation, welcome
the Ministers from the region to our meeting today.

The Ambassador of Denmark has already made a
statement to this meeting of the Council on behalf of
the European Union, and Ireland, of course, fully
associates itself with that statement.

The world has an unfinished agenda of duty and
of debt to the Great Lakes region and to Central Africa.
As the presidency note for our meeting states, Central
Africa has the sorry record of seven of its 11 countries
being racked by devastating and ruinous conflicts over
recent years. The cost has been countless lives lost,
incalculable suffering, and economies, in large
measure, destroyed. This has been a humanitarian
disaster without parallel in our time.

Now, despite all the daunting challenges, there is
across Central Africa a real moment of opportunity and
hope that can, in turn, allow rebuilding and healing.
This is an opportunity that must not be lost. It is an
opportunity that must be fully seized not just by all the
countries of the Great Lakes region and of Central
Africa but by the United Nations and by the world.

The three regional organizations in the
subregion - the Economic and Monetary Community
of Central Africa, the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), and the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries - need to be
strongly supported and encouraged. In particular, the
revival of ECCAS is to be warmly welcomed. The
regional organizations will have a major role to play in
the period ahead in consolidating and anchoring the
peace.

At the ministerial meeting last August in Bangui
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, ministers from 10
Central African countries emphasized the importance
of the creation of the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa (COPAX) and urged countries that have
not yet ratified the related Protocol to do so without
delay. Ministers also expressed their deep concern at
the persistence of armed conflict in the subregion and
the importance of strengthening regional relations, so
as to lessen tensions and combat insecurity in the
border areas.

On regional cooperation and on cooperation
between the United Nations and the subregion, there
are four particular points I would like to emphasize on
behalf of Ireland today.

First, regional cooperation is a critical dimension
in building peace in Central Africa. Much is already
being quietly achieved in this area - as we heard from
many ministers this morning - from joint training
courses and joint border patrols to summit meetings on
security matters. We have, however, seen all too clearly
evidence in the subregion that intra-State conflict all
too easily becomes inter-State conflict across the
region. There are, in many cases, the closest ethnic and
linguistic links between countries in the region.

It can be no surprise, therefore, that the
consequences of war and violence have spread in
recent years to engulf much of the subregion. Many
steps can now be taken by the international community
to help address root causes of the conflict, including by
the early convening of an international conference on
the Great Lakes region. Many challenges can be
tackled effectively only by joint actions related to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; the
refugee tragedy in the region; economic reconstruction;
issues of resources; and by strengthened cooperation.
Consequences of war left to fester can all too easily
lead to further instability and conflict.

Secondly, the United Nations and the
international community as a whole must strongly and
actively support strengthened regional cooperation in
Central Africa. The establishment of the African Union
will, of course, lend support to this process. But
support by the international community cannot be
desultory or timid; conflict prevention is not just about
early warning systems or operational procedures,
however important these are. It must also involve
supporting structural conflict-prevention policies; the
promotion of regional joint actions; and the
deployment of necessary resources.

The Secretary-General, in his July progress report
on the implementation of recommendations in his
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable pace and sustainable development in Africa,
rightly reminded us that mobilizing international
support for peace is essential. This is especially true in
Central Africa.

Thirdly, we need more coherence in the United
Nations, including at the inter-governmental level, to
support the national and regional peace-building and
conflict-prevention efforts in Central Africa. This
means not just the common country assessments in the
United Nations Development Programmes
addressing- as they do - conflict issues, but,
critically, the international community backing this up
with necessary resources. Too often in the Security
Council we have received briefings from the
Secretariat or the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs that have made reference to
United Nations appeals for funding in conflict or
peace-building programme areas having been - at
best - only partially funded. We have also had donors
not always following through on commitments made;
the Central African Republic and Burundi are obvious
examples in this respect. We need greater coherence,
focus and commitment in this whole area. The new
Security Council and Economic and Social Council
working groups on conflict resolution in Africa will
have an important role to play in this respect.

The Central African subregion is as clear an
example as can be found of this need for greater
coherence and flexibility on the part of the
international community. We have recently made
encouraging progress. Decisions by the World Bank,
the European Development Fund and other bodies in
respect of Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for example, are to be warmly welcomed. The
Bank's conflict analysis framework is also to be
welcomed. But the general point stands: there is a need
to relax conditionalities in post-conflict funding, to
ensure the early release of funds promised by donors
and to promote, as a matter of the greatest urgency,
administrative capacity, investment in human resources
and a reduction in the debt burden in the Central
African region.

Fourthly, the United Nations system and the
international community must support regional
economic cooperation in every way possible. This is
something that the European Union is actively doing
through the Cotonou Agreement. Building peace also
means supporting the Central African region so that it
has the chance to play its full and fair part in the
African and world economies. Regional cooperation in
economic programmes, the pooling of resources and
the sharing of infrastructural costs makes eminent
sense.

A strengthened partnership between the United
Nations system and Central Africa is one of the most
important tasks facing this Organization in seeking to
support peace and sustainable development in Africa.
But this, in the main, will require political will by
Member States, and we in the Security Council have
our own critical role to play. We owe this to Central
Africa and its peoples.
