Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We, too,
would like to thank the Secretary-General for the
information that he has provided us and to welcome the
representatives of the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the African
Union and the Government of the Sudan and to thank
them for participating in this debate.

We would like also to thank all of those who have
used their best offices to persuade the highest
authorities of the Government of the Sudan to accept a
handover from the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) to a United Nations peace operation.

We regret that the Government of the Sudan is
resisting understanding that the objective of the peace
operation in Darfur would be only to work in
cooperation with its authorities to implement the peace
and security agreements and to protect the population
of Darfur, which has no protection at the present time.

Developments in the field show that this is
urgent. Deterioration in the security conditions and
restricted access to humanitarian aid mean that millions
of people are at serious risk and on the verge of a
humanitarian disaster.

Given the situation, we believe that the United
Nations cannot ever abdicate its ethical responsibility
to protect and defend human rights when Governments
cannot or do not wish to protect their own peoples.

In that context, we believe that the Security
Council, should, as a priority, ensure the
implementation of resolution 1706 (2006), specifically
to promote the effective implementation of the Darfur
Peace Agreement and protection of civilians. Given
developments in the field, we deem it important that
the Security Council, on the basis of resolution 1706
(2006), take the following urgent measures.

First, it must seek an early deployment of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in
Darfur, which means continuing dialogue with the
Government of the Sudan. Today we heard the
representative of the Sudan say that his Government is
prepared to engage in dialogue. We hope that this state
of affairs will continue.
19

The second step would be an immediate

reinforcement of AMIS. The African Union should
continue to play an important role in the area.

The third measure would be to achieve a lasting
and viable ceasefire agreement, in compliance with the
commitments contained in the Darfur Peace
Agreement, specifically chapter III, and all previous
peace agreements.

The fourth measure - perhaps the most
important - concerns the humanitarian question. The
international community must continue to seek
appropriate means of cooperation and of securing
financial support in order to protect the civilian
population.

We must accept the fact that Darfur poses an
enormous challenge that the Security Council has so
far not been able to resolve. However, my delegation
hopes that, with the support of the Government of the
Sudan, regional organizations and the international
community, we will be able to bring about peace and
stability to Darfur, on the basis of a political approach
and through dialogue.

In that context, we support several elements of
the assessment of the Secretary-General with regard to
the plan presented by the Sudan for Darfur.

Finally, my delegation, too, would like to convey
to the people and the Government of the United States
our solidarity on this anniversary date and our
continuing support in the fight against terrorism.

