At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Government of Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council, and I commend its initiative to hold this open debate. Terrorism and related criminal activities continue to pose a serious threat to international peace and security, the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms and the political independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and social and economic development of all Member States. These activities are unjustifiable regardless of their motivation, constitute serious crimes and must be condemned and prosecuted. The sensitive geographic location of Azerbaijan, the continued occupation of its territories by Armenia, in grave violation of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and other unresolved armed conflicts in the region increase transborder threats. Since the end of the 1980s, as a means of realizing its groundless and unlawful territorial claims and as a method of warfare, Armenia and various Armenian terrorist organizations have perpetrated numerous terrorist attacks against my country, claiming the lives of thousands of its citizens. In resolution 2482 (2019), the Security Council expressed serious concern that terrorists could benefit from organized crime, whether domestic or transnational. It is of particular concern that areas of armed conflict, especially territories under foreign military occupation, often create opportunities for terrorists, organized criminal groups and networks to benefit from the exploitation of and the illicit trade in natural resources, illicit drug trafficking, trafficking in cultural property, money laundering and other crimes. The occupied territories of Azerbaijan are a graphic example of interpenetration of the occupying forces and the unlawful puppet regime established by Armenia in those territories with terrorist and organized criminal activities. The strict compliance by States with their international obligations, including the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council, is critical to ensuring, inter alia, that their respective territories are not used for terrorist and related criminal activities, in particular for financing or providing, directly or indirectly, any support to such activities under whatever pretext or disguise. It is important that, where terrorists or organized criminal groups are engaged in unlawful commercial activities, including in conflict zones and occupied territories, targeted sanctions, corporate liability and criminal responsibility function in tandem to ensure prosecution for violations of international law. In that connection, in addition to measures that States are entitled to take at the national level to assert criminal jurisdiction over crimes perpetrated by their nationals overseas, international cooperation in criminal matters, with mutual legal assistance as its component, is the key to combating impunity for acts of terrorism and related offences. Azerbaijan strongly supports enhanced individual and collective counter- terrorism measures, including in particular those aimed at degrading and ultimately defeating terrorist organizations, their affiliates and networks. It is important that such efforts continue and expand. Although terrorism and organized crime have different motivations and legal regimes, there is a need for the further comprehensive examination of evolving linkages between them. We consider it useful to continue discussions on the topic.
