The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.

I would like to begin by welcoming to the Security
Council His Excellency Vice-President Oscar Naranjo
of Colonbia. We would also like him to convey our
best regards to President Santos Calderon, whom we
met during the Security Council mission to Colombia,
as well as our appreciation for his courage and
commitment to the peace process. I would also like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Arnault for his comprehensive briefing and to commend
the contribution made by him and the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia to the implementation
of the Peace Agreement.

It is more than a year since the Government
of Colombia and the Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) signed a
historic peace deal ending more than half a century of
armed conflict. We have now entered the second year
of the Colombian peace process, which is a milestone
achievement - not only for the Colombian Government
and the FARC-EP, but also for the entire international
community. However, we still have a long way ahead,
and we are all aware of the challenges they face.

As Under-Secretary-General Feltman rightly
indicated during his visit to Colombia, there is a sense
of growing concern about how the peace process has
been evolving over the past several months. At the same
time, we truly appreciate the frank assessment and
acknowledgement by the Government of Colombia of
the existing difficulties and its sincere and firm stand
on the irreversibility of the peace process.
Yet some shortcomings in reintegration activities
still persist that mightjeopardize effective realization of
the peace process. Both the Government and the FARC-
EP have to do their best to ensure a proper reintegration
process in order to prevent former combatants from
being recruited by dissident groups or former rivals. In
order to avoid the undermining of public confidence,
it is essential to strengthen the security-development
nexus, especially in former FARC-EP territories long-
affected by the armed conflict.

We reiterate our firm commitment to the
Colombian peace process and look forward to the
overall implementation of the peace-related legislative
agenda, including reforms and all other necessary
constitutional amendments and provisions to address
the challenges of peacebuilding.

We regret that the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional
(ELN) has resumed its attacks and missed the
opportunity to amplify the truth. However, Kazakhstan
still hopes that the Colombian Government and the
ELN will ultimately find a way to extend the ceasefire.
We fully support Colombia in its endeavour to ensure
the complete elimination of the half-century war and
move towards fostering reconciliation. The very fact
that the Colombian Government and the FARC are
united in their determinaiton to end the conflict and
bring about peace allows us to remain optimistic that
subsequent stages in the peace process have no option
but to succeed. Kazakhstan absolutely supports all
those efforts.

In conclusion, Ijoin my colleagues in the Council
who spoke very warmly about the professional and
personal qualities of the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom, Mr. Matthew Rycroft, and stated
that he will be missed here. We wish him all the best in
his future endeavours.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Vice-President of Colombia.

