Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2010/562). Also, we express our
appreciation to Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the recent developments in Kosovo, and we
commend the staff of the United Nations Mission for
their hard work and dedication. We welcome the
participation in today's meeting of Mr. Vuk Jeremic',
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
as well as of Mrs. Vlora Citaku.

Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), operating within the framework
of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), aimed at
implementing its mandate of maintaining peace,
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo. Furthermore, we appreciate UNMIK's
contribution to the reconciliation process, facilitation
of constructive dialogue and regional cooperation, as
well as its focus on mediation between the
communities and its support to minority communities.

We also have taken positive note that the security
situation in Kosovo has remained relatively calm
during the reporting period, despite some incidents,
mainly in northern Kosovo, as stated in the Secretary-
General's report. Developments such as the International
Court of Justice advisory opinion triggered particular
tensions in an already sensitive and politically delicate
atmosphere.

As for the Court's advisory opinion, we welcome
General Assembly resolution 64/298, adopted on
9 September 2010. Bosnia and Herzegovina extended
its full support to the adoption of that resolution,
sponsored by Serbia and the 27 member States of the
European Union. It calls for the initiation of a process
of dialogue between the parties, a dialogue that would
help promote cooperation and achieve progress on the
path to the European Union.

We consider that the efforts to improve
inter-community dialogue and confidence-building
among the parties are of particular importance in
creating an environment conducive to sustainable
return. Nonetheless, the number of voluntary minority
returns during the reporting period remains low. We
commend UNMIK and other United Nations agencies,
such as UNICEF and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, for their efforts to
defuse tensions and draw attention to the common
needs of returnees and internally displaced persons and
encourage them to continue their work.

Having in mind how important strengthening the
rule of law is, we stress the significance and welcome
the activities of UNMIK, as well as those of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), operating within the status-neutral framework
of the United Nations to that end. We also support the
existing practice of cooperation and coordination
between UNMIK, EULEX, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and NATO - the
latter present through the Kosovo Force troops - and
express our hope that that practice will continue.
Furthermore, in light of our strong commitment and
support to the work of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), we find the reported
strong cooperation between EULEX and the ICTY
encouraging.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
stability and security in Kosovo are important for
achieving lasting peace and prosperity in our region.
We also believe that the international community
should continue to play an important role in supporting
the aspirations of the region's countries with regard to
their integration into European and Euro-Atlantic
structures. For their part, the countries of the region
should cooperate fully with the international community
if those goals are to be achieved.

I cannot conclude without emphasizing that
promoting good relations and cooperation with
neighbouring countries is among the top priorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's foreign policy.

