Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We, too, thank
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.

We are deeply concerned about the situation
in Darfur. At Ms. Bensouda's most recent briefing
on this item (see S/PV.7478), New Zealand spoke at
some length about the gravity of the situation and
the need for accountability. While, as Ms. Bensouda
has reported, nothing has really changed, I will not
reiterate the statements I expressed in June. Instead I
want to focus on non-cooperation with the activities of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the Sudan.
That is the key issue before us today. It has been the key
issue before us at these briefings for more than 10 years.

As a State party to the Rome Statute, New Zealand
is concerned by all instances of non-cooperation,
whether they occur in relation to a Security Council
referral or otherwise. However, we are realistic and
we know there are non-States parties around this table
that may not share those concerns. As such, today
we will focus on a concern that every member of the
Council and every Member of the United Nations must
share - non-compliance with Chapter VII resolutions
of the Council.

The Sudan is required, under resolution 1593
(2005) and the Charter of the United Nations, to
cooperate with the ICC investigations in Darfur. The
Sudan's non-cooperation with the Court amounts to
non-compliance with a Council resolution and its
obligations under the Charter. As the Prosecutor has
reminded us so clearly and uncomfortably today, the
Council has responded with deafening silence to the
situation. The Council's inaction in the face of this
non-compliance with its own resolution undermines its
credibility. Indeed, it undermines the credibility of all
of its decisions. That is a serious issue. Sadly, it is a
regular issue.

The Secretary-General has relayed 11 findings of
non-cooperation to the Council. The most recent was
last Friday. That finding relates to Mr. Abdallah Banda,
an indictee from a rebel group who is alleged to be
responsible for a deadly attack against African Union
peacekeepers in South Darfur and Darfur in 2007. It
is alleged that Banda led a group which attacked an
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) camp
with anti-aircraft guns, artillery guns and rocket-
propelled grenade launchers, killing 12 peacekeepers
from Nigeria, Mali, Senegal and Botswana. The
Council unanimously adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2007/35, condemning this attack and
demanding that no effort be spared in identifying and
bringing to justice its perpetrators. The Prosecutor of
the ICC has taken up this call and is trying to pursue
Mr. Banda. She is, however, stymied in her efforts. The
Government of the Sudan refuses even to receive her
communications on the case, let alone cooperate in
any practical or tangible way. Mr. Banda, whom the
Council committed to bringing to justice, is at large in
the Sudan, and the Council has done nothing to support
the one institution seeking to bring him to justice.

In the face of that contradiction, New Zealand would
like to make two proposals. They are not a substitution
for or in contradiction to the proposals just outlined by
the Prosecutor, which we also fully endorse. Our first
proposal is simple. We propose that the Council be
more structured in its consideration of these findings
of non-cooperation. There is currently no consistent
practice. In most instances, despite these findings
being relayed by the Secretary-General in accordance
with the Relationship Agreement between the United
Nations and the International Criminal Court, the
Council does not even discuss them, and certainly not in
any fulsome way. In our View, when a non-cooperation
finding is received, the Council should discuss it. As
we would with other issues, we should consider all the
tools the Council has at its disposal, such as a resolution
or another product, even a press statement, a letter from
the Council or a meeting with the concerned country.
Then we should make an assessment on a case-by-case
basis about which, if any, of those tools we should use.

We accept that, as is often the case, the Council
may not agree on which tool to use or how to respond.
The fact that we may differ on how to respond should
not mean that the Council does not consider fully the
options before us. If the Council ignored every instance
where we did not agree, there would be many important
issues left off our agenda. This is an issue that goes to
the effectiveness of the Council and its decisions, and
needs to be addressed. To ignore these issues is neither
a productive nor a credible way forward.

Our second proposal goes to the deeper issue - the
Council's relationship with the Government of the
Sudan. While it may seem obvious, it deserves repeating

that a crucial part of the Council's ability to ensure the
implementation ofits decision is its relationship with the
country concerned. As we have said before, including
when the Prosecutor was here in June, the current
Council approach to the Sudan is not working. There is
a clear need for the Council to build a new relationship
with Khartoum. There is an opening now. We should
capitalize on the appointment of the new Joint Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Darfur
and Head of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, Martin Uhomoibhi, as a moment
to revitalize the Council's relationship with the Sudan.
Part of the Council's building of this relationship and
a renewed approach should be a better understanding
of the situation on the ground. In that regard, New
Zealand would see a Council visit to the Sudan as a
good opportunity that should seriously be considered.

These two proposals are about getting the essentials
of our work right: credible working methods, effective
relationships and good information. While some steps
are simpler than others, continuing to do nothing is not
an option.

I would like to close by recognizing Chile's
contribution as the focal point for States parties on the
Council to many of the matters I have raised today.
Ambassador Barros Melet's leadership and that of his
team will be missed.

