Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): 1
want to begin by welcoming the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Fausto Pocar, and the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Erik Mose, and thanking them
for their respective reports and oral briefings. I also
wish to thank Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte of the ICTY
and Hassan Jallow of the ICTR for their contributions
to those reports.

We are pleased to note that the two Tribunals are
steadily working to meet their completion strategies.
We welcome the fact that both are increasing the speed
of their work by devising various strategies which have
proven to be of immense help. However, my delegation
also notes that the two Tribunals are troubled, as we
are, by the lack of progress in the arrest of the
remaining fugitives who are important for the
completion of the mandates of the Tribunals.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, my delegation welcomes the
number of judgements delivered as well as the others
to be concluded soon. We commend that progress, as
we do the progress being made in the trials before the
Tribunal. We find in the report (S/2006/951, enclosure)
that the time frame of the completion strategy for the
trials still remains 2008, as provided earlier. We have
observed, however, a shift in some elements of the
strategy, which are now based on specific and updated
assessments of the scope and nature of each case, while
previously these were based on a statistical average in
the light of general experience from completed trials.
We view this shift as being prompted by the difficulty
of relying on estimates. It is, in our view, a right
response to real demands.

It is also obvious that the transfer to national
jurisdiction is a very important factor for both
Tribunals in fulfilling their completion strategies. For
the ICTR, the Prosecutor has already transferred 30
case files to Rwanda and is considering additional
cases for such transfer to other national jurisdictions.
We support this strategy, but as we have expressed on
previous occasions, we have to assist the national
jurisdictions by improving national capacities to
prosecute cases transferred to them, especially the
capacity deficiencies mentioned by the Prosecutor in
his presentation. It is in this regard that we commend
the special fellowship programme for Rwandan law
students.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), measures
adopted earlier to adopt the completion strategy seem
to be on course. These measures, which include the
speeding up of trials and appeals, an increase in the
number of ad litem judges and referral to national
jurisdictions, were the right steps. We commend
Prosecutor Del Ponte for her insistence on observing
international fair-trial principles and the highest
standards of due process in these referrals. Her
declaration that she will not hesitate to take the cases
back if the standards are not met is an appropriate
assurance.

The current ICTY report maintains the Tribunal's
completion date as 2009. However, it also lists factors
outside the control of the Court that may affect its
completion strategy, such as illness of the accused or
the defence counsel, availability of witnesses, retention
of qualified staff and, most importantly, State
cooperation in the apprehension of the remaining
fugitives. These factors are real and affect both
Tribunals.

We are concerned that Ratko Mladic' and Radovan
Karadzic' continue to remain outlaws. These two
individuals, with the other six fugitives, have remained
beyond the reach of the law for far too long. The ICTY
will not have fully discharged its mandate without the
arrest and trial of those indictees.

We are sympathetic to the view that the Security
Council may wish to reconsider its position on the
completion strategies for the two Tribunals. The arrest
and trial of high-ranking fugitives like Mladic,
Karadzic and Kabuga must be factored into the
completion strategies. These individuals remain
fugitives in the hope of outliving the Tribunals. The
Council should make it clear that the Tribunals will
maintain their jurisdiction with respect to each
fugitive's accountability.

We also wish to raise the question of enforcement
of sentences of convicted persons and the fate of those
acquitted by the Tribunals. States must be encouraged
to take up these two categories of persons and share the
burden of promoting international justice. We therefore
appeal to all Member States to accept the relocation of
acquitted persons and to accept enforcement of
sentences in their territories for those found guilty. We
commend those States that have expressed willingness
to take on cases on transfer from the ICTR. We
encourage them also to consider accepting relocation
of acquitted persons as well as the enforcement of
sentences in their territories.

In conclusion, we again appeal to all Member
States to honour their contributions to the two
Tribunals, which can only discharge their mandates
effectively with our full support, including financial
support.

