Mr. Al-Nassar (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting, and to extend our
thanks also to Judge Pocar, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY); Judge Byron, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR);
Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the ICTY; and
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the ICTR,
for their excellent informative and comprehensive
briefings and for their progress reports on the
implementation of the two Tribunals' completion
strategies.

The Tribunals continue to work to improve the
completion strategies, with the support of the Security
Council and in accordance with its resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004). They continue to take steps at
various levels in order to complete those strategies by
the end of 2008. While we recognize the need for the
Tribunals to finish their work by the deadlines set, we
would like to stress strongly that there must be a
balance between respecting such time frames and
ensuring the full implementation of the their mandates
in an effective and satisfactory manner that guarantees
full rights and a fair trial for all indictees.

The establishment of the two Tribunals
demonstrates the determination of the international
community and commitment of the United Nations to
administer justice and put an end to impunity by
bringing to justice those responsible for the most
heinous crimes against humanity. However, that
determination and commitment must be matched by a
continued commitment by the Security Council and all
States concerned to arrest, transfer and bring to justice
those major indictees who are still at large. Justice
cannot be complete while these primary indictees
remain at large before the eyes and ears of the
international community.

We therefore call upon Governments and States
concerned to fulfil their commitments and
responsibilities to the international community, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, mainly by arresting and transferring the
fugitives, foremost among them Mladic, Karadzic and
Kabuga, and by pledging full cooperation for access to
records and witnesses. We call once again upon the
Security Council to supervise a strict implementation
of those resolutions.

Now, during the two Tribunals' final years, we
must focus on their legacy - a significant legacy of
international jurisprudence that can benefit and guide
future courts. We call upon the Tribunals to continue
their efforts to carry out their work till its completion,
because the victims of those heinous crimes are
pinning great hopes on them for the administering of
justice and peace.

The work of the two Tribunals contributes
significantly to the achievement of security, stability
and national reconciliation. We believe, however, that
they cannot complete their work until they bring the
principal indictees to justice. That will require the full
cooperation of all States concerned in handing them
over, with a View to restoring security and stability in
the regions.

