Mr. Wittig (Germany): May I join others in
thanking Ambassador Nestor Osorio, not only for his
briefing but also for his outstanding work in chairing
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) over the past two years.
As Ambassador Osorio leaves, the work of the 1737
Committee continues to be of crucial importance.

In June 2010, about two and a half years ago, the
Council adopted resolution 1929 (2010). Since then,
Iran has neither been willing to enter into negotiations
on substantial issues during various rounds of talks
with the E3+3 Governments nor taken concrete
confidence-building measures in order to convince the
international community that its nuclear programme is
exclusively peaceful in nature. Nevertheless, the E3+3
remain committed to pursuing a diplomatic solution.
The E3+3 intend to resume negotiations with Iran in
the very near future.

The Iranian nuclear programme remains, in fact,
a major threat to international peace and security.
The latest report (GOV/2012/55) of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) does not alleviate our
concerns, just the contrary. Iran continues to expand
its enrichment capacity at Natanz and Fordow. On this
very day, talks between the IAEA and Iranian officials
are taking place in Tehran. It appears that Iran has once
more refused to grant IAEA access to Parchin. Even
if the long-overdue access should finally be granted,
extensive activities carried out by Iran on that site will
have seriously undermined the Agency's ability to
conduct effective inspections. Of the utmost concern is
the fact that due to Iran's persistent lack of cooperation,
no progress whatsoever has been made in clarifying the
possible military dimensions of its nuclear programme.

During the last Security Council briefing, several
members expressed their deep concern regarding
conventional arms transfers from Iran (see S/PV.6839).
The fact that the Sanctions Committee's Panel of
Experts has not received any reports of intercepted
conventional arms transfers involving Iran in the
current reporting period should not necessarily be
interpreted as non-occurrence of such sanctions
violations. Our concerns have not been dispelled. In
fact, recent reports about illegal arms flows from Iran
to Syria via air through Iraq underscore the pressing
relevance of that issue. Moreover, those reports add
to various public statements, by both Iranian officials
and Palestinian groups such as the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and Hamas, indicating that Iran provided relevant
technical assistance for building arms and rockets
that were designed to target Israel. We strongly urge
the Committee and its Panel of Experts to follow
those preoccupying reports very closely and to act
accordingly.

We remain convinced that high vigilance on Iran's
proliferation activities is necessary. The Committee
and its Panel of Experts have an important role to play
in promoting the overall acceptance and credibility
of this body in ensuring worldwide implementation
of the sanctions. Against that background, we are
confident that the Committee will soon conclude its
considerations on two designations recommended by
the Panel of Experts. Once again, the Iranian entities to
be designated, Yas Air cargo Airline and SAD Import-
Export Company, are clearly linked to arms trafficking
with Syria.

In the same context, Germany welcomes
the valuable implementation assistance note on
conventional arms currently under consideration by
the Sanctions Committee. Its publication would be a
further step towards making the sanctions regime more
efficient. We are hopeful that other implementation
assistance notes incorporating some more of the Panel's
recommendations will follow suit in the near future.
The Panel of Experts submitted its midterm report to
the Committee on 9 November 2011. We have examined
it carefully and find it valuable and substantiated. We
would like to express our appreciation for the Panel's
work and support it by sharing our experiences.
Therefore, we have invited the Panel to again visit
Germany from 17 to 20 December in order to discuss
matters relevant to its mandate.

Iran urgently needs to convince the international
community that its nuclear programme is exclusively
peaceful. We are convinced that a diplomatic solution
is possible and that negotiations with the E3+3 can
yield results. Yet the onus is on Iran, and our patience
cannot be unlimited. If Iran continues to disregard its
international obligations, it will face the increasing
costs of its continued obstruction.

