Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and
the report on the implementation of Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2014/3l4, annex).

Argentina has previously reaffirmed its support
for the Dayton Agreement and for the defence and
preservation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. These are conditions that,
together with respect for the rule of law, we believe are
essential to lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, it seems to be ever more necessary for a critical
evaluation to be undertaken of the current approach of
the international community so that the country can be
effectively supported to achieve irreversible progress.

The demonstrations that took place in various cities
throughout the country in February were an expression
of the frustration citizens feel and should serve as a
warning. The lack of meaningful and concrete measures
to implement the remaining requirements of the five
objectives and two conditions for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative has been a constant
in recent reports received by the Council. Likewise,
we continue to hear reports of continuing challenges
to the powers of the central State by the entities and on
the non-enforcement of decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We remain concerned by reports referring to
statements by senior officials of Republika Srpska
promoting the dissolution of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and challenging the basic provisions
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same time, it remains
impossible to hold local elections in the city of Mostar
because of the inability to implement the 2010 ruling of
the Constitutional Court on the city's electoral system.
This prevents progress in the implementation of the
ruling of the European Court of Human Rights in the
Sejdic-Finci case.

There have been repeated calls on the political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to step up their
efforts to reach an agreement on the implementation
of the Constitutional Court ruling. That would ensure
respect for the rule of law, allow elections to be held
in Mostar and promote renewed efforts to achieve an
agreement allowing for the effective protection of the
rights of non-constituent peoples, as the efforts of the
international community in this regard seem not to
have attained their objectives.

Positive developments include the adoption of
amendments to the law governing the issuance of
identification numbers for citizens, which ended a
political and institutional crisis that lasted several
months. Significant progress was made in unblocking
the process of delayed appointments to the Federation
Constitutional Court and its vital national interest
panel. In this regard, we highlight the good offices of
the Office of High Representative.

However we are concerned that it has not yet been
possible to reverse the overall negative trend and resume
the progress that was being made in early 2012. It is
ever more necessary to achieve a deeper understanding
of the underlying causes for the lack of progress.
Only in that way will the international community be
able to adapt its approach, continue working together
with Bosnia Herzegovina and offer its support more
effectively.

Finally, Argentina wishes to reiterate once again
its support for the work of the Office of the High
Representative in implementing the civilian aspects
of the Dayton Peace Agreement and its efforts to help
Government entities to comply with the terms of the
peace agreement and the State Constitution. We believe
it is necessary to continue to provide the Office the
sufficient resources and political support to fulfil its
mandate under the Dayton Peace Agreement.

