Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): Ijoin all the delegations
in thanking Mr. Hedi Annabi for his very useful
briefing. We have noted with satisfaction the large
turnout of voters for the elections and the efficient
manner in which the whole process was conducted. My
delegation pays tribute Mr. Hans Haekkerup for his
excellent coordinating role with other organizations for
the smooth running of the elections in Kosovo. We also
commend all the men and women of KFOR and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for their contribution.

We also need to congratulate the people of
Kosovo on their commitment to democratic norms. The
large-scale participation of the minority communities,
despite the intimidation campaigns in some areas of
Kosovo, has demonstrated the Kosovars' determination
in shaping the future of their province. We are
confident that the elected representatives will work
together in the institutions of the provisional self-
government to bring stability and economic and social
reconstruction to Kosovo. We hope that the legislative
Assembly of Kosovo will soon start its session to
tackle the huge tasks that lie ahead of it.

My delegation feels it is necessary to remind the
elected political leaders of their responsibilities to
respect fully all provisions of resolution 1244 (1999),
in particular the final status provisions. Any attempt to
change the status of Kosovo would go against the
commitments made under the relevant Security Council
resolutions and other agreements, the most recent one
signed in Belgrade earlier this month.

The provisional self-government of Kosovo will
not function effectively without the participation of all
minority communities. It is therefore incumbent on the
elected representatives to work together, creating
conditions for a peaceful and normal life for all
inhabitants of Kosovo. We hope that the momentum
that has been created during the voting period will be
maintained to consolidate the smooth transition to
provisional self-government.

My delegation calls on all those who fled their
homes during the crisis to return to the province. In the
same vein, we urge political leaders to create the
necessary conditions for the safe return of displaced
persons and refugees to their homes in Kosovo.
UNMIK and KFOR should therefore continue to ensure
the safety of all citizens of Kosovo, especially in the
Mitrovica region, where the situation remains very
fragile. For these people to return to their homes, there
is a need for reconstruction of key infrastructures. We
call on UNMIK to enhance the efforts of its economic
reconstruction pillar to complete work already started
to this end. We commend the donors in their efforts and
encourage them to continue supporting the
reconstruction programmes.

Finally, my delegation believes that it is now up
to the people of Kosovo, especially the minority
communities, to show their determination to participate
in the public life of Kosovo.

