Mrs. Craft (United States of America): We are very glad that you are with us today, Mr. President, and the United States appreciates that the signature event of Viet Nam's Security Council presidency is focused on the enduring importance of the Charter of the United Nations. We also thank Secretary-General Antdenio Guterres and the Chair of The Elders, Mary Robinson, for her remarks. Seventy-five years ago, the nations of the world came together to draft a charter meant to stand the test of time. Today we recognize the enduring importance of the Charter precisely because it is built on our faith in fundamental freedom and human rights, the dignity and worth of every individual and equal rights for all. Those notions fundamental to American democracy have gained broad acceptance over time. We are proud to have played a foundational role in the birth of this institution and to support the values that inform its central tenets. The Charter reflects a commitment to multilateralism that respects national sovereignty by creating space for sovereign nations to gather and deliberate, and the founding members of the United Nations endeavoured to help us overcome disagreements and achieve greater peace and security for the human family. Unfortunately, to echo a question raised last year by Secretary of State Pompeo, we must ask ourselves today: Does the United Nations continue to serve its mission faithfully? As I remarked frequently during the United States presidency of the Security Council last month, the Security Council must acknowledge that inaction, repetition and intransigence have created a credibility gap. As the body with the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, the Security Council needs to recapture its sense of unity and purpose. Therefore, as we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary, we should stand together to reaffirm our commitment to uphold the core principles of the Charter. The United States is a proud leader, partner and host country of the United Nations, and we are firmly committed to those principles. Members should note, however, that reaffirming a commitment to the Charter means to take seriously our responsibility to act, not merely to talk, and to abide by the principles of the Charter, not merely to profess support for them. On far too many occasions, we have seen nations that are parties to the Charter suppress human rights, undermine the sovereignty of their neighbours, harm their own citizens and even deny the right of other nations to exist. That kind of hypocrisy is deeply damaging to the credibility of the United Nations, as a whole, and to this organ, specifically. The eyes of the world will be on the United Nations during its seventy- fifth anniversary - therefore, there is an especially urgent need to bolster the Council's credibility. Through focused and sustained action, the Council can continue to promote accountability in places like Syria - seeking to ensure, among other objectives, that those who use chemical weapons against their own people are held responsible, that those who force thousands of residents to flee their own countries are held to account and that those who threaten the world with nuclear weapons are stopped. That work takes time, focus and commitment, but it is essential. The United States will continue to lead on those issues, seeking close partnerships within the Council and in the broader United Nations community. We also recognize the need to reform many parts of the United Nations to ensure that it effectively and efficiently delivers on the mandate of the Charter. United Nations reform remains a top United States priority, as its full realization will ensure that the Organization is fit for purpose across the three vital pillars of peace and security, development and management. By reaffirming our commitment to upholding the United Nations Charter, we can send an important signal to the world - that we maintain the same faith in human rights and human equality as those who signed the Charter in 1945 and that we will continue to act on that faith in hopes of bringing greater peace and security to all people. I hope that each of my colleagues will join with us in reaffirming that commitment in both word and deed. I would now like to address recent events that are connected to our discussion of the importance of upholding the United Nations Charter. Last week, the United States took defensive military action against Iranian threats. President Trump's decision was in direct response to an escalating series of armed attacks in recent months by Iran and Iranian-supported militias on United States forces and interests in the region. Those attacks are detailed in the letter we submitted yesterday, pursuant to Article 51 of the Charter. That decision was not taken lightly. For years, Iran and Iranian-supported militias in the region have threatened the lives of Americans and have shown unyielding contempt for the authority of the United Nations. President Trump has made clear that his highest and most solemn duty is the defence of our nation and its citizens. Therefore, we will act decisively in the exercise of our inherent right of self-defence to protect Americans when necessary, as is recognized under the Charter. As President Trump made clear in remarks delivered yesterday, we want a future - a great future - for Iran. It is a future that the people of Iran deserve, one of prosperity at home and harmony with the nations of the world. Today, therefore, I want to reiterate that the United States is ready to work towards that end and to embrace all those people who join us in seeking it. Moving forward, we hope to find willing partners in that work.
