Mr. Downer (Australia): It is with great pleasure
that I address the Security Council following the adoption

 

of this resolution authorizing the establishment of a
multinational force for East Timor. We are engaged here in
an historic process, launched by the landmark decision by
President Habibie of Indonesia earlier this year to allow the
people of East Timor to make a decision on their future.

The ballot organized by the United Nations, which
took place on 30 August, saw 98.6 per cent of the
registered Timorese voters cast their ballot. We were all
moved by the enthusiasm with which the people of East
Timor voted on their future, and we were pleased by the
generally peaceful conditions in which they did so.
The world community was, therefore, all the more
distressed by the violence that welded up after the ballot,
and particularly after the announcement of the result of the
ballot on 4 September. The international community, at the
request of the Indonesian Government, now has the
opportunity to assist the people of East Timor and to ensure
that the process set in place by the Tripartite Agreement is
seen through to its completion.

Australia welcomed the decision of the Indonesian
Government to invite a multinational force to assist in
restoring peace and security in East Timor. I recognize that
this has not been an easy decision, and I pay tribute to
President Habibie and his Government for accepting that
this was the most effective way to deal with the collapse of
order there since the ballot. At the Secretary-General's
request, Australia is willing to accept the leadership of the
multinational force, which has been authorized here today.
We look forward to working with regional and other
countries to build a genuinely multinational force that will,
as an interim measure, help bring the tripartite process
mandated by the United Nations back on track until such
time as a United Nations peacekeeping operation can be
deployed.

It is vitally important that the multinational force be
deployed quickly. Australia is working with other
contributors to ensure the earliest possible arrival of the
force. We encourage the Member States that are in a
position to do so to contribute generously to the trust fund
being established under this resolution by the
Secretary-General, in order to facilitate participation in the
force by a wide range of countries.

The events of the past 10 days in East Timor have
generated a pressing humanitarian crisis in East and West
Timor through the massive displacement of people. In
cooperation with United Nations agencies and the
Indonesian Government, Australia stands ready to assist in
providing urgent humanitarian assistance. The force that
has been mandated today will have a role in facilitating
humanitarian assistance operations.

The process established by the 5 May Agreement
has provided a once-in-a- generation opportunity to resolve
the problem of East Timor, an issue that has been on the
United Nations agenda for almost a quarter of a century.
All of us here have an interest in seeing East Timor
become stable and peaceful.

The unanimous adoption of this resolution underlines
our common commitment to East Timor's future. If this
future is to be peaceful, reconciliation amongst the East
Timorese will be critical. We are willing to assist in the
process of reconciliation in whatever way we can. We
urge the different groups in East Timor to work together,
in cooperation with the United Nations, to put behind
them the violence of the past for the sake of future
generations.

I would like to pay tribute to the Secretary-General
and to the staff of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET), under the leadership of Ian Martin.
Their performance, under extraordinarily difficult
circumstances, brings credit to this institution. We are
pleased that the mandating of the multinational force will
enable UNAMET's valuable work to continue. Australia
has been a significant contributor to UNAMET and will
continue to support the United Nations work in East
Timor.

I congratulate all participants here today on the
cooperative approach that has characterized the
development of this historic resolution. It is a measure of
the depth of interest and concern that the world
community has in this issue.

In announcing the ballot outcome, the
Secretary-General said that the United Nations would not
fail the people of East Timor. The Security Council's
action today will give confidence to the people of East
Timor that the international community will follow
through on that solemn commitment.

