Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): It is a privilege to see
you, Mr. President, presiding over this meeting of
the Security Council. We are also honoured to have
enjoyed the presence of His Excellency Mr. Nursultan
Nazarbayev, President of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
We take the opportunity to congratulate his country's
delegation on the excellent work that it has done to date
as President of the Security Council. We also thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his briefing
and his leadership on the subject that Kazakhstan chose
for today's discussion.

Bolivia, in the context ofits dedication to respecting
international law and as a pacifist State that promotes
a culture of peace and the right to peace, advocates the
peaceful settlement ofdisputes, good offices, preventive
diplomacy, multilateralism, non-interference and
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States as universal principles recognized by
the international community, which are effective tools
to avoid the scourge of war and its consequences.

We are meeting at a time when we are experiencing
a reality of great tensions at the global level. Bolivia
is concerned about the considerable number of armed
conflicts, which carry heavy humanitarian cost. We
have chosen the path of the culture of dialogue among
nations through the peoples' diplomacy. In that regard,
we stress the need to adopt a wide-ranging approach
if we are to achieve peace and prevent conflicts by
analysing their structural causes, strengthening the
rule of law and promoting economic growth and
social development.

Bolivia, which belongs to the first densely populated
area in the world that declared itself free of nuclear
weapons, through the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean,
better known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and to the first
region to have declared itself a zone of peace - and
thanks to the peace process, the last armed conflict in
our region is being resolved in Colombia - has the
authority to call for this example to be replicated in
other parts of the world.

In that connection, we believe that the Members of
our Organization have the great challenge to implement
the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which
was adopted by the General Assembly on 7 July 2017.
It is time for countries to commit to prohibiting the
development, testing, production, procurement and
possession of nuclear arsenals and explosives. We
note the decision of countries such as Kazakhstan to
abandon the possession of nuclear weapons from its
defence doctrines and national security policies. In
line with our support for non-proliferation, we reiterate
our opposition to the carrying out of any type of
nuclear test or launching of ballistic missiles capable
of carrying weapons of mass destruction. We call for
the complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantling of
all nuclear programmes without peaceful ends and all
ballistic missiles.

In that regard, we believe that the best preventive
measure is the elimination of all nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction. As such, in the
specific context ofthe conflict on the Korean peninsula,
we believe political dialogue is the only way to achieve
the denuclearization of the region. In that connection,
the development of mutual confidence-building
measures is essential. We highlight the willingness
shown by the Governments of the Republic of Korea
and of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
begin negotiations in order to facilitate the attendance
of a North Korean delegation in the upcoming Winter
Olympics and the participation of both countries in the
inaugural ceremony under the same flag.

Another success in the implementation of
mutual confidence-building measures is the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran's nuclear
programme, which was negotiated among the five
permanent members of the Council, the European
Union and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
That development showed the readiness of the parties
to reach a peaceful and consensus-based agreement.

As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Bolivia
is firmly convinced that cooperation among States is
critical to its implementation so as to avert non-State
actors from acquiring or utilizing chemical, biological
or nuclear weapons. We also note that the Committee is
a platform for assistance among States, not a mechanism
for coercion or to channel sanctions against States.
Finally, we look on with concern at multimillion
dollar investments in the military-industrial complex.
Those exorbitant sums could be used instead to face
the grave humanitarian crisis, to fulfil the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, to eradicate poverty
and inequality and to thereby build a more just and
humane world.

