Mr. Kolby (Norway): We, too, are very pleased
to have this opportunity to meet with the Foreign
Minister of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and to hear his views on the issues of peace
and security in the region, which are important to the
Council.

First of all, Norway would like to commend
Macedonian authorities for having successfully
maintained peace and stability and developed
democracy in their country during a decade of
independence under difficult circumstances. This has
been achieved not least thanks to a consistent policy of
constructive cooperation between the various ethnic
groups, Macedonian Slavs and Albanians. Norway
appreciates the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia's achievements and we will work to ensure
that the international community actively supports the
Foreign Minister's efforts to maintain peace and
stability in the future as well.

At the outset, we must make it clear that the
Foreign Minister's country has legitimate security
concerns which must be addressed and that its
sovereignty and territorial integrity must be fully
upheld and respected. Norway strongly condemns all
violent activities of extremist armed groups in the
region, including the Albanian extremist attack last
Sunday, which tragically caused the deaths of three
Macedonian soldiers. Such activities constitute a threat
to internal as well as regional peace and stability and
must be firmly rejected. It is, not least, important that
leaders in the region isolate the extremist forces and
clearly condemn acts of violence.

We support the Macedonian authorities in their
legitimate efforts to restore internal peace and security,
including confidence-building measures on the
Macedonian side of the border with Kosovo. It is
important that the measures used be proportionate to
the challenges on the ground and we commend the
responsibility and restraint shown by the Foreign
Minister's Government in responding to this situation.

My Government notes with interest the plan of
activities proposed by the Macedonian authorities.
Norway agrees that the Kosovo Force (KFOR) must
intensify its activities to control the border areas in
Kosovo. We also agree on the importance of keeping
close contact between the Macedonian army and KFOR
in order to achieve the best possible control of these
border areas.

In conclusion, we firmly believe that today's
presidential statement will provide important support
for the Foreign Minister's future efforts.

