President Duda: Let me start by thanking the
Kazakh presidency for organizing this high-level
debate on such an important and relevant topic. It
shows Kazakhstan's long-lasting commitment to
non-proliferation efforts. Kazakhstan's credibility
in that matter is reinforced by the fact that it is one
of a very few countries that has abandoned the
nuclear path. I remember reading remarks by President
Nazarbayev in which he stressed "that was the best
decision I have ever made for my young country". And
Kazakhstan's continued engagement in that regard
has been demonstrated many times ever since. Let
me mention just the recent establishment of the Low
Enriched Uranium Bank, which not only constitutes a
major step towards promoting nuclear safety but also
promotes transparency and builds confidence among
peace-loving nations.

I also want to thank President Nazarbayev
personally for inviting me to this debate. This is my
first time, and most definitely not my last, visit to the
Security Council as President of the Republic of Poland.
I am here because the issue under consideration is very
much connected to Poland's priorities in the Council,
that is, supporting the existing and building new
international law instruments to mitigate the unlawful
and aggressive behaviour of some members of the
international community. Let me stress that not only
aggression, but also any attempt to build aggressive
capabilities, should always be treated as a Violation of
international norms because, in the end, it leads to the
erosion of the noble idea of the peaceful coexistence
among States.

Peaceful cooperation among all States is the very
essence of solidarity and lawfulness at the international
level. That is why it is so important to further develop
legal instruments in international relations, as well as
the ability to enforce them. It also applies to the issue of
nuclear non-proliferation. As members of the Security
Council, we are committed to treating it with all the
seriousness it deserves.

Despite having a developed and established legal and
treaty architecture, non-proliferation and disarmament
remain an unfinished project. At its core, the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) can
be seen as having a mixed record. I see three problems
in that regard. First, there is no requirement for a
country to join the Treaty, and those that do join have
a potentially easy way out - they can withdraw from
it with no more than three months' notice. Secondly,
there is no framework under the Treaty for a sanctions
regime to guard against Treaty violations. And, thirdly,
although the Treaty allows for its signatories to pursue a
nuclear strategy for peaceful purposes, the inspections
procedure is based on voluntary cooperation and
mutual trust. But, as we have seen throughout history,
the world is not run by the gentlemen's agreement rule.
In fact, world affairs are too often run by people who
are anything but gentlemen.

Recent developments in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, broken assurances provided for
Ukraine by the Budapest Memorandum, controversies
over the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran,
as well as threats posed by non-State actors, have all
shown that the non-proliferation agenda is even more
topical than ever today. And it does not apply only to
military nuclear capabilities; chemical and biological
weapons and ballistic missile proliferation2 are just
as important.

With regard to chemical weapons, Poland finds
it unacceptable that we are still confronted with the
continued use ofthat type ofarms. It is the responsibility
of the Security Council to continue conveying a strong
message to the world on that matter. Chemical weapons
were used on a number of occasions since the 1960s by
Egypt in Yemen, in the 1980s by Iraq against Iran and
recently in Syria, but with no serious consequences for
the side that used them - which is the problem.

Currently, however, the most worrisome situation
seems to be the one on the Korean peninsula, where
provocative actions taken by the North Korean regime
not only destabilize the whole region but also undermine
the entire non-proliferation effort. The stockpiling of
chemical weapons, the development of military nuclear
capabilities and ballistic missile programmes and
provocative tests of those weapons are clear violations
of international law in general, and of the respective
Security Council resolutions in particular. Such actions
show that the policy of aggression and confrontation
overshadows the policy of open dialogue and trust.
What is worse, they also show - creating a dangerous
precedent - that running a policy based on the law of
force, and not the force of law, sadly can be effective
and can go unpunished.

The way in which we solve the crisis will have
a significant impact on the future of the entire
global non-proliferation architecture. I believe that
the intensified efforts undertaken together by the
international community will bring about a political
solution and will result in the stabilization of the
situation in the region. That is especially crucial
today, as the 2018 Winter Olympics will soon begin
in South Korea. That event should be celebrated in
safe surroundings and allow for spectacular sport
competition in an atmosphere of peace and friendship
among all nations.

Poland has been a longstanding and active supporter
of strengthening non-proliferation and disarmament
norms and principles. We currently chair two important
initiatives, namely, the second Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and The Hague
Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation,
the latter which we inherited from Kazakhstan in 2017.
Despite the concerns raised over the NPT, we believe
it is the only real instrument that brings us closer to a
world without nuclear weapons. The implementation of
the Treaty is subject to review every five years. As its
current guardian, Poland has the intention of focusing
on maintaining its credibility, as well as creating the
environment for a mutually respectful, transparent and
all-inclusive dialogue. Bearing in mind that the 2020
Review Conference will mark the fiftieth anniversary
of the entry into force of the NPT, we would very
much appreciate the support of the Security Council
and of the United Nations in efforts to make it our
common success.

Equally significant to global and regional security
and stability is the proliferation of ballistic missiles,
including those capable of delivering weapons of mass
destruction. Unfortunately, the record of efforts aimed
at curbing it is short. That is why the importance of
control mechanisms has become even greater.

For 15 years since its establishment, The Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation has
been promoting transparency and confidence-building
measures. As its Chair, Poland wishes to follow up by
supporting the full implementation of the Code and
strengthening its relationship with the United Nations,
as reflected in General Assembly resolution 59/91, of
3 December 2004.

In closing, I would like to again express my
gratitude to the Kazakh presidency for selecting such
an important issue as the focus of today's debate.
Poland will continue its commitment to making our
world safe from nuclear threats. As we are all aware,
the devastating aftermath of the use of weapons of
mass destruction would transgress all borders. That is
why we should work closely within the United Nations
community to make sure that it never happens.

