Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin this report on the Security Council's trip to Haiti
by thanking Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, the team of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the Government of
Haiti for welcoming us and for facilitating our visit.

The trip - the Security Council's first to the
country in three years - was undertaken to examine
the security situation, to review post-quake
reconstruction efforts and to assess the consolidation of
democracy. We saw first hand Haiti's important
progress since the tragic earthquake of January 2010.
We also saw a disturbing level of political infighting in
a country that can ill afford it. Throughout our trip, we
reiterated the international community's solidarity with
Haitians as they tackle those challenges.

In Port-au-Prince, we heard President Martelly
and then Prime Minister Conille outline their
respective visions, including for promoting
development by attracting foreign investment and
creating jobs. We gained some insights into the
Government's ideas for rebuilding Haiti's devastated
2
infrastructure and for strengthening its health care. Our
interlocutors underscored that development efforts are
a critical part of ensuring Haiti's long-term stability.

President Martelly told us that he wanted to
create a second security force with responsibilities that
could include border security, environmental protection
and disaster response. Council members questioned
that course of action and emphasized instead the
importance of completing the reform and strengthening
of the Haitian National Police (HNP) so that it can
assume full responsibility for the country's security.

Members of the Senate and the Chamber of
Deputies shared with us very frank, and sometimes
critical, views on the slow progress of international
support, alleged sexual abuse by MINUSTAH
personnel, cholera and what the legislative saw as the
failings of Haiti's executive branch.

On the first full day, MINUSTAH officials
briefed us on the plans under way to reduce the
Mission's military component, in accordance with
resolution 2012 (2011), and to put greater
responsibility on United Nations Police and their
Haitian counterparts. Later, we travelled to Miragoane,
from which MINUSTAH had already withdrawn its
military forces. There, we saw a demonstration of how
a MINUSTAH police unit from Bangladesh was
supporting the Haitian National Police in crowd control
and other security operations.

From Miragoane, the Council travelled to
Leogane - the epicentre of the 2010 earthquake. We
met the leaders of a Korean company of MINUSTAH
engineers, whose work included rebuilding roads and
other infrastructure necessary to MINUSTAH's
operations and the installation of solar-powered lights
in a nearby displaced persons camp to help increase
security. We also visited the site of a non-governmental
organization-led project that was constructing houses
for people who had lost theirs in the earthquake. The
MINUSTAH engineers were working there to
strengthen the local capacity by training Haitians in
construction and basic engineering.

We met representatives of the Haitian private
sector and civil society, as well as members of the
diplomatic corps, at a reception at the end of our first
full day. We heard a range of Views regarding the
challenges that face Haiti and the role of the
international community in supporting the country.
12-24308
On our second full day, the Council travelled to
Cap-Haitien in the north to examine how rule of law
institutions function at the local level. We visited a
typical severely overcrowded prison and a judicial
tribunal plainly unable to cope with the demands that it
faces. Those Visits were stark reminders of the
enormous challenges in strengthening the judicial
system in Haiti.

We toured Caracol, also in the north, where
Haitians and international partners are starting to
construct the first major industrial development since
the earthquake - the Caracol Industrial Park. The
project is set to open later this year and Sae-A Trading
Company, a leading Korean garment manufacturer, has
already committed to investing in an operation there.
Once fully operational, the Park could create up to
60,000 new jobs when it is completed.

On returning to Port-au-Prince, we visited the
Delmas 33 police station, where we saw how the
simple act of co-locating United Nations and Haitian
police can enable mentoring, training and the transfer
of key skills.

We began our final day with a visit to the Haitian
National Police Academy in Port-au-Prince, where we
were briefed on efforts to increase the number of HNP
personnel, to bring more women into the force, to
investigate officers accused of corruption or human
rights violations, and to build skills for combating drug
trafficking and sexual and gender-based violence. In
the Carradeux internally displaced persons camp,
Council members visited tent homes and witnessed the
difficult conditions that face Haitians still living in
camps, that is, nearly half a million people. United
Nations Police and camp leaders briefed us on efforts
to protect women and other vulnerable groups from
sexual and other Violence.

We also Visited one of only two cholera treatment
centres in the capital, where Haitians and international
partners are working to slow the spread of the disease
and to treat those stricken by it. Over lunch, we met
with members of women's organizations, religious
groups and non-governmental organizations and youth
and other civil society leaders. They shared with us the
deep desire of Haitians to see their country stand on its
own and rely less on international support.

Many Haitians shared with us serious concerns
about the bitter disputes that divide Haiti's political
leaders, both within and between the executive and
12-24308

legislative branches of the Government. Ordinary
Haitians told us that they want their elected leaders to
put aside winner-take-all politics and to work together
in a spirit of compromise to solve the nation's
problems. Moving forward with elections for local
officials and one third of the Senate is a critical part of
that process.

The Council saw that Haiti's enormous
challenges require the coordinated efforts of all
stakeholders, most important, the Haitian Government
and civil society, but also the civilian and military
elements of MINUSTAH, other parts of the United
Nations system, donor Governments and local and
international NGOs. Such efforts are critical to
realizing the Government's goals of attracting
investment and creating jobs. The trip gave us the
opportunity to see the dedicated work that the men and
women of MINUSTAH perform under very difficult
conditions.

Many Haitians acknowledged that MINUSTAH
plays a necessary role in maintaining security and
stability. However, they also shared a desire to see the
Mission eventually leave, with strengthened Haitian
institutions taking on its responsibilities. The cholera
epidemic and allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse by some Mission personnel have badly eroded
support for MINUSTAH and undermined its work. We
are deeply troubled by these allegations, and expect the
United Nations to redouble its efforts to prevent any
further incidents of this kind and to ensure that those
responsible are held accountable.

Haitians and the United Nations Mission have
endured much together and accomplished much in the
two years since the earthquake. With continued
dedication and hard work, they can yet build a better
future for Haiti.

