Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal): Today I will
speak on behalf of the troika of observer States of the
Lusaka Protocol - the Russian Federation, the United
States and Portugal.

We welcome the Vice-Minister for External
Relations of the Republic of Angola to this important
discussion. His presence signals the strengthened
engagement of the Angolan Government in responding
to the needs of the staggering number of internally
displaced persons and refugees in Angola, as well as in
supporting the ongoing international effort to improve
the humanitarian situation throughout the entire
country. We note that the United Nations and the
Security Council have welcomed these important
efforts by the Angolan Government.

Unfortunately, the gravity of the humanitarian
situation in Angola, as described in very clear terms by
Under-Secretary-General Oshima, may soon dwarf the
efforts of the international community and the
Government. The humanitarian burden of the war
continues to grow and has accelerated in recent
months. The estimated number of internally displaced
persons is now over 4 million. The number of refugees
continues to grow in Zambia, Namibia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - over 30,000 in
recent months. The conflict is forcing populations to
move, often against their will and often with
inadequate preparation for their care. We particularly
want to register our grave concern about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the areas
of the country where access is most difficult for relief
agencies.
The Government of Angola can do more to help
its own citizens who are displaced, and we are
encouraged to hear the representatives of the
Government of Angola recognize that they themselves
need to do more for their own people. We welcome
recent expressions of intent by the Government to
provide more resources in the areas of health, transport
and food distribution, and we look forward to these
important commitments quickly becoming reality.

We encourage the Angolan Government to take a
more active stance in the provision of direct assistance
and to fully cooperate in the efforts of the international
community to alleviate the suffering of those who are
not receiving the necessary assistance. The members of
the troika are looking for action and expect the
Government of Angola and the United Nations to
report back on their progress in addressing the
humanitarian situation.

This meeting of the Security Council is proof that
the humanitarian situation in Angola is of the utmost
concern to the international community. The ongoing
conflict has brought unacceptable suffering to the
Angolan people and has subjected them to terrible
living conditions. If there were no other reason to
justify the renewed commitment of the international
community to the peace process in Angola, this dire
humanitarian situation would be reason enough.

We need to be creative and constructive in
finding adequate and appropriate solutions to address
the suffering of millions of Angolans, in particular
those living in the most remote areas. This must be
done in a way that combines efficiency and respect for
the basic political principles of the peace process.
Humanitarian assistance should not be used to achieve
political advantage, and neither should it be withheld
or impeded in any way. Access should be ensured for
aid workers throughout the country.

We must be practical. There are populations in
the territory of Angola that have been unable, until
now, to have access to food supplies and basic medical
assistance due to the conditions created by the war. The
good will of those involved in this process will be
measured by how they address the humanitarian needs
of the Angolan people. All those involved need to
understand that the international community cannot
allow the current situation to continue indefinitely.
Everyone must show the flexibility to let others act
where they are not able to do so.

Without peace and stability there will be no
durable solution to the dire humanitarian situation in
Angola. We have often stated our conviction that there
can be no military solution to the Angolan conflict. The
troika of observers to the Lusaka Protocol praises the
efforts being made by the Secretary-General's Special
Adviser, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, in order to relaunch a
dialogue between the parties. The troika is of the
opinion that all these efforts must be pursued in the
most transparent manner, in order to sustain the
confidence of the parties, keeping in mind that the
Lusaka Protocol is, and will remain, the sole
framework for peace.

We also consider the use of agreed-upon
facilitators as a helpful tool to clarify each party's
understanding of the current situation. Nevertheless, to
move the peace process ahead, the presentation of any
concrete proposals in this regard should remain firmly
in the hands of the United Nations, as the
representative of the international community and the
guarantor of the Lusaka Protocol, and through which a
future solution must be found.

We once more reiterate that only the practice of
good governance, respect for human and civil rights
and the delivery of better social and economic
conditions to the Angolan people can contribute to
bringing the conflict to an end. Within the
responsibilities the troika assumed under the Lusaka
Protocol, we are prepared to continue to assist the
United Nations in its proactive role during this phase of
the peace process as long as we are requested to do so.

