Mr. Rostow (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking Chairman Denisov for his
briefing this morning and, indeed, his entire team for
their leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). These quarterly public Council meetings help
ensure that counter-terrorism remains at the top of the
Council's and the United Nations agenda.

The Security Council and its counter-terrorism
bodies are entering an important phase, and every
effort should be made to ensure proper coordination.
The Working Group established under resolution 1566
(2004) will start meeting later this month. The Group
has an important mandate, which includes making
recommendations to the Council on practical measures
to be imposed on those involved in or associated with
terrorist activities other than those on the Al-
Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee's consolidated list.
In carrying it out, however, the Group should take
special care to coordinate with existing Council
counter-terrorism bodies.

In addition, the experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) will
soon arrive in New York to begin their work of
reviewing and analysing the reports submitted to that
body. By early spring, we expect the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate to be fully staffed and
ready to start visiting States to assess on-the-ground
efforts to implement resolution 1373 (2001). We
encourage States that need help to reach out to
Ambassador Ruperez and his team and welcome them
to visit their capitals. With those visits under way, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee will be moving to its
next phase and a step closer to being able to identify
those States that are not meeting their obligations
under resolution 1373 (2001).

Resolution 1566 (2004) explicitly called on the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Al-Qaida/Taliban
sanctions Committee and the 1540 Committee to
enhance cooperation with each other. While we have
seen some progress in that area, including the first-ever
meeting among the Chairmen of those bodies, there
needs to be more sharing of information and
consultation to ensure the most effective Council
contribution to the global fight against terrorism.

There are a number of concrete steps that can and
should be taken in that area. First, there should be
regular meetings among the experts assigned to support
each of the Council's terrorism-related bodies.
Secondly, the Chairman of each committee should
regularly hold a joint meeting for the wider United
Nations membership to report on its work and to allow
Member States to ask questions. Thirdly, the work
programmes, including the proposed travel, of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee's Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the Monitoring Team should be drawn up
together. Finally, the Executive Directorate, the
Monitoring Team and the experts of the 1540
Committee, once they begin their work, should share a
common database of information.

Although there are three Committees, and now a
Working Group, involved in the global counter-
terrorism campaign, we must not forget that they are
all Security Council bodies. Each is supervised by, and
indeed part of, the same body. Indeed, they are the
Security Council. In the coming weeks and months,
improved coordination among the Council's counter-
terrorism bodies will be essential to make the United
Nations a more effective player in the international
counter-terrorism effort.

Allow me to highlight the importance of the
CTC's fourth special meeting of international, regional
and subregional organizations, which is to be held next
week in Almaty, Kazakhstan. Such meetings offer
representatives of those organizations an opportunity to
discuss the challenges they are facing in developing
and implementing their counter-terrorism programmes,
share best practices and improve coordination between
and among the different players in the growing
counter-terrorism industry. Yet that gathering should be
about more than talking and exchanging information; it
should lead to action and results.

In short, while the discussions in Almaty are
important, the follow-up is equally, or even more,
important. Too often we have seen meetings of that sort
not lead to the follow-up action necessary to advance
the international counter-terrorism agenda. For
example, there are still too many regional and
subregional organizations that have yet to adopt or
implement counter-terrorism action plans. We still have
not seen enough organizations develop and disseminate
counter-terrorism best practices.

Almaty will be the first special meeting of the
CTC since the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate and the appointment of
Ambassador Ruperez as its leader. We have every
confidence that he will help the participating
organizations to take the necessary practical follow-up
steps to advance the multilateral counter-terrorism
campaign.

