Mr. Yankey (Ghana): We are grateful to
Mr. Pascoe for his remarks and acknowledge the
immense contribution of the outgoing Special
Representative, Mr. Alvaro de Soto, to peace in the
Middle East.

We welcome the opportunity to participate in
today's debate on the Middle East, which is taking
place against the background of recent positive

developments in that complex and volatile region. We
are obliged nonetheless to express concern about the
immediate and long-term ramifications of the ongoing
violence in Iraq, especially the fate of internally
displaced Iraqis and of refugees. We also hope most
sincerely that the dispute over Iran's nuclear
enrichment programme will be resolved through
dialogue.

My delegation is very much encouraged by the
renewed contacts between the Israeli Prime Minister,
Mr. Ehud Olmert, and the Palestinian President,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, and we take this occasion to call
for an immediate restoration of the truce between
Hamas and Israel in order not to jeopardize this new
opportunity for peace. It is also important to emphasize
the need for the Quartet and other influential
stakeholders to take whatever steps are required to
reinforce the confidence-building initiatives
undertaken by the two sides, including pressing for the
immediate release of all hostages and prisoners, where
appropriate - and we support the call for the release
of the BBC journalist - as well as addressing the
grave humanitarian crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the refugee camps.

Against that background, we wish to reiterate our
full support for the Mecca accord, brokered by Saudi
Arabia and other Arab leaders to bring an end to the
deeply troubling armed clashes between Fatah and
Hamas. We urge the Palestinians to endeavour to
resolve their differences through dialogue so that they
can present a peaceful and united front in seeking an
independent and Viable State of their own.

Further, we welcome the Arab peace plan and
believe that it broadens the basis for a negotiated
settlement to the Palestinian question. We trust that the
Government of Israel will give due consideration to the
peace plan, which, together with the Road Map and
other existing agreements, ought to provide a workable
framework for negotiating a just and durable peace
between Israel and its neighbours. There can be no
doubt that until it is resolved, the age-old conflict in
the Middle East will continue to cast a shadow over the
rest of the world.

In his latest reports on the situation between
Lebanon and Israel, the Secretary-General recorded
significant progress in the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), particularly the commitment to dialogue
demonstrated by the two countries. We commend the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for its efforts
to facilitate the implementation of the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

On the other hand, we should be mindful of the
various threats to peace that have been highlighted,
including the internal political situation in Lebanon,
the unresolved dispute over the Sheba'a farms, the
reported breaches of resolution 1701 (2006) by the two
sides and other provocative incidents. We welcome the
efforts being made to clear the cluster bombs and
unexploded ordnance that have claimed the lives of
several Lebanese nationals and injured many others.
We wish to echo the appeal by the Secretary-General to
the two sides to abide by their commitments under
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to preserve the peace.

My delegation is very keen to see tangible
progress in the search for peace and stability in the
Middle East, including, inter alia, the realization of an
independent and viable Palestinian State in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
related agreements. The stark reality is that our
collective security is inextricably bound together with
the future of the region. That places on us all an urgent
responsibility to move beyond the status quo.

