Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Charter of the United Nations entrusts the Security
Council with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
Chamber is a symbol of the victory ofthe peoples ofthe
world against fascist wars of aggression and a symbol
of justice conquering evil. The post-war international
order based on the Charter must be adhered to and
maintained.

The theme of today's Security Council meeting is
"War, its lessons and the search for a permanent peace".
In order to draw lessons from war and maintain lasting
peace, it is necessary to face history squarely and use
it as a mirror.

Facts speak louder than words. In his statement
this afternoon, the Japanese representative offered
justifications on the issues of the Yasukuni shrine,
comfort women and textbooks. A moment ago, he did
the same thing again. In fact, Japan is only digging itself
into a deeper hole by trying to whitewash its history.

The international community knows what kind of a
place the Yasukuni shrine is, and Japan knows it all too
well. It was a spiritual symbol of Japanese militarism.
To this day, it openly glorifies and justifies Japanese
militarist wars of aggression. Japan still openly claims
that the Pacific war that it launched was for self-defence
purposes. It is still accusing the International Military
Tribunal for the Far East of conducting illegal trials.
And it still venerates 14 Class A war criminals and
more than 1,000 other war criminals as deities. In his
statement this afternoon, the Japanese representative
referred to them as people who made the ultimate
sacrifice for their country. That once again proves that
Japan is still hanging on to its erroneous View of its
history of aggression. Japanese Prime Minister Abe's
visit to the Yasukuni shrine is an affront to historical
justice, human conscience, the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, the world's victory
over fascism and the post-war international order.

During the Second World War, the Japanese army
forcibly recruited large numbers of comfort women
from China, Korea and many other countries and
committed egregious crimes against humanity. Thus
far, the Japanese Government has not offered an apology
or compensation for the issue of comfort women, and,
by rights, it should continue to bejointly condemned by
the international community.

Japan's purpose in revising the textbooks is to
falsify history and distort the facts. What the Japanese
Government should do is to effectively comply with the
Cairo Declaration, the Potsdam Proclamation and other
relevant rulings and cease all actions that violate and
undermine the territorial sovereignty of neighbouring
countries.

The Japanese justifications raise several questions.
The United Nations has 193 States Members. Apart
from Japan, have any other country's leaders gone to
pay homage to Class A and class B war criminals of
the Second World War? Why has Japan chosen the
opposite side on this issue than that of the international
community? Are we to understand that to pay tribute
to war criminals and glorify wars of aggression is
to declare a wish for peace? The Charter puts it very
clearly: the founding of the United Nations was to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. The
war criminals venerated at the Yasukuni shrine are
criminals responsible for those war crimes. Are we to
understand that to pay tribute and homage to those war
criminals is to comply with the purposes and principles
of the Charter? Are we to understand that altering
textbooks and covering up the truth of history is the
correct way to make future generations realize the
mistakes that have been made and avoid the path of war?
By saying those things, the Japanese representative
was only deceiving himself and others. If the Japanese
leaders really wish to distance themselves from wars
of agression, the history of wars of agression the war
criminals of the Second World War, they should know
better than to engage in such justifications.

Abe's acts gravely undermine the political
foundation of Sino-Japanese relations. He himself
closed the door to a dialogue with China. What he must
do now is not to provide justifications for himself but
to effectively mend his ways, relinguish his erroneous
outlook on history, which runs counter to the human
conscience and international justice, and correctly
understand and deeply repent the Japanese history of
militarist aggression. He must comply with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
truly win the trust of the neighbouring Asian countries
and the international community. The people of the
world will watch Japan's actions.

