Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): First of all, as this month is drawing to an end,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
outstanding skill and rich diplomatic experience you have
displayed in guiding the work of the Council this month.

I would also like to welcome the participation of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia in this meeting.

Ever since conflict broke out in the Abkhaz region
of Georgia, the situation in some regions has remained
tense, despite the ongoing good offices of the
international community. The process of political
settlement remains at an impasse. The key issues are now
that serious differences still exist between the two sides
with regard to the future political status of Abkhazia and
that the work of repatriating refugees in that region
continues to be hampered. The Chinese delegation is
deeply disturbed and concerned by this.

I would like to reiterate here that China has always
maintained that in settling the conflict in Georgia the

 

independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Georgia should be respected by the
international community. At the same time, the basic rights
of the residents of all ethnic groups in that region should be
safeguarded.

We are of the view that the final settlement of the
question of Georgia basically lies with the people
themselves. Only when both sides to the conflict have the
political will can the efforts of the international community
have any effect or play any role. We therefore call upon
both sides to take into account the fundamental interests of
the people, adopt a constructive attitude, pursue the path of
negotiations and settle their differences.

We welcome the high-level meeting held in Geneva
recently between the two sides. We hope that both sides
can continue and speed up the Geneva process. We await
direct contacts at an early date between President
Shevardnadze and the Abkhaz leader, Mr. Ardzinba. That
would be the first step in building confidence between the
two sides and beginning to solve the current problems.

We are satisfied by the fact that the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) has since its
deployment maintained an excellent relationship of
cooperation with both sides, as well as with the
peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS).

We are disturbed by the unstable situation in the
districts of Gali and Zugdidi and by the fact that the
security of UN OMIG is being threatened. We condemn the
terrorist attacks on the peacekeepers of the United Nations
and the CIS. We call upon both sides to make good on
their promises to safeguard the security of the peacekeepers.

We are of the view that the continued presence of
UNOMIG will be conducive to the peace process in
Georgia. We therefore endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the extension of the UNOMIG
mandate and will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us. We hope that UNOMIG will continue to carry
out the mandate of the Security Council faithfully.

