Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I would just like to make a
brief comment on some of the statements made today.

On the subject of the Security Council giving
mandates to investigate war crimes in the Balkans, I
would like to reiterate that all of the war crimes that
have been investigated were investigated under the
auspices of the Security Council, and transferred to
national courts of States Members of the United
Nations only after agreement between those Member
States and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, which was established by the
Security Council.

As we all know, Kosovo is not and will not
become a State Member of the United Nations. All
major crimes committed by major officials and
wartime commanders in Yugoslavia were investigated
under the auspices of the Security Council and with the
requirement that those who conducted the
investigations report back to the Security Council on
their work. I fail to understand the fervour of the
opposition to the Security Council's mandating and
receiving a report on the findings of such
investigations, unless there is something to be hidden
from this Council.

According to Amnesty International, Human
Rights Watch, the European Law Enforcement Agency
and other international organizations, some of which I
quoted in my statement earlier today, Kosovo is at the
bottom of lists when it comes to human rights and
security, contrary to Mr. Hoxhaj's claims, in rebuttal to
my statement, that it is a young, dynamic, developing
democracy.

If we are to talk about multi-ethnicity, inclusion
and tolerance in Kosovo, I would just like to draw the
Council's attention to the following numbers. There are
more people sitting around this table than there are
Serbs left in Pristina, out of the total pre-war
population of 40,000. In Prizren, the ancient capital of
Serbia, today there are 18 Serbs out of the pre-1999
population of 10,000. In anilane today, 100 remain
out of 15,000. In Urosevac, there is one Kosovo Serb,
and in Suva Reka, zero.

More than 205,000 people have been expelled
from Kosovo since 1999, according to the numbers of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Less than 15,000 have returned in a decade, less than
300 since the unilateral declaration of independence,
and only 47 this year. So much for multi-ethnicity and
inclusion in Kosovo.

