Mr. J a'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): To begin with I wish to congratulate you, Sir,
on China's accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month, which has been distinguished, as
is customary, by outstanding wisdom and responsibility.

We are a main stakeholder of the agenda item
under consideration, as Israel has occupied the Syrian
Golan since 1967. I therefore speak as a principal
party in restating the position of the Syrian Arab
Republic. It is a principled position in favour of the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination;
an independent State across the whole of its national
territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and the
guaranteed return of refugees to their country under
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Those
non-negotiable rights cannot be subject to concessions
or statutes of limitation, or impeded by force.

The holy esplanade of Jerusalem is under
occupation and exploited by the Israeli occupying
forces. Given the onoing situation around the holy sites,
the Security Council must more than ever do more
than merely express it condemnation and concern. The
Council must fully assume its responsibility to ensure
the immediate implementation of all of its resolutions
relevant to ending the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories, including resolution 2334 (2016), on the
illegitimacy of the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.

With respect to Mr. Mladenov's briefing to the
Council today, in our view nothing justifies the fact
that he insisted on ignoring the nature of his mission
and mandate as Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process. In an unacceptable, unprofessional
and immoral manner, Mr. Mladenov failed to mention
the illegal Israeli activities in the Syrian Golan. He
did not underscore the United Nations position on the
Israeli occupation since 5 June 1967, despite a dozen
resolutions adopted by our international Organization,
in particular the Security Council, on that very subject.

As a result ofthe racist and terrible Israeli occupation
that has endured for more than half a century, the Syrian
citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan remain subject to
the worst crimes under the oppressive policies of racial
discrimination, detention, torture and other procedures.
They are deprived of their natural resources. They
are deprived of their right to study under the Syrian
national curriculum. They are deprived of their right to
a Syrian identity card. They are deprived of their right
to access national Syrian hospitals in their villages in
the occupied Syrian Golan. That situation, including
the occupation and confiscation of land and property,
has persisted for more than half a century.

The Special Coordinator ignored the fact that Israel
is supporting armed terrorist groups in the occupied
Syrian Golan. He did not address that issue at all. In
addition, in a highly partial and unprofessional manner,
Mr. Mladenov decided, as we heard this morning, to
justify the attacks of the Israeli occupying forces on
the Syrian army. I would remind Mr. Mladenov that
we are talking here about Syrian territory occupied by
Israel. The Israeli army provides logistical support to
the terrorist groups in those territories. Whenever we
gain a victory, we are attacked by the terrorist groups.
The Israeli air force has targeted Syrian bases that are
situated far from the occupied Syrian Golan.

Will Mr. Mladenov continue to justify Israel's
actions and the fact that Israel is targeting Syrian army
bases, which are themselves combatting terrorism?
Mr. Mladenov should indicate his concern about the
fact that the United Nations is refusing to assume
its responsibilities. He should discuss the statement
made at the conference between the Presidents of the
Russian Federation and the United States of America.
For the record and for history, I call on the Special
Representative to consider the well-documented reports
of Ms. Dilyana Gaytandjieva, a Bulgarian national, and
the articles published in a Bulgarian newspaper on the
activities of terrorist groups in Syria and the transfer of
weapons from Bulgaria to Jeddah, including on ships
registered to certain Member States. All of this is being
financed by certain Gulf States. I will return to that
issue in detail when we discuss counter-terrorism in
another meeting.

It also would seem that the Special Coordinator has
not heard of the illegal decision ofthe Israeli occupying
forces to hold local council elections in villages in the
occupied Syrian Golan. They called this an Israeli law,
but in fact it is a flagrant violation of our Charter and
of United Nations resolutions as well as international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, and the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 497 (1981), adopted unanimously
on 17 December 1981. That resolution rejects Israel's
annexation of the occupied Syrian Golan and finds all
Israeli activity in the occupied Syrian Golan null and
void from the perspective of international law.

My country, the Syrian Arab Republic, categorically
rejects this new Israeli resolution. We reiterate that the
Golan will remain an integral part of Syrian territory
and that it will be reintegrated with the motherland. We
also reiterate that we have sovereign authority over the
occupied Syrian Golan within the 4 June 1967 borders.
This is a non-negotiable right on which there can be
no concessions. These are our territories; they are
occupied now, but we will get them back. The Israeli
settlers will leave, sooner or later.

In that respect, my Government calls on the
Security Council to bring pressure to bear on Israel to
ensure the immediate liberation of Syrian prisoners,
in particular Sedqi al-Maqt, the Nelson Mandela of
Syria, who served a 27-year sentence in the occupying
Power's prisons. He was sentenced a few days ago to
another 14 years because he had dared to expose the
occupying Power's practice of providing logistical
support to armed terrorist groups in southern Syria and
in the separation zone.

My country, Syria, believes that today the Security
Council must shoulder its historical responsibility to
correct this injustice. We are meeting today and have
met on other occasions with the goal of putting an end
to the loathsome Israeli occupation, not of holding
discussions on issues far removed from the item on
our agenda.

I would recall that Israel has long occupied territory
and carried out massacres. It is the only party in the
Middle East to have an arsenal of nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons. Do not forget the terrorist war
and the unprecedented destruction it has wrought in
the Middle East. Indeed, certain parties in the Security
Council are trying to avoid working to end the appalling
Israeli occupation and are providing cover for it.

