Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, and thank
him and his team for the remarkable work they have
accomplished at the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET). As well, I thank
Mr. Hasegawa for his presentation of the progress
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/888).

In recent months, Timor-Leste has achieved
considerable progress in all areas related to nation-
building and the creation of the infrastructure and
conditions required for the harmonious functioning of
the State. Preparations are under way for the holding of
local elections with the assistance of UNMISET and
other bilateral and multilateral partners. The capacities
of public administration, the judicial system and the
security agencies have been strengthened. The
Timorese Government has carried out its national
administrative functions effectively and responsibly.
As well, in recent months, there has been progress in
the economic and social development of Timor-Leste.
We welcome that outstanding progress and the work of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor in
peace-building and in support of the development of
the institutions of Timor-Leste.

Relations between Timor-Leste and neighbouring
countries, in particular Indonesia, remain an essential
factor in the current phase of the consolidation of the
nation-building process. My delegation welcomes
Timor-Leste's readiness to cooperate with its
neighbours, in particular Indonesia. In that context, we
hope that the two parties will soon reach agreement on
the final delimitation of their land borders, in the light
of the importance of such an agreement for their
security and for the stability of the region as a whole.

Likewise, we hope that negotiations with
Australia on the maritime border and on the sharing of
oil and natural gas resources will move more firmly
and more speedily towards an agreement, which is
crucial for Timor-Leste's security and general socio-
economic development.

It is clear that, in spite of the significant progress
made, Timor-Leste has not yet achieved the desired
level of autonomy. Its public administration remains
fragile. In the area of law and order, the Timorese
police force continues to show institutional weakness,
in particular with respect to training. As well, the
national security capacities of Timor-Leste remain at
an early stage of development.

It is therefore important that for the final months
of UNMISET's mandate, the terms of that mandate
should not be modified. That way, the Mission will be
able to continue to support Timor-Leste's ability to
ensure its security and stability and to consolidate the
progress made so far. For that reason, we support the
Secretary-General's recommendation to extend
UNMISET's mandate for six months, without
modifying its tasks as set out in resolution 1543
(2004).

In order to truly attain social stability and
sustainable economic development, the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste need the international
community's steadfast and sustained support. We are
convinced that the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste will achieve greater progress in nation-
building and in the consolidation of State institutions.

