Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. We also thank the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for their
special report on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/20l9/816),
as requested by resolution 2479 (2019).

We have witnessed some encouraging developments
since the Council last deliberated on the Sudan
(see S/PV.8603), including the signing of the Juba
Declaration between the transitional authorities and
the coalition of armed groups, the agreement to open a
United Nations human rights office in the Sudan and the
commencement of peace talks in Juba a few days ago.
In order for the peace talks to move forward, all parties
must restrain themselves and refrain from actions that
could undermine trust among them. Inclusive dialogue
is the key to resolving any differences, and for that, the
cessation of hostilities is a must.

I wish to focus on three important issues. First,
we have consistently underlined the importance of
the responsible drawdown of UNAMID, guided by
a careful assessment of the situation on the ground,
including on whether the current challenges still
require UNAMID's continued presence. The drawdown
of UNAMID must be done in a manner that preserves
its gains and does not create a security vacuum. My
delegation values the role of State liaison functions in
enabling UNAMID, the United Nations country team
and the Sudanese authorities to together address critical
conflict drivers in Darfur through joint programmatic
activities. Focusing the future mandate of UNAMID on
supporting and strengthening the State liaison functions
is something that the Council should positively consider.
We take note of the options presented in the special
report regarding the appropriate pace of UNAMID's
drawdown and stand ready to discuss them with other
Council members in a constructive manner.

That brings me to the second issue - the follow-
on mechanism. My delegation cannot overemphasize
the imperative of ample, timely and meaningful
consultations with the Sudanese authorities in
developing a follow-up mechanism for UNAMID.
National ownership and support is a precondition
for the implementation of a successful follow-up
mechanism. The United Nations and the African Union
must leverage their full strength, including the various
tools at their disposal, and harmonize the work of
existing initiatives.

The third issue we would like to highlight relates
to international support. We must not lose sight of the
fact that efforts to promote peace in the Sudan are
taking place against a backdrop of persistent economic
difficulties and a dire humanitarian situation. As a
brotherly nation of the Sudan, Indonesia is heartened
to see the outpouring of international support for the
country, including during the General Assembly's
high-level event on the Sudan last month. For current
political gains to be sustainable, the Sudan needs
mobilized financial assistance, investment and trade.
We also call for the removal of the Sudan from the
list of State sponsors of terrorism and the lifting of
unilateral economic sanctions against the country,
as we emphasized during the high-level event last
month. The international community should do more
to alleviate the humanitarian suffering of the Sudanese
people, including internally displaced persons and
those affected by food insecurity and the recent floods.

A peace process is never an easy venture. It is a
long and arduous journey that requires the utmost
care, political will, compromise and constant support.
Indonesia stands ready to accompany the Sudan on this
historic journey.

