Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to first
extend our thanks to our briefers for their updates this
morning on the situation.

We welcome the fact that the security situation in
Abyei has remained relatively calm, while we are aware
that the situation still remains unpredictable and tense.
The situation could quickly deteriorate and, in that
case, have unacceptable consequences for civilians.
Also, considering the instability in nearby areas, we
very much agree with the Secretary-General that the
continued presence of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) remains crucial.

We commend the work of the mission and the
Ethiopian troops carrying out that important mandate.
Protecting civilians, securing access for humanitarian
assistance, mediating migration-based conflicts,
facilitating the return of displaced persons and
demilitarizing the border region are all tasks that are
vital to upholding stability in the Area.

Seven years after UNISFA's creation, we are
regrettably no closer to a political solution. The
current impasse cannot be allowed to continue, and
we must step up efforts to find new ways forward.
UNISFA needs to remain part of the path towards
the normalization of relations between the Sudan and
South Sudan. United Nations efforts should always aim
at reaching political solutions, and its mission should be
calibrated to advance that objective. That is also true for
UNISFA. The implementation of the relevant chapters
of the cooperation agreement - namely, border issues
and security arrangements, and the settlement of the
final status of Abyei - is the end state that needs to
be achieved. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation to give the mission an
augmented role in supporting the political process.

In that context, we also commend the work of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
and UNISFA's cooperation with the Panel must be
maintained and further synergies with the efforts of the
African Union should be sought.

We share the sense of frustration that the parties
have not built on the positive momentum of last spring
and carried through the actions that were expected of
them. Some efforts have been made and small positive
steps taken, but much more needs to be done to reach
a political settlement that addresses the underlying
issues. We hope that the recent positive developments
in the relations between the Sudan and South Sudan can
also contribute to reaching a political solution on the
future status of Abyei.

The Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JVBMM) is a Vital part of the framework
that regulates the relationship between the Sudan and
South Sudan, which also contributes to overall stability
in the border area. As stated in the Secretary-General's
letter (S/2018/778), no single confrontation between the
parties' forces has taken place since the inclusion of the
JBVMM. in the mission's mandate in 2012. We agree
that there is a need to push for further progress, rather
than risk the gains that have been made.

Furthermore, in the absence of the envisaged
temporary institutions, UNISFA has been carrying
out crucial tasks in areas that were not foreseen. We
particularly commend the work done in addressing
sexual and gender-based violence and children's
rights. There is a serious governance vacuum, and the
mission must be equipped to appropriately address that.
It should, for example, have the tools to also support
mediation opportunities and address essential law and
order issues.

Let me conclude by extending our sincere thanks
to Special Envoy Haysom for his relentless engagement
and invaluable contribution to that work. His efforts
have contributed not only to the issue before us today,
but to the whole region. We will miss the clarity and
straightforwardness of his briefings, but we also look
forward to continuing to closely work with him in his
new important role in Somalia.

