Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Let me start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having organized
this afternoon's meeting. Let me also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Kyung-wha Kang for her briefing.
It is absolutely unacceptable by any standards to
allow as many as 400,000 people or more to continue
living and dying in besieged areas in Syria. For this
reason, we support all initiatives aimed at denouncing
such situations in the strongest possible terms and
applying the necessary political pressure to decisively
end this tragic situation and state of affairs.

We warmly welcome the access of humanitarian
convoys to the town of Madaya and to other places
under siege by rebels in the north-west part of Syria. We
commend the outstanding efforts by the humanitarian
community, which, against all odds, keeps on working
to save lives and provide the minimum necessary
comfort to the Syrian people, who are in absolute
distress.

Our praise goes also to the Humanitarian
Coordinator for Syria, Mr. Yacoub El Hillo, and to
the personnel of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, who in
the past few days were able to deliver much-needed
provisions and medical supplies, including blankets
and clothing. We sincerely hope that increased pressure
will force the Government and the opposition forces
to continue allowing regular and unimpeded access of
humanitarian aid to all besieged areas in Syria.

The eloquent statement made by the Secretary-
General yesterday described the situation in Madaya as
having reached a shocking depth of inhumanity owing
to the suffering to which women and men, including
children and the elderly, are subjected. Reports of
people dying from starvation or being killed by
snipers or landmines while trying to flee amount to
war crimes, as the Secretary-General has pointed out.
Those responsible for such despicable actions must be
held accountable.

In the political process, in particular if that
process is to succeed, the warring parties must show a
genuine commitment to respecting the basic tenets of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
They must put an end to the suffering of the civilian
population, in particular those trapped in besieged and
hard-to-reach areas. We hope that the preparations of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Steffan de Mistura, for the political talks between
the Syrian Government and the Syrian opposition
in Geneva, due to start on 25 January, will continue
unhindered, and that a political solution to this
humanitarian catastrophe can be achieved as soon as
possible.

With the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015),
a commitment was made to accelerate efforts to
achieve a ceasefire that would run in parallel to the
political process, pursuant to the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex), and move the political process
ahead expeditiously. As such, the modalities and
requirements for a ceasefire must be determined, and
the necessary pressure applied on all the parties, in
order to enable the lifting of all sieges on civilian-
populated areas, thereby facilitating the political
settlement to the Syrian conflict. That remains the only
way to stop the tragedy now afflicting the people of
Syria. In that connection, we look forward to hearing
the briefing that will be delivered to the Council next
Monday by Mr. De Mistura.

The people of Syria need adequate responses from
the Security Council. It is our duty to respond in order
to give peace a chance.

