Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank our colleagues from the United
States and the United Kingdom for the briefings they
have just given the Security Council, pursuant to
resolution 1483 (2003).

I would like to make the following comments.

As my United States and United Kingdom
colleagues have noted, significant progress has been
made during this period. Some public services have
been restored or are in the process of being restored.
Most schools and hospitals have thus reopened and are
functioning. The production and supply of electricity
have for the most part been restored to levels
comparable to pre-war levels. The dreaded
humanitarian crisis has not taken place. Markets are
well-stocked. The distribution of food aid has
continued, particularly within the oil-for-food
programme. The Madrid Conference brought about an
encouraging mobilization for the reconstruction of
Iraq.

After three decades of tyranny, more than 12
years of a sanctions regime unprecedented in its
severity and three deadly wars, this progress was
eagerly anticipated by the Iraqi people. This progress is
necessary to restore confidence in the future. Together,
we must see to it that this progress continues.

France pays tribute to the work of those, whether
Iraqis or foreigners, and whether acting in a national
capacity or working for United Nations agencies and
programmes or non-governmental organizations, who

have taken and continue to take an active part in this
progress, at times sacrificing their own lives. I cannot
forget to mention here the considerable efforts also
made by the member countries of the Coalition, under
their responsibilities as occupying Powers.

Unfortunately, this progress, however positive
and real, could be eclipsed by the continuation of
violence that we have witnessed throughout this same
period. Acts of violence and attacks continue unabated,
and are becoming ever more deadly, now
indiscriminately targeting the personnel of
international organizations, non-governmental
organizations, the Coalition force and, in particular,
Iraqis themselves, who are the primary victims. Given
these criminal, horrendous acts, the strongest possible
condemnation and punishment are necessary. But that
is not enough. Maintaining a state of occupation feeds
the Iraqi people's resentment and growing frustration,
which are exploited by extremists to extend their
audience and to justify violence. That is why we, since
the end of the conflict, have been advocating a rapid
restoration of Iraqi sovereignty and the end of the
occupation.

We therefore welcomed the new approach
contained in the agreement signed in Baghdad on 15
November between the Governing Council and the
Coalition Provisional Authority. The agreement indeed
recognizes that the restoration of Iraqi sovereignty
must be the first stage in the political transition, with
the establishment of a fully responsible transitional
Government. It is in this context that Iraqis will then,
at their own pace, be able to define permanent
constitutional arrangements and organize elections in
order to freely choose their leaders.

We cannot waste this opportunity; it could be our
last. We must therefore see to it that this new approach
indeed makes it possible to effectively curb the
violence and to establish on a solid basis the political
recovery and economic reconstruction of Iraq. To
achieve this, we need to see to it that the
implementation of the Baghdad agreement does not
create new divisions, but brings people together. It is a
matter of urgency to rebuild a consensus, not only in
Iraq at the regional level, but also within the
international community.

In order to attain this three-fold objective, we
believe that several elements are crucial.

Sll'V.4869

 

First, there needs to be an immediate expansion
of the social and political basis of the political process.
All Iraqis that oppose violence or who agree to give up
violence must be involved in this process, including
those who thus far have been excluded or have
excluded themselves from the process. Every Iraqi
should be able to identify with the institutions that will
be established.

It is also essential to involve and to hold
accountable all of the States of the region, without
exception, to enable Iraq to become once again part of
its regional environment. It is essential also that the
United Nations be allowed, with full independence, to
lend its legitimacy and its support to see the transition
in Iraq through each of its stages.

We understand the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General regarding the security of his staff.
That is why we proposed that, initially, a special envoy
of the United Nations Secretary-General be appointed.
While not residing permanently in Iraq, that envoy
could, at the outset, help to engage Iraqis and countries
in the region in the transition process, which would
thus reinforce its legitimacy. We hope that the
representative that the Secretary-General will appoint
in the near future will be able to perform this essential
task.

The idea of a national conference under United
Nations auspices that would bring together all of the
Iraqi sensitivities and all of the Iraqi groups, to which
countries of the region should be invited along with
others, was mentioned. This idea deserves careful
consideration. It could be discussed with the Iraqis.

Finally, the transfer of effective responsibilities to
the Iraqis must go on without waiting for the June 2004
deadline, as spelled out in paragraph 6 of resolution
1511 (2003). It is essential that the provisional
Government to be established by that date will be able
then to exercise full sovereign power over Iraq.

So we welcome the approach adopted by the
Baghdad agreement, but it is actually the conditions of
its implementation that will determine its success. The
change of approach should not be confined to reversing
the sequencing of the political transition. It should also
be translated into an effort to involve the greatest
number of people participating, within and outside
Iraq. This effort should be reflected by the Security
Council if it were to be prompted to address this new
approach contained in the Baghdad agreement.

