Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity for us to take
part in this very constructive discussion. I would also
like to thank the Force Commanders of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, as well as the Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization, for their briefings.

As many speakers have said, peacekeeping
operations have undergone major changes over the
past few years in order to keep up with security and
political changes and to adapt to new environments
in host States - environments that are often complex
and complicated in nature in which there is sometimes
no peace to keep, and no peace to build. Those
developments include the creation of rapid intervention
forces as part of many peacekeeping operations, such
as the force present in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as the ever more frequent use of force
by peacekeepers, which poses a challenge to the most
basic principles of peacekeeping.

The primary challenge remains how to respond
to non-State actors, who are present in many armed
conflicts in the areas where UnitedNations peacekeeping
operations are deployed. Such groups often operate in
the absence of clear rules of engagement, use force
without respect for international legal frameworks and
hide among the civilian population. Their command
structure is often complex, diffuse and multipronged.
The linkage among armed conflict, terrorism and
organized crime has grown in a large number of
countries, which requires peacekeeping operations
to adapt rapidly and wisely to the new political and
security environment that has taken hold throughout
the world.

We have observed that such emerging threats have
forced peacekeeping operations to implement such
principles under pressure and constraints, outside
the framework of their mandates and without the
foundations ofa clear strategy. That principle has been
followed for the past few years without developing
the concepts and necessary principles within the
framework of peacekeeping operations mandates, and
without awareness or understanding of the dynamic
of peacekeeping operations on the ground or the root
causes of conflicts that would lead to appropriate
responses or put an end to the phenomenon that
strengthens extremism, terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

Furthermore, it is essential to think about the use
of force to maintain the mandates of peacekeeping
operations within the framework of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations in a transparent
way that respects international law and international
humanitarian law while continuing peacekeeping
operations and protecting them from attacks, especially
those forces active under Chapter VII.

The activities of rapid intervention forces mean
that civilian employees of peacekeeping operations
sometimes become the targets of those asymmetric
attacks and the victims of asymmetric threats.
The Council must therefore develop a common
understanding, in consultation with Member States
and troop-contributing countries, for devising ways
to address that problem and to uphold the legality of
measures undertaken in that regard, as well as to
implement mandates in an appropriate way to address
unconventional, asymmetric challenges and threats.

Furthermore, it is essential to closely look into
the partnerships between the United Nations and
international and regional organizations and to review
peacekeeping mandates to ensure that they can have
recourse to force as required, as well as to strengthen
their intelligence-gathering capabilities. In that regard,
we hope that the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations will come up with recommendations
that will enable the Organization to tackle current
challenges such as the ones I have just mentioned,
which while they may not threaten certain countries,
pose a threat to the whole world.

The protection of civilians is discussed in an
idealistic way within the framework of peacekeeping
operations, which is the main thrust of their action.
However, the guiding principles for the forces on
the ground do not cover the protection of civilians
in a systematic and comprehensive way. Very often,
the guidelines have been based on the protection of
military forces more than on the protection of civilians.
That is understandable. However, there is a gap that
needs to be considered in defining the mandates for
peacekeeping operations so as to guarantee a balance
between the ability to protect civilians and to protect
the mandate of the mission itself with respect to the use
of force to defend the mandate and to address emerging
challenges.

There can be no doubt that peacekeeping operations
play an important role in the protection of civilians.
However, because they do so in a temporary way, a
permanent solution with respect to the protection of
civilians lies first and foremost with the host State.
That requires work to be carried out through two
processes. The first includes security sector reform,
strengthening the rule of law and greater responsibilty
for violations of human rights law and international law.
The second process must also guarantee responsibilty
and national ownership of host States in order to
create a solid foundation for the protection of civilians
and to guarantee that it is lasting in nature. Indeed,
the protection of civilians must take into account
the strategic and tactical aspects of peacekeeping
operations.

That leads directly to the other elements that impact

peacekeeping operations, namely, the constraints
imposed by troop-contributing countries, whether they
be military or police contingents, on the operations
in which they play an active part. Those troops often
obey the orders of their national hierarchies rather than
heeding the commanders of the operation itself, which
impacts the way orders are followed and executed.
Therefore, it is vital to take into account the legal
responsibility of the United Nations. It is essential to
underscore the need to put in writing the cooperation
between United Nations and troop-contributing
countries to develop and strengthen the guiding
principles of the operational mechanisms of armies and
police to guarantee planning and permanent contacts
between them, by clearly defining the hierarchies and
the lines of command and control in peacekeeping
operations.

By way of conclusion, we would like to reiterate
that Jordan, as an active contributor to 10 of the 16
peacekeeping operations throughout the world, will
continue to support the efforts of the international
community and the United Nations to develop a
clear vision that offers viable solutions to address
contemporary challenges and that enables us to be
as prepared as possible to respond with wisdom and
flexibility so as to effectively and firmly manage both
the current and future challenges facing peacekeeping
operations.

