Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
thank the Japanese presidency for convening today's
open debate. We are grateful to Japan for its
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group of the
Council on this topic. We also wish to say a special
word of thanks to the group of five small States for
their important contributions to the subject we are
discussing today.

We believe that any effort to improve the working
methods of the Council must focus on two goals:
enhancing transparency and strengthening interaction
between the Council and the United Nations
membership at large. The Council must also aim at
maximum transparency vis-a-vis the broader public, in
particular through its cooperation with the media.

In recent years, we have seen some improvement
in the realization of these aims. The Council has
increased the number of its open debates and briefings.
The consultation process which the Council has
established with the troop- and police-contributing
countries before deciding on the mandate of a mission
or its renewal is another step in the right direction. In
some instances, so-called informal interactive
dialogues have provided the Security Council and
interested countries with a useful framework for a
direct informal exchange on issues of concern to the
Council. This is a path that we should explore further.

I should also like to commend the initiative of
Uganda to organize an informal meeting with Member
States on the occasion of the presentation of the most
recent annual report of the Council to the General
Assembly. We hope that this practice will be continued.

At the same time, there are other areas in which
we still see substantial potential for improving the
Council's working methods. One example is the
cooperation between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). It has been our experience that
chairpersons of country-specific configurations of the
PBC contribute in a very useful manner to the public
meetings of the Council on the country situations they
deal with. At the same time, it has also been very
helpful to listen to their additional comments during
subsequent Council consultations, but so far, that has
of course been possible only when the chairperson in
question also happens to represent a Council member.
We believe that it would be beneficial for the Council
to have the chairs of all country-specific configurations
of the PBC - I repeat, all country-specific
configurations of the PBC - participate in the relevant
consultations of the Council independently of whether
they represent Council members or not.

One important way to improve interaction
between the Council and whole groups of the
membership is an intensified cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. The Security Council
debated this subject under the presidency of China (see S/PV.6257) and agreed that an increasing interaction of
this kind contributes to the coherent and effective
implementation of the Council's resolutions. That is
certainly true for cooperation between the Council and
the European Union, which has a strong interest in
contributing to the work of the Council in many areas
of mutual concern, and even more so since the entry
into force of the Lisbon Treaty.
Austria has made a special effort to contribute
towards increased transparency and interaction in the
subsidiary Council bodies that it has honour to chair. In
the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, Austria is maintaining close dialogue with
the specially affected countries and the host countries
of the Tribunals. We also organized an Arria Formula
meeting on residual issues of the Tribunals, open to all
United Nations Member States. We introduced regular
biannual briefings, we issued an annual summary of
the activities of the Group and, for the first time ever, a
chapter on the Working Group was included in the
latest annual report of the Security Council (A/64/2).

Furthermore, I would like to highlight some
developments in the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, which Austria also chairs.
Resolution 1904 (2009) of December 2009
substantially improves the procedures under the 1267
sanctions regime in terms of due process. For the first
time ever, individuals and entities seeking de-listing
will have the chance to present their cases to an
independent and impartial ombudsperson to be
appointed by the Secretary-General. It also directs the
ombudsperson to forward to petitioners all information
about the negative decision provided by the
Committee, including explanatory comments. Security
Council resolution 1904 (2009) represents a significant
step forward in improving the fairness and
transparency of the 1267 sanctions regime, thus
enhancing both its effectiveness and its legitimacy.
This is an area which has been discussed quite often in
recent debates on today's subject. Still, much depends
on the practical implementation of that resolution,
especially on the appointment of an eminent
ombudsperson in the near future.

Adding to something my Turkish colleague said,
let me say that transparency and interaction are
constant challenges in the relations not only between
the Council and the wider membership but at times
also within the Council itself. With regard to some
issues on the agenda of the Council, its decisions are
prepared within various special formats. We are well
aware of the political and practical reasons for which
these formats have developed, but experience also
shows how important inclusiveness and transparency
can be for achieving and preserving the unity of the
Council.
8

The Council's working methods have developed
over the years, yet they will remain a work in progress.
As the work of the Security Council adapts to Changed
circumstances, so should the Council's working
methods. Involvement of the wider membership will
remain key in order to serve the interests of the entire
world Organization.

