Mr. Terzi (Italy): Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate you personally and thank the Honourable
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico, Ms. Patricia
Espinosa Cantallano, for her initiative and for that of
the Mexican presidency of the Security Council to
convene this open debate on children and armed
conflicts and for chairing the Security Council's
meeting today. I would also like to express my sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy
and Ms. Veneman for their important statements today.

In taking the floor, I would like to subscribe to
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Czech Republic in his capacity as the Presidency of the
European Union.
The protection of children's rights during armed
conflicts is one of Italy's top national priorities, as we
indicated when we were elected to the Human Rights
Council in 2007. During our 2007-2008 term on the
Security Council, this same commitment inspired us to
make an active contribution, proposing the insertion of
child-protection provisions into United Nations
mission mandates from Cote d'Ivoire to the Sudan and
Afghanistan. We are glad that this proposal has now
become standard practice, whenever a mandate is
established or renewed by the Security Council.

I wish to pay tribute to Ambassador Ripert, the
outgoing Chair of the Security Council Working
Group, for the leadership and contribution that France
has provided in pushing forward the United Nations
agenda for children in armed conflicts. Let me also
congratulate Ambassador Heller for taking over this
task.

We have been moved by the testimony of Grace
Akallo in the Council today. She is an example of
resilience, and the account she made of the heroism of
Sister Rachele witnesses to the fact that individual
actions and strongly felt values can make a difference.

Italy welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/ 158) and endorses its
recommendations. In particular, we support the
Secretary-General's proposal to extend the trigger for
the Council's action to include sexual violence. The
Security Council's adoption of resolution 1820 (2008),
which we co-sponsored, acknowledges that, today,
sexual violence is one of the primary threats to
children in situations of armed conflict.

Placing this violation among the criteria for
inclusion in the reports of the Secretary-General would
be another major step forward in the Council's action
against this appalling crime and a signal that the
Council is listening to the voices of children who have
been its victims.

We also share the report's emphasis on action
plans, whose significant results have been the release
and reintegration of child soldiers in countries where
parties to conflicts have agreed to detailed and time-
bound commitments.

The 83 child-protection advisers on United
Nations missions perform essential duties. As a main
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
my country is ready to actively support United Nations
action to strengthen the training of United Nations
mission personnel in this area, and welcomes the
efforts in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to draft common guidelines. In the development of
strategies for the protection of children, their
participation is another priority. We must listen to their
voices. To further encourage child participation and
protection, my Government has organized - together
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, UNICEF, and Save the Children -
a high-level event in Rome in late June this year. The
participants will include several former child soldiers
and youth advocates from the Network of Young
People Affected by War.

Impunity remains a major issue, and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) has a key role to
play. We recall that the very first arrest warrant the
Court issued concerned the recruitment of child
soldiers. The Security Council and its Working Group
should look into ways to develop practical cooperation
with the ICC in fighting impunity. The first step is for
the Security Council to impose targeted measures on
offenders, as contemplated by resolution 1612 (2005).

Given the role of the United Nations in
addressing the plight of children in armed conflict, we
believe there is an urgent need for the Security Council
to start working on a new resolution that would allow
us to incorporate the lessons learned and the
developments ensuing from the approval of resolution
1612 (2005).

