Mr. Vrailas: I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving the floor to the European Union (EU). We are
honoured to participate in this important meeting of the
Security Council under your leadership, Sir.

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Iceland;
the countries of the Stabilisation and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Armenia align themselves with this
statement.

As several speakers before me have stressed, the
general elections in 2012 will constitute an important
milestone for Timor-Leste, providing further evidence
that the country is firmly set on its path to a
consolidated democracy.

Let me start by congratulating Foreign Minister
Zacarias Albano da Costa with the progress described
in the excellent report of the Secretary-General before
us (S/2011/64l). We commend his Government's
leadership and strong political commitment to fostering
peace, unity and development.

I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq for the quality and
insightfulness of her briefing. The European Union
commends her team's efforts in ensuring good donor
coordination and in keeping development partners
briefed and consulted on the joint transition plan.

The preparations of the 2012 elections are
progressing in a positive manner. The constructive and
responsible way in which political leaders and civil
society have been interacting under the so-called
Maubisse initiative is particularly encouraging and
indicative of the broad commitment within Timor-
Leste society to democracy and dialogue.

Beyond its ongoing assistance in the preparations
of the elections, the European Union is currently
examining an invitation by the Government of Timor-
Leste to send an election observation mission. I can
assure the Council that we are considering this request
with a friendly eye. EU election observation missions
can be of tremendous value, as the missions in 2002
and 2007 have shown.

The maintenance of public security and the
progress made towards strengthening the security
institutions, as noted in the report of the Secretary-
General, are welcome developments. The successful
handover of primary policing responsibilities to Timor-
Leste's national police without a negative impact on
the crime situation is particularly noteworthy. While
commending this progress, we would like to stress that
the security forces need to live up to the highest
standards of professionalism and integrity. In this
regard, we recognize the continued importance of a
comprehensive review and reform of the entire security
sector.

While recognizing the existence of potential
security challenges, we are confident that the election
process will be free and fair and held in a peaceful
context. We welcome the continued willingness of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) to provide operational support to the national
police during this period, if required and requested by
the Timorese authorities.

Throughout 2011, considerable progress has been
made in the transition process. The joint transition
plan, which places capacity-building at its core, is very
welcome in this regard. The strengthening of
institutional and human capacities is of great
importance to a successful transition process. These
activities are therefore also at the heart of the EU
assistance programme.

Continued discussion of the architecture of the
future United Nations presence, an important element
of a sustainable transition, will be necessary. In this
regard, the Timorese authorities should be decisive in
the definition of the modality of a United Nations
presence in the country after UNMIT.

Timor-Leste's constructive participation in the
Human Rights Council's Universal Periodic Review
deserves special mention. The efforts of both the
Government and non-governmental organizations are
to be praised.

Timor-Leste has also made further progress
towards improving accountability for past human rights
violations. We firmly believe, however, that
reconciliation remains an important precondition for
long-term stability. The National Parliament is strongly
encouraged to resume discussions on the two draft laws
on a memorial institute and reparations at the earliest
possible date, as well as on other steps to implement
the recommendations of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.

Timor-Leste has seen accelerated progress in
many aspects of its economic and social development.
At the same time, the country still faces challenges in
the process of fully realizing its potential for equitable
and sustainable development. In that regard, we
welcome the national strategic development plan 2011-
2030, as presented by the Government of Timor-Leste
in July 2011. The plan represents a very valuable
framework that provides guidance for coordinating and
channelling our support, thus further improving aid
effectiveness. We are highly committed to supporting
the implementation of this plan in a spirit of
partnership, mutual trust and accountability, including
the increased use of reliable country systems.

The recently announced creation of an
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
working group for Timorese membership in ASEAN is
a significant step towards developing Timor-Leste's
closer economic, political and people-to-people ties
with South-East Asia.

Allow me to end by reiterating that we have stood
firmly by Timor-Leste's side in the past and will
continue to do so in future. We look forward to the
2012 deliverables: successful elections and further
progress in the transition process.

