I would like to start by thanking Special Representative Lyons and Ambassador Djani, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), for their briefings. I would also like to extend a warm welcome to Ms. Zadran and to thank her for her powerful statement and clear call for a peaceful future for the youth of Afghanistan. On 12 September, the Afghan people took a significant step on the road to peace, with the start of the Afghanistan peace negotiations in Doha. We welcome the commitment the two negotiating teams have shown so far, culminating in their agreement, on 2 December, on the rules and procedures for the talks. It is vital that the negotiations resume swiftly on 5 January. I would like to emphasize three points today. First, we must be prepared for a long and challenging process ahead. When the talks resume on 5 January, the parties will start negotiating on substance for the first time. In many cases, the distance between the two sides' positions may seem unbridgeable. There will be setbacks before there are breakthroughs. That is normal and probably necessary. A successful outcome will require a long, challenging process of building trust, finding common ground and compromising. International partners will also need to show commitment and patience in the process. The United Kingdom, for its part, stands ready to offer support. Secondly, even if a final settlement takes time, Afghans should start to see the tangible benefits now. Yet, as we have heard many times today, appalling levels of violence continue to blight the lives of Afghans. And let us be clear - the Taliban is responsible for the majority of that violence, which not only results in loss of life but also undermines confidence in the negotiations. The Taliban claim to want a part in Afghanistan's future and the international community, and demand relief from United Nations sanctions. That requires substantive progress in peace negotiations, an end to violence and a complete and permanent break from terrorism, including from Al-Qaida. Thirdly, the outcome of the Afghanistan peace negotiations is for Afghans themselves to decide. But the parties, and especially the Taliban, must recognize that Afghanistan is not the place it was 20 years ago. To be sustainable, a peaceful settlement will need to be inclusive and preserve the rights and freedoms of all Afghans, including women and minorities. To maintain international support, the new Afghanistan will need to adhere to its treaty obligations, including those concerning human rights. And to reach a settlement that achieves those ends, the process will need to be inclusive and broad. For my part, I look forward to supporting women's participation in the process in my new role co-chairing the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan alongside Ambassador Raz. In Geneva last month, the international community reaffirmed its support to Afghanistan. The United Kingdom pledged up to $207 million in development assistance for 2021. The Afghan Government, for its part, renewed its commitments, as set out in the new Afghanistan Partnership Framework. Together, the commitments made last month can help strengthen Afghan institutions and the Government's ability to support its citizens - tasks that are vital even as peace talks unfold. Today Afghanistan stands a step closer to being at peace with itself and its neighbours, being free from conflict and terrorism, and being able to protect the rights and freedoms of all Afghans. We should redouble our collective efforts to make that a reality.
