Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): We welcome and
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and his
clear recommendations (S/2016/722, annex) for the
protection of civilians and of health-care workers and
facilities in armed conflicts and for his compelling
call on the parties to conflicts to strictly uphold and
implement them.

We also thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of Medecins
Sans Frontieres, for their very enlightened briefings
this morning and for bringing here to the Council the
real situations that persist in a number of parts of our
common globe, to which we must pay special attention.

Angola is deeply concerned by the prevalence of
attacks on health-care workers and medical facilities
in conflict zones, with a devastating impact on people
in need of health care and humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian access remains a key challenge as
the parties to conflicts deliberately obstruct the
delivery of assistance to civilians trapped in conflict
zones. Attacks against humanitarian and health-care
workers and facilities, their means of transport and
equipment; the arbitrary denial of humanitarian access;
bureaucratic restrictions; interference in the delivery
of assistance; and depriving civilians of their means
of survival are flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law set down in the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, its Additional Protocols of 1977
and 2005, as well as the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel and its
Optional Protocol. Moreover, such acts of violence
exacerbate the conflicts and undermine the Security
Council's efforts, as mandated by the United Nations
charter. South Sudan, Afghanistan, Syria and Yemen
are some of the instances where vital humanitarian
supplies are looted, damaged or destroyed, prolonging
the population's suffering and the conflicts themselves.

Regrettably, and despite the robust normative
frameworks set out in several resolutions and presidential
statements issued by the Security Council, especially
the unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016) on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, we continue
to witness constant violations of these principles.
Angola condemns all attacks against humanitarian
and health-care personnel and facilities, and urges the
parties to conflicts to fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law. We repudiate the prevailing impunity for
violations and abuses committed against medical and
humanitarian personnel. Parties to conflicts bear the
primary responsibility for meeting the basic needs of
the civilians under their control, and we agree with
the Secretary-General's assessment that humanitarian
organizations must be able to engage systematically
with all parties to conflicts in order to secure and
maintain humanitarian access and alleviate the human
suffering of those trapped in conflict.

Resolution 2286 (2016) conveyed a strong signal
on the rejection of such violations of international
humanitarian law. The Secretary-General's
recommendations are an extremely important tool to put
an end to that scourge. We call for their implementation
by all relevant actors. The Council cannot continue to
meet and simply listen to the appeals and descriptions of
the prevailing situations in different parts of the world,

especially when called to briefings by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Medecins Sans
Frontieres. We must act, and the time for action is now.
It is even late - we must act.

