Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for the submission, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 940 (1994), of his report dated 17 January 1995
on the situation in Haiti.

The events that have taken place in Haiti were of great
concern to the Government of Honduras, since the military
coup that overthrew the legitimately elected President of
that country set a serious precedent detrimental to
democracy in the Caribbean and Central American region
in particular, and in the Latin American region in general;
and because, furthermore, the crisis deepened as the
military regime refused to relinquish power, flouting all
efforts by the international community to restore order
and democracy in Haiti. Non-compliance by the de facto
Government with the Governors Island Agreements and
the New York Pact, as well as its flagrant defiance of the
United Nations and the Organization of American States
(OAS) were having a negative impact on the credibility
of those organizations and the confidence placed in them,
thereby reinforcing an impression of regional instability.

The case of Haiti proved to be an exception in all its
forms. In our view, while the crisis in that country was of
an internal nature and did not constitute a threat to
international peace and security, at the same time the
crisis had serious political and legal implications for
democracy.

Serious violations of human rights and the mass
exodus of a considerable portion of the Haitian population
for political or economic reasons called for prompt and
resolute action on the part of the international community,
the United Nations and the Organization of American
States.

Honduras, following its humanitarian tradition, and
faced with the serious situation resulting from the flight
of hundreds of persons from Haiti in the quest for safety
in third countries, on two occasions welcomed Haitian
nationals onto its soil as refugees.

The measures adopted by the United Nations in
cooperation with the OAS offered during their first stage
a viable opportunity for resolving the Haitian crisis.
Nevertheless, it was only by means of concrete action on
the part of this Council and the international community
that it was possible to reverse the situation and to offer
Haiti an opportunity for democracy to be realized in that
country, and to become the engine of its future economic
and social development.

My Government is of the View that force should be
used as a last resort in maintaining international peace
and security. It also believes that this type of decision
should be adopted by the Security Council in any event
with the support of all its members, that is to say, in a
collegial manner. The concept of a multinational force
under the leadership and control of one country should
not be regarded as an alternative to the mechanisms that
are established in the United Nations Charter for the

 

maintenance of international peace and security, especially
at this time, when we have very developed concepts and
instruments, such as preventive diplomacy, peace-building
and peace-keeping.

Similarly, we recognize the importance of joint
activities undertaken by the United Nations, the
Organization of American States and the Multinational
Force currently deployed in Haiti, in particular the
commitment of the United Nations Secretariat to work
together with the OAS in assisting Haiti in the fields of
national reconciliation, political stability and social and
economic reconstruction.

Moreover, my delegation welcomes the statement by
the Multinational Force Command and the recommendation
made by the States participating in that Force in which they
affirm, respectively, that a stable and secure environment
exists in Haiti. This enables the Council to determine that
it is appropriate for the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH) to begin to assume its full functions.

The Secretary-General also refers to the importance of
the achievements of the advance team which is responsible
for coordinating the transition from the Multinational Force
to UNMIH and which is planning the transfer functions on
the ground. Our delegation recognizes the need to increase
the size of the technical team of experts on administration
and logistics that is to cooperate with the advance team.

As to consultations with Governments with a view to
their contributing to the military and civilian aspects of
UNMIH, my delegation wishes to report that Honduras will
contribute a contingent of 120 military personnel and two
transport units, and that the necessary contacts have been
made with the Secretariat to expedite deployment, which
our information indicates should be completed early in
March this year.

The Secretary-General notes in his report that
resolution 940 (1994) mandates UNMIH to assist the
Haitian authorities in establishing an environment conducive
to the organization of free and fair elections. We hope that
the Secretariat has begun the relevant consultations with the
Organization of American States (OAS) to work on these
tasks in a coordinated way and that it will be ready to assist
as soon as necessary.

My delegation acknowledges the efforts of the
multinational force to deploy in remote areas of Haiti, and
its activities to maintain calm in the country. We stress the
importance of training an interim security or police force
made up of Haitians in order to guarantee a secure and
stable climate before the transitional period. It is
important to note that, while the number of students and
graduates has increased considerably, the interim force
must be expanded considerably and training courses must
be intensified so that the force is commensurate with the
size of the country and its population, and, above all, so
that it measures up to the delicate task before it.

We therefore unreservedly support the draft
resolution before the Council, extending the mandate of
UNMIH for a further period of six months and
authorizing the deployment of the United Nations Mission
in Haiti.

In our View, Haiti could soon provide the third
example - after Central America and Mozambique - of
the Organization's intervening through a peace-keeping
operation under Council resolutions to make progress
from conflict to peace and from peace to a stable and
lasting democracy. But the current efforts of the
international community at large, and of the Security
Council in particular, to maintain democracy and the rule
of law in Haiti can have no long-term success if the grave
socio-economic situation there persists. In his report, the
Secretary-General highlights the generous pledges made
to help Haiti solve its serious economic problems.
Honduras fully shares his concerns in this regard.
Millions of Haitians have placed their hopes in this
exercise. The United Nations must not let them down. My
country is committed to this cause, and will contribute to
it within its modest means.

