The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members to the
following documents: photocopies of a letter dated 10
October 2003 from Afghanistan, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
8/2003/986; and 8/2003/970, letter dated 7 October
2003 from the Secretary-General. Members of the
Council also have before them document 5/2003/984,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in
the course of the Council's prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Angola, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Guinea, Mexico, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1510 (2003).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


