Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): Your presence, Mr. President, which we warmly
welcome, attests to the importance that your country,
Canada, attaches to the protection and promotion of human
rights, particularly the protection of civilians in armed
conflict - the issue being addressed at our meeting today.
In this connection, we would like to express our gratitude
to you and to your delegation for having organized this
debate.

I am certain that the very good statements just
delivered by Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), by Ms.
Carol Bellamy, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), and by Mr. Olara
Otunnu, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, will add a great deal to
the deliberations of the Council on the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

It is intolerable that civilians - especially women,
children, the elderly and the personnel of humanitarian
agencies - are being targeted wherever armed conflicts
erupt, in disregard of international rules that prohibit such
practices. In this context, the Security Council must ensure
that the rules relative to the protection of civilians in times
of war are scrupulously respected. The Council can also
request United Nations agencies dealing with humanitarian
assistance to develop programmes to promote awareness of
international humanitarian law. In this regard, we would
like to thank the International Committee of the Red
Cross for its efforts.

For our part, the Security Council should first and
foremost work to prevent conflicts, for an ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of cure. On 13 April 1998,
the Secretary-General presented a report to the Security
Council on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/318). The Council considered the
recommendations outlined in that report for the
maintenance of peace and the protection of civilians. It is
now up to the Council to translate those provisions into
concrete actions that can contribute to a restoration of
peace and security wherever they are being seriously
threatened.

To that end, the weight of the international
community should be brought to bear upon the parties to
conflicts in order to lead them to resolve their disputes by
peaceful means. Emphasis should therefore be placed on
actions to combat illicit arms flows, especially of small-
calibre arms, and on the observance of arms embargoes,
as called for in Africa by Security Council resolution
1196 (1998).

It is often not ideas that are lacking in finding
solutions to conflicts. What is most lacking is political
will.

