Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I regret the fact that I must take the floor
today, on Good Friday. In Arabic, Good Friday is
called "Sad Friday", and it is a sad day for more than
one reason: many Palestinians have been killed. The
President of the Palestinian Authority has been
attacked in his very headquarters; the compound has
been destroyed.

The Security Council's immediate response to the
request of the of the Arab Group - the convening of
an emergency Council meeting to discuss the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question - bears witness to a concern over and a
readiness to confront the acts of killing and destruction
perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian people. We
hope that this meeting will give the Council a further
opportunity to examine the wounds of the Palestinian
people, because that people continues to spill its blood,
as it has for more than 50 years. This problem did not
crop up yesterday or today. The current suffering is the
result of Israeli occupation and reflects only part ofthe
general abuse perpetrated on the Palestinians by the
State of Israel and its denial of their rights. We are not
meeting to discuss the first act of aggression - it is
another link in a long chain of terrorist practices
carried out by Israel against the Palestinian people.

If the Council wishes to condemn terrorism, it
must also condemn Israeli terrorism. That terrorism is
the occupation of Palestinian land and repression ofthe
Palestinians. Any debate in the Council on
developments in the area that fails to examine the
causes of the Middle East conflict - and I am
referring to the Israeli policy of occupation, repression
and assassination - would only encourage Mr.
Sharon's terrorism. He would only see another
opportunity to gain time and attack the Palestinian
people in order to stifle its aspirations for freedom and
independence, which are the same as those of any other
occupied people before their liberation.

Those who refer to Sharon's willingness to find
peace are speaking of a mirage or illusion. He has
never tried to conceal his true intentions and policies,
which are as clear as the nose on his face. Sharon has
no intention of withdrawing from the occupied
territory. He intends to continue colonizing the area,
constructing settlements, confiscating Palestinian land
and chasing the Palestinian people away from its land.
As long as Sharon is able to do these things, he will
persevere.

Sharon is the person who ordered the massacres
in Sabra and Shatila and then led a provocative visit to
Al-Haram al-Sharif. In addition, it was Sharon who,
unable to kill the leadership of the Palestinians,
yesterday ordered the attack on the Palestinian
Authority and on the very person who had led the
peace negotiations. Sharon has called for either
Arafat's arrest or his death. In an interview yesterday,
Arafat declared that if Sharon wanted to kill him, he
was ready to be a martyr. Therefore, now Arafat
himself is backed into a corner * and even he will be a
martyr.

Today Sharon is conducting a policy of
destruction and assassination - a policy of destroying
Palestinian cities, villages and refugee camps. This is
what we see on television and read about it in the press.
To date, Sharon has killed 1,300 innocent Palestinians.
This constitutes genocide against the Palestinian
people.

Yesterday, Sharon declared that Arafat was an
enemy. What does "enemy" mean under international
law? It means a person whom one can kill. These acts
require the Council to condemn them, just as it has
condemned the acts of other war criminals in other
countries. The acts that Sharon has committed send a
very unambiguous message and are a clear denial of
the historic, enlightened resolutions adopted by Arab
leaders at the Arab Summit in Beirut. Those resolutions
are hardly one day old.
I believe there is a direct link between what has
happened today, on Good Friday i this "Sad
Friday"- and the resolutions that the Arab Summit
adopted and presented to the world that they might
serve to achieve lasting, comprehensive peace on the
basis of international legality and Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978).
Those resolutions elicited great international support
- and this is Israel's response to the Arab initiative.

Now we must try to learn from and understand
the true meaning and implications of these massacres
of the Palestinian people. That people is being attacked
by the Israeli army with the most sophisticated tanks
available and by the Israeli air force and artillery; that
army has not hesitated to destroy anything - old men,
women, children, houses, farmland - in order to
obliterate any trace of life.

Israeli terrorism against the Palestinian people is
the most comprehensive form of terrorism we know.
Arabs on the whole condemn terrorism. This
unprecedented level of terrorism is the bloodiest type
there is, and we deem it as our main task to ask the
Council immediately to appeal for an end to these acts
ofIsraeli barbarism if we truly want peace in the area.

The presence of tanks and cannons in Palestinian
towns and villages is totally unjustifiable. It is
therefore incumbent upon the Council to order Israel
immediately and unconditionally to withdraw from
these towns and villages.

The only guarantee of peace in the Middle East is
the securing of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people. Anyone who deems sound and rational the
Israeli logic of achieving peace before security is
wrong, because peace does not bring security; the
contrary is true. When peace prevails, everyone feels
secure, but occupation cannot give rise to peace.

The Syrian delegation reiterates the need for the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibility under
the Charter and to seize this opportunity to act, on the
basis of the historic decisions and resolutions adopted
by the Arab Summit, in order to preserve what remains
of its prestige in the eyes of the world and of the Arab
people in particular.

The very least that the Council can do is adopt a
direct condemnation of Israeli policy and of its
repressive measures, and call on Israel immediately to
put an end to this policy, so that the international call
for ending the occupation can be heeded and the
established rights of the Palestinian people can be
recognized.

Resolutions that do not make a clear distinction
between the aggressor and the victim and that tolerate
and justify the actions of the aggressor can lead only to
greater devastation and suffering. This is the message
we must all understand deeply. We must remind Israel
that it must respect international humanitarian law, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention, in view of
the attacks that have been perpetrated since yesterday.
Indeed, victims are dying in the streets today.
Ambulances are not allowed to help them or take them
to hospitals.

In conclusion, the Council must demonstrate a
genuine and sincere will to discharge its role and
responsibility, in particular as regards Israel's
occupation of Palestinian land, and compel Israel to
withdraw from Palestinian and Syrian land, as well as
from what remains of Lebanese territory since 4 June
1967.

We must not cooperate with Israeli policies that
are hostile and destructive to peace.

