Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this open debate. We also highly appreciate
the presence of the Secretary-General and thank him
for his tireless efforts towards dialogue between the
Palestinians and the Israelis. Chile promotes peace
between both peoples and the two-State solution. We
therefore recognized the State of Palestine in 2011,
including for the sake of supporting negotiations.

Under the framework of the recent conflict in Gaza,
my country repeatedly condemned the rocket launches
by Hamas and the disproportionate use of force by
Israel in densely populated areas leading to the loss of
life of hundreds of innocent civilians. That is why my
country called for consultations with the Ambassador
of Israel during the conflict and contributed financially
through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We have also
continued participating in the bilateral cooperation
programme of the Latin American region.

Chile welcomes the role of mediator played by
Egypt, as well as the ceasefire agreed on 26 August in
Cairo. However, as has been mentioned, the ceasefire
cannot mean a return to the status quo ante, which is
unacceptable and a fertile breeding ground for violence.
The international community must support the urgent
restart of negotiations. In addition, the parties have the
responsibility to move towards a mutual understanding
and to refrain from taking decisions that undermine
dialogue. In that vein, threats by Hamas and other
radical groups against the Israeli civilian population
must come to a halt. Israel must put a stop to building
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory and lift
the blockade imposed on Gaza.

The Charter of the United Nations is clear in the
functions it assigns to the Security Council. It is our
task to speak out on this issue and thus isolate those
who advocate for extremist positions. The Quartet also
has a role to play in resolving the conflict, as we have
said in the past. Chile wishes for peace for both peoples.
In that spirit, my country is organizing an international
meeting with prominent Israeli and Palestinian figures
to advance dialogue and understanding, which will take
place in November in our capital.

With respect to the problems affecting Lebanon
and the side effects resulting from the Syrian conflict,
we agree with the remarks made by the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme at
the latest meeting of the International Support Group
of Lebanon. It is not only a humanitarian crisis, but a
crisis of development and stability. Lebanese political
leaders must return to dialogue with a focus on national
unity. It is crucial to follow the principle of dissociation
established in the Baabda Declaration and for the
Lebanese militia, including those with political aims,
to refrain from taking part in the Syrian conflict. There
will be no peace in Lebanon as long as there is conflict
in Syria.

We deplore the fact that in this latest conflict
there is a continued violence from all actors against
the civilian population. We express our concern at its
effects on women, which has taken the form of sexual
violence and summary executions, as well as the
ongoing aggression against children, including their
recruitment as soldiers.

We are alarmed by the advance of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and its offensive against the city
of Kobani, which has displaced thousands of people.
We also add our concern to that expressed by the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs on
the situation of those people who continue to be trapped
in Kobani without having access to humanitarian
assistance.

Finally, we encourage the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy for Syria's continued efforts to mediate
between Syrian and regional actors to break the
stalemate and find a political way out. Despite the
difficulties before us, we must persevere, for that is the
only way of putting an end to the tragic situation in the
region.

