The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom.

For the United Kingdom, as for my Belgian
colleague and others who have spoken in this debate,
climate change is transforming the way that we think
about security. Over the last couple of years, the threat
we face has grown larger in scale and sharper in
outline. Recent scientific evidence has reinforced and,
in some cases, exceeded our worst fears. It has given
us a picture of the physical impacts on our world that
we can expect as our climate changes; and those
impacts go far beyond the environmental. Their
consequences reach to the very heart of the security
agenda. Consequences of flooding, disease and
famine - and, from that, migration on an
unprecedented scale. The consequences of drought and
crop failure - and, from that, intensified competition
for food, water and energy. The consequences of
economic disruption on the scale predicted in the Stern
report are not seen since the end of the Second World
War.

Charged as we are with the maintenance of
international peace and security, this Council can make
a unique contribution to the building of a shared
understanding of what an unstable climate will mean
for our individual and collective security. We can, and I
believe we must, because this Council deals day in and
day out with those very kinds of tensions and conflicts
that an unstable climate will make yet more frequent
and even more dangerous. As a group of the most
respected retired American admirals and generals said
in a report published just yesterday, climate change is a
threat-multiplier for instability.

Listening to the debate, I am struck by the
widespread recognition that there are significant links
clearly already being experienced by some countries
between the impacts to be expected from climate
change and the increased risks of conflict and
insecurity within and between States. The United
Kingdom fully agrees that full account should be taken
of climate risks as we address the root causes of
conflict. And, like other Council members, I very much
welcome the Secretary-General's offer to assist us in
such work.

The fact that so many non-members of the
Security Council have chosen to speak today is a
reflection of the bitter truth that instability will often
be visited first and hardest on the already most
vulnerable. President Museveni of Uganda, whose
economy depends on hydropower from a reservoir that
is already depleted by drought, has called climate
change an act of aggression by the rich against the
poor. He is one of the first leaders to see this problem
in security terms. He will not be the last.

Certainly for the United Kingdom, climate
change is a security issue, but it is not a matter of
narrow national security. It has a new dimension. It is
about our collective security in a fragile and
increasingly interdependent world.

The United Kingdom proposed this debate during
our presidency, because we felt that by facing up to the
implications of climate change for that collective
security, the world will take wiser decisions as we
begin to build a low-carbon global economy - not at
the cost of development - but to enable us to build a
new kind of, indeed, sustainable development, as the
representative of Qatar sought.

If our shared endeavour succeeds, maybe we can
achieve this. Of course, as a number of colleagues have
said, there are other organs of the United Nations that
have particular responsibilities in respect of climate
change, but this is not an either/or. The United
Kingdom would welcome substantial debates in the
General Assembly. Indeed, I made this issue a
particular feature of the speech I made to the General
Assembly last September. Also, we would welcome
debates in the Economic and Social Council. I am well
aware, as has been mentioned, that the meeting of the
Commission on Sustainable Development this year will
focus on energy. I look forward to the output of those
discussions.

I think this debate has already shown that this is
an issue not just of grave concern, but also very much
of common concern, and so I judge that we need that

shared endeavour to which I referred a moment ago. If
it succeeds, we will all enjoy better prospects for
security. Climate change is a threat that can bring us
together if we have the wisdom to prevent it from
driving us apart.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

On behalf of the Security Council, I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany. I extend a warm
welcome to Her Excellency Heidemarie Wieczorek-
Zeul, the Federal Minister for Economic Cooperation
and Development.

