Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): Thank you for expressing,
on our behalf, the Council's profound regret and sorrow at
the passing of His Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco.

My delegation is grateful to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for her briefing. We are glad
that Mrs. Ogata concentrated her briefing mainly on
problems in Africa. While it is perhaps inevitable, as
Mrs. Ogata herself has suggested, that the situation in and
around Kosovo, as a European crisis, should preoccupy its
European neighbours, the Netherlands, too, is concerned
that the Kosovo crisis should not detract attention from the
dramatic problems besetting Africa. There are some
worrying indications not only that available funds are
decreasing, but also that there are problems with the
deployment of personnel, both by the United Nations and
by non-governmental organizations. Today's briefing
reassured us that for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Africa indeed is not
a lesser priority. Nor is it for the Netherlands. When
allocating funds, we will do our utmost to maintain a
balance, for example, by making available extra
contributions for Angola to the World Food Programme and
UNHCR.

A consistent approach is required when addressing
post-conflict situations. Universal standards have to be
applied. For instance, in the case of Sierra Leone the
human rights Violations call for measures commensurate
with their massive scale. In that context, the Netherlands
is of the View that the blanket amnesty in Sierra Leone,
as provided for in the Lorne peace treaty, should be
reconsidered. There is ample proof, and it is now widely
accepted, that holding the perpetrators of human rights
violations accountable for their crimes actually contributes
to reconciliation and stability in a country. My first
question of Mrs. Ogata would be whether she would
agree that maintaining the principle of accountability may
also have a positive impact on the voluntary return
programmes for refugees.

Concerning the situation in Rwanda, the
Netherlands' position has been for some time that
everywhere, except in the north-west of that country, the
relief phase has ended. The High Commissioner has
indicated, quite rightly, that there is still a wide gap
between relief and development. The Netherlands calls on
the relevant members of the United Nations family,
including the Bretton Woods institutions, to work closely
together to develop a coherent, common strategy for
Rwanda. The results of the discussions in the Brookings
process need urgent implementation in that country.

The Netherlands is especially concerned about the
fate of displaced children, including child soldiers, and
welcomes cooperation between UNHCR and the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). In the view of the
High Commissioner, can these two organizations together,
in cooperation and with the Special Representative for
Children in Armed Conflict, muster the required expertise
to rehabilitate these child soldiers?

The Netherlands is concerned also about the
situation of internally displaced persons in Angola, who
are not - or who are insufficiently - accessible for
humanitarian organizations, as a consequence of the hold
of UNITA on provincial capitals. Also, assistance is
obstructed by attacks on relief convoys and targeted
attacks against relief workers. It is essential that the
Government of Angola and UNITA both cooperate with
UNHCR in the delivery of emergency relief assistance to
all areas.

Many humanitarian problems have an international
peace and security dimension. In his 1998 report on the
causes of conflict in Africa, the Secretary-General urged
the establishment of an international mechanism to assist

 

host Governments in maintaining the security and neutrality
of refugee camps. In this context, we welcome the initiative
launched by UNHCR to address security issues among
Burundian refugees in Tanzania, a country faced with
dramatically overcrowded camps.

I would like to conclude with a last question to
Mrs. Ogata, concerning the effects of the continued fighting
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by rebel militias.
Could the High Commissioner comment on reports
concerning the departure of several thousands of Hutu
combatants, especially ex-FAR and interahamwe, from
refugee camps in Congo (Brazzaville) to be subsequently
recruited, trained, armed and deployed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

