Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): First, I wish to thank the
presidency for convening this open debate on an issue
of great importance to the United Nations and the
Member States. Indeed, conflict prevention and crisis
management through mediation are one of the founding
principles of the United Nations, and we cannot
overemphasize its significance to our work in the
Council. We therefore welcome the opportunity to
engage in such a comprehensive debate on this issue.

Secondly, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General and the Mediation Support Unit for their
diligent work in preparing the report before us today
(S/2009/189). I also express my thanks to Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his concise presentation
highlighting the important elements of the report and
paving the way for an enlightened discussion today.

Last but not least, I would like to express our
deep appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Burkina
F aso for bringing this issue under closer scrutiny back
in September last year, during its presidency of the
Council.

The report before us today touches upon almost
every single element pertaining to the importance of
mediation and what needs to be done to further
streamline our activities in this particular area.
Therefore, I am not going to repeat those points one by
one. Suffice it to say that successful mediation is by far
the most efficient and cost-effective means for the
peaceful settlement of disputes and that more time,
effort and resources ought to be devoted to such
endeavours.

In this regard, there is no doubt that the United
Nations has a special role to play in leading these
efforts. On most occasions, United Nations
engagement in itself lends credibility and legitimacy to
mediation processes. Moreover, the body of work
developed by the United Nations in any particular
conflict often provides the best starting point, as is the
case with the situation in Cyprus. Thus, we need to do
everything possible to further enhance the professional
mediation capacity of this Organization. The Secretary-
General's report contains useful recommendations to
this end. As one of the leading contributors to the
Mediation Support Unit, Turkey is committed to
playing an active part in this exercise.

That said, in today's world of multifaceted
challenges to peace and stability, which involve a great
number of different actors and dynamics, the United
Nations cannot always be expected to fulfil this role
alone. Regional organizations, individual Member
States and even non-governmental entities have
important and at times leading contributions to make,
depending on the particular features of the conflicts in
question.

This is indeed a fact, and it is explicitly
mentioned in the report. The challenge, however, is to
find the right composition and combination of action
so that the different players do not compete with each
other, but rather complement and mutually strengthen
their endeavours. For that, healthy coordination and
cooperation among the interested actors is required at
every step of the mediation process. It is within this
frame of mind that I am looking forward to the
Council's upcoming mission to Africa, where we will
have our annual meeting with the African Union Peace
and Security Council to discuss existing and possible
future joint efforts.

Of course, this phenomenon is not confined to the
African continent, and it must be seen as a guiding
parameter for all mediation efforts around the world. In
this regard, the United Nations, again, is in a crucial
position to make its cooperation and coordination with
other actors work effectively. Whether through the
provision of professional operational support by the
Secretariat or via the political endorsement and
direction given by the Security Council, the United
Nations can indeed make a positive difference to the
quality, credibility and efficiency of overall mediation
efforts. The groups of friends established within the
United Nations framework can also be conducive to
effective peacemaking, provided that they have the
right membership.

As to the role of the Security Council in
particular, the incentives and disincentives that the
Council may provide at the different phases of the
mediation processes can prove to be an indispensable
enabler in convincing the parties to the conflict to
settle their differences through peaceful means. That
said, we agree with the Secretary-General that:

"While disincentives have been widely
studied and applied, positive incentives have not
received much attention and further work to
refine them is merited" (S/2009/189, para. 29).

In particular, we should be able to make further
and more strategic use of the positive incentives
available across the United Nations system through
different United Nations agencies and funds.

The issue of mediation is particularly relevant to
what Turkey tries to do in its region and beyond.
Indeed, Turkey has lately been engaged in a number of
mediation activities of its own, ranging from
Afghanistan to the Caucasus and from the Balkans to
the Middle East.

Based on this experience, we have learned that
mediation is a complicated process involving multiple
actors in a way that requires careful and calibrated
steps undertaken with patience and commitment. We
have also observed, that compared to
intergovernmental organizations, State actors may in
some cases have the advantage of flexibility and the
ability to act quickly, quietly and discreetly, which can
be instrumental to the success of a mediation effort.
However, we have also seen that the support of the
United Nations and the international community to the
ongoing processes, as appropriate, can be crucial.

In conclusion, I am convinced that the issue of
mediation and, in particular, the comparative
advantages of different international actors for
mediation merit further discussion in future thematic
settings.

With that, I thank the Secretary-General once
again for the guidance contained in his thought-
provoking report and express our readiness to actively
engage in future deliberations on this topic.

