Ms. Zahir (Maldives): I wish to thank Viet Nam for organizing this important open debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine. Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate the newly elected members of the Security Council - Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam - who have assumed their membership of the Council this month. We wish them well as they take on this important responsibility. We are beginning yet another year in somewhat the same manner as previous ones - with deep concern for the ongoing violations against the Palestinian people and apprehensions about the possibility of achieving peace in the region. The year 2019 ended with regrets and deep political uncertainties for any peaceful settlement of the conflict. Discriminatory policies towards the Palestinian people, violations of their basic human rights and severe restrictions on the movement of people and goods in and out of Gaza continue. While the challenges seem insurmountable, the Government and the people of the Maldives remain steadfast in our support and advocacy to find a lasting solution for the many challenges facing the Middle East, and especially to uphold the inalienable rights of the people of Palestine. We believe that the Security Council can and must do more to address this prolonged conflict. The Maldives has always believed that an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, established on the 1967 borders, living side by side in peace and harmony with Israel, is the best and only solution to this decades-long conflict. We call upon Israel to fully implement the decisions of the Council and respect the legal obligations under the Charter of the United Nations. It is unacceptable that the illegal occupation of Palestine continues to this day, with demolitions and seizures of Palestinian- owned property, the building of illegal settlements and the continuing gross violations of the basic human rights of the Palestinian people. We call upon the Security Council to take urgent action to protect civilians. The restrictions imposed on the movement of people and goods in and out of the Gaza Strip must be lifted immediately to ensure the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance. The crisis in Syria is indeed one of the gravest tragedies of our time. Thousands of people have been killed and many have been forced to flee their homes since the start of the conflict. Locked in a stalemate, the conflict is not only exacerbating the humanitarian crisis but also destroying the future of young Syrians. With over 11 million people in need of humanitarian assistance, the continued hostilities affecting civilians and the destruction of civilian infrastructure can only deteriorate the situation further. We cannot falter in our duties to bring back peace for the people of Syria. The Security Council and the international community must do more to reinvigorate talks to find a peaceful settlement to the conflict. We are encouraged that the momentum to reach a political settlement in Yemen has been progressing. But we must remain steadfast and continue to strengthen and support the efforts to end the war in Yemen. We welcome the signing of the Riyadh agreement and commend the efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and other countries involved in achieving that important milestone and opening the door for broader peace talks. The Security Council is the most vital organ of the United Nations. It has the responsibility of maintaininginternational peace and security. It therefore needs to do more to ensure that its authority and legitimacy are not compromised. The Council needs to step up its efforts to ensure that its decisions are respected by everyone, every Member State and every member of the Council. If we fail to uphold our obligations, we cannot ensure the peaceful resolution of these conflicts and wars. As we enter a new decade, let me call on all to give peace a chance and a home for the people of Palestine.
