Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): Thank you, Sir,
for scheduling this important briefing. Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative Mr. Abou Moussa for
his briefing and, moreover, for the valuable
contribution he makes to peace and security in the
Central African region. I also thank His Excellency
Mr. Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, and General Sylvain-Goma,
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), for their briefings. I
also welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representatives of the Republic of South Sudan and
the Central African Republic. As the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/693) makes clear,
engagement by the Governments of countries affected
by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) is Vital to
addressing the threat presented by the LRA.

As Mr. Abou Moussa has just reminded us, the
LRA continues to pose a substantial threat to regional
security in Central Africa. The atrocities that they
commit have serious humanitarian and human rights

consequences. The United Kingdom condemns in the
strongest terms their continued violations of
humanitarian law and their human rights abuses, which
have resulted in the displacement of 440,000 people
across the region. The LRA's campaign has the
potential to cause further instability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic, and to hamper the efforts of those
countries to progress towards peace and security.
Removing the threat of the LRA is important in terms
of creating and consolidating a secure and stable
environment in the affected countries.

Tackling the threat posed by a group that, as the
Special Representative has pointed out, has no obvious
political agenda is a particular challenge that requires
strong commitment and effective coordination among
all of those acting in the region: the United Nations and
its missions, the African Union (AU) and the
Governments of the affected States, supported by the
international community.

I recognize the significant efforts that the
militaries of Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and the Central African Republic
have undertaken to pursue and apprehend the
remaining LRA fighters. It is important, of course, to
record that all action against the LRA should be
conducted in compliance with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. And it is
essential that the protection of civilians is a clear
component of any military operation - a point already
emphasized by the Permanent Representative of
Gabon.

I am pleased that the Secretary-General's report
has highlighted the many ways in which United
Nations peacekeeping operations have worked with the
affected countries to protect civilians from this ongoing
threat. I believe that the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) could enhance its
effort by promoting regional programming by United
Nations agencies and missions in support of
humanitarian operations and the reintegration of
combatants. Facilitating high-level liaison among
heads of the affected States, heads of United Nations
missions and the AU's Special Envoy for the LRA, and
collecting and disseminating data would help United
Nations missions to protect civilians against LRA
atrocities.
Turning to UNOCA's wider role, I am pleased to
note that UNOCA's first six months have seen it put on
a sure footing. I join Special Representative Abou
Moussa in thanking the Government of Gabon for its
support in facilitating the launch and operations of
UNOCA.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2011/704)
rightly points out the financial constraints under which
UNOCA will need to operate. It is therefore essential
that UNOCA delivers against a limited number of
prioritized objectives, particularly while in its early
stages. Tackling the LRA is primary among those, but
it is also welcome to see efforts to tackle piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, efforts which have the clear and strong
support of the Security Council.

I am also pleased to see that upstream conflict
prevention will be central to UNOCA's work. I hope
that best practices from the United Nations Office to
the African Union (UNOAU) will be adopted by
UNOCA in its efforts to pre-empt tensions in the
region and mediate between parties. So I am highly
encouraged by what Special Representative Abou
Moussa has said about his close cooperation with his
colleague, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of UNOAU.

In order for the Council to effectively review and
support the efforts of the United Nations, AU and
affected countries, we must be well informed. To that
end, we would like to request that the Secretary-
General report to the Council before the end of May
next year regarding opportunities for improved
information-sharing among the AU, LRA-affected
States and United Nations missions, and outlining the
role of UNOCA in coordinating activity against the
LRA.

Finally, I thank Council members for their
support for the presidential statement which the United
Kingdom delegation has prepared and which we will
shortly be adopting.

