Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): 1 thank Special
Representative Farid Zarif for his report, and welcome
Deputy Prime Ministers Daeic' and Thaci to today's
debate.

New Zealand believes long-term stability and
security will come from an inclusive and democratic
Kosovo that respects the rights and interests of all its
citizens. It will come from genuine reconciliation among
its various communities and from the maintenance of
constructive and cooperative relations between Pristina
and Belgrade. The Secretary-General's latest report
(8/2015/74) outlines the encouraging progress that
continues to be made in all those respects.

While the primary responsibility for that lies with
the parties themselves, the international community
continues to have an important role to play in providing
the necessary conditions for progress. We commend
and support the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and of Special
Representative Zarif in facilitating conditions for
building cooperative relations between Kosovo's
communities and the important ongoing role of
regional partners, including the European Union (EU)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. We, the Security Council, also need to play our
part in those efforts, including through support for a
resumption of high-level dialogue between the parties.

New Zealand welcomes the formation in December
of a new Government and the constitution of the Kosovo
Assembly, which brings to an end a lengthy period
of political uncertainty. The broad representation of
Kosovo's communities in the new coalition Government
demonstrates just how far Kosovo has come. We hope
that recent security incidents will prove to be isolated
events and that the inclusive nature of the Government
remains unchanged.

We also welcome the announcement of the
resumption of high-level talks between Kosovo and
Serbia, beginning next week. The EU dialogue is an
important mechanism for enabling progress, and we
commend Belgrade and Pristina for their positive
approach. Maintaining a positive approach will be
important to ensure the full implementation and
outstanding provisions of the 19 April 2013 agreement.

Long-term reconciliation between Kosovo's
various communities will require the resolution of the
outstanding questions concerning missing persons and
further progress on displaced people and facilitating
voluntary returns. We acknowledge the positive steps
taken with regard to the latter and encourage attention
to addressing the obstacles to returns identified in the
Secretary-General's report.

We echo the Secretary-General's call for the
establishment of a specialist court to try cases arising
from the work of the EU Special Investigative Task
Force. It is important that the court be - and is seen to
be - objective and impartial.

Finally, New Zealand encourages further efforts to
strengthen rule of law institutions in Kosovo, including
through promoting judicial independence and measures
to tackle corruption and organized crime.

