Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation joins
other delegations in congratulating you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March 2010. Botswana
attaches great importance to combating the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, and in this
connection we welcome your initiative, Sir, to hold this
open debate on the impact of illicit arms trafficking on
peace and security in the Central African region. Let
me also commend you for inviting representatives of
regional organizations, all of whom, we believe, are
crucial stakeholders in the subject matter of today's
debate.

The illicit trade and trafficking in small arms and
light weapons is a major threat to peace and security in
Africa. The impact of illicit arms trafficking on peace
and security in the Central African region is
particularly severe. Besides peace and security, other
specific issues that arise from the problem of illicit
arms trafficking are cross-border crimes, armed
violence, and harassment of travellers, tourists and
investors, both local and foreign.

My delegation aligns itself with the draft
presidential statement on this subject, and we fully
support its adoption later today and its
recommendations. We also associate ourselves with the
statement just delivered by the Permanent Observer of
the African Union on this subject.

We agree that peace, safety and stability are
essential preconditions for the achievement of
sustainable development. This means that addressing
the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
which fuels armed violence and instability, will go a
long way in promoting an environment conducive to
development.

Clearly, the presence of arms that are
unaccounted for not only contributes to heightened
crime levels, but also provides an opportunity to
undermine efforts to expand infrastructure and to
deliver services throughout the length and breadth of
national territory. It is therefore important that the
international community step up efforts to prevent,
combat and eradicate the illicit trafficking of small
arms and light weapons, a challenge that has the
potential to undermine a country's development
prospects and the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals by the target date of 2015.
Furthermore, arms that are unaccounted for impede the
process of regional and Africa-wide economic
integration and the people-to-people interaction that we
all aspire to in that part of the world.
Botswana views the curbing of arms trafficking
as a practical step towards attaining international peace
and security, including in the Central African region.
Such efforts deserve the full support of the
international community, including through extending
financial and other resources to countries in the region
and strengthening the capacity of the subregional
economic body, the Economic Community of Central
African States, in the coordination of agreed measures.

Efforts by the subregion to implement
confidence-building measures and establish
mechanisms for the promotion of peace and security
deserve the support of the international community.
Botswana notes with appreciation the important role of

the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa with regard to
supporting the measure that I have just mentioned. We
also welcome the proposed legally binding instrument
on monitoring small arms and light weapons,
ammunition and manufacturing equipment, which will
be on the agenda of the thirtieth ministerial meeting of
the Standing Advisory Committee, which is to be held
in Kinshasa from 26 to 30 April 2010. Botswana urges
the international community to lend its full support to
this process and to also support the implementation of
such a legal instrument once it is in place.

Botswana is committed to the full implementation
of measures mandated by regional and international
legal instruments, in particular the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, the Bamako Declaration on an African
Common Position on the Illicit Proliferation,
Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, and - in my subregion - the Protocol on
the Control of Firearms, Ammunition and Other
Related Materials in the Southern African
Development Community Region.

We are pleased, Sir, that you have convened this
open debate at a time when we are preparing for the
fourth Biennial Meeting of States on Small Arms, to be
held from 14 to 18 June 2010. This debate should serve
to enrich our understanding of the issues in Central
Africa in particular, which is one of the hardest-hit
regions as far as the problem of small arms and light
weapons trafficking is concerned, so that we will be
better prepared to make meaningful contributions to
the deliberations of that Meeting.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
Botswana's commitment to the realization of peace and
security in Africa as a prerequisite to development,
dignified human existence, effective governance and
the pursuit of prosperity. We cannot overemphasize the
need for cooperation at the regional, bilateral and
international levels in order to facilitate the successful
implementation of our commitments under the various
agreements. Botswana also supports the use of
innovative measures and initiatives to deal with
specific aspects of arms trafficking and the mitigation
ofits impact.

