Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I should like at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. I assure you of
the close cooperation of my delegation. I wish also to
pay tribute to Ambassador Heller and the Mexican
delegation for the excellent manner in which they
guided our work during the month of April.

I wish also to congratulate Ms. Karin Landgren
on her appointment to the post of Representative of the
Secretary-General in Nepal and to wish her every
success in her mission. I thank her for her briefing this
morning.

We are concerned at recent events in Nepal,
which led to the resignation of the Prime Minister.
Those events show that the situation in that country
remains fragile and that a return to stability could be
delayed. We therefore call upon political actors in
Nepal to opt for dialogue in order to establish a
genuine climate of mutual trust and to strengthen the
nation's foundations.

The political rift among political actors and the
difficulties faced by a number of institutions point to
the need for additional efforts to create a more peaceful
political climate. It would be a shame if the progress
made in the peace process, which is described in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/22l), were
jeopardized. Moreover, the gains that have been made
in drafting a constitution must be safeguarded. We
therefore call upon all political actors to agree on a
consensus draft.

One of the most difficult pending matters in
Nepal is the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist
army personnel. We therefore welcome the resumption
of the work of the Special Committee mandated to
follow up on this important issue. The establishment of
the Technical Committee to support the Special
Committee in its work also represents significant
progress.

Similar efforts must be sustained in the field of
demobilization, and that is why we call upon the
United Nations to continue to support the Nepalese
authorities in this area. It is encouraging to note that
the establishment of a committee to monitor the
implementation of the nine-point agreement has made
possible the publication of a report on land and
property seized by Maoists.

It is clear that all these achievements can be
strengthened only in a peaceful socio-political climate.
As a result, that means that efforts to support the
development of Nepal must be further strengthened.
We hope that the National Development Forum
planned for mid-May 2009 will enable the Government
to mobilize additional resources for the development of
the country. We call upon the country team as well as
all partners to sustain their efforts in this regard.

In spite of the recent holding of by-elections, we
ask the various parties to discuss their differences with
a view to creating a favourable climate for the peace
process. We call upon the Government to abide by the
commitments made.

In terms of safety and security, we look forward
to the National Security Council contributing to the
establishment of a healthy atmosphere. In spite of the
Government's laudable initiatives, supported by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the fight against impunity and ensuring
respect for the human rights of minorities remain
problematic issues. In this regard, we welcome the
Government's significant efforts to establish
mechanisms for transitional justice and for the fight
against impunity. The United Nations, countries of the
region and all of Nepal's partners mustjoin in.

To conclude, we would like to thank and renew
our support for the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) through the Arms Monitoring Office and the
Political Affairs Office. We urge the Mission to pay
particular attention to the genuine demobilization of
minors and call upon the Nepalese Government to
honour its commitments in this area.

As we have seen, in spite of the progress that has
been made, the situation in Nepal remains fragile and
volatile. It is for that reason that my delegation, while
fully subscribing to the progressive draw-down of
UNMIN, would like to call upon the Security Council
to undertake it prudently in order to preserve the
progress that has been achieved to date. We thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for the preparation
of a draft presidential statement, which my delegation
supports.
