Mr. Lowcock: My colleagues and I have given the
Security Council a lot of updates on the situation in
eastern Ghouta over the past three months. I want to
start today by bringing members some voices directly
from eastern Ghouta. The Office of the Special
Envoy in Geneva has, just in the past three days,
received thousands of messages on instant messaging
applications from civilians there. They are pleading for
help. Here is one of them, from a humanitarian worker
in the area - a person well versed in international
humanitarian law:

"During the past two months, military operations
turned into a process of systematic targeting of
civilians. Most air raids have intentionally targeted
civilian residential buildings. Whole families
have died under the rubble. Today, and as battles
intensify, I call on you, as a father now expecting
my first child to be born, and as a humanitarian
worker trying to maintain what is left of life, to act
to stop the systematic operations against civilians
and open the roads for humanitarian assistance."

Here are more VOICCS.

"There are entire families being targeted.
A mother and her three children. Four pregnant
women; one died, another is in a critical condition,
the third lost her baby, and the fourth is under
observation. A young girl lost both eyes, and it
is continuing."

"We do not want war, we do not want war, we
do not want war."

"Can you hear our messages, voices and fear?"

"Our situation is so tragic. Our basements are
not safe and lack basic needs. Help us, be with us."

"Instead of saying 'no more", the world is
saying 'one more."'

As representatives ofMember States, all here aware
that their obligations under international humanitarian
law are just that - they are binding obligations. They
are not favours to be traded in a game of death and
destruction. Humanitarian access is not a nice-to-
have; it is a legal requirement. Counterterrorism efforts
cannot supersede the obligation to respect and protect
civilians. They do notjustify the killing of civilians and
the destruction of entire cities and neighbourhoods.

The Council has been briefed in minute detail,
month after month, on the scale of the suffering of
the Syrian people. Our reports have indeed been
endless: dead and injured children, women and men;
airstrikes, mortars, rockets, barrel bombs, cluster
munitions, chemical weapons, thermite bombs, suicide
bombs, snipers, double-tap attacks on civilians and
the essential infrastructure they depend on, including
hospitals and schools; rape, illegal detention, torture,
child recruitment and sieges of entire cities reminiscent
of medieval times.

Over the past 24 hours, heavy shelling and aerial
bombardment of multiple communities in eastern
Ghouta have reportedly continued, resulting in the
deaths of at least 50 people and wounding at least
200. According to some sources, the total death toll
since 19 February is close to 300 people. Twenty-
three attacks on vital civilian infrastructure have
been reported since 19 February. At least seven health
facilities were reportedly hit on 21 February. The
only primary health-care centre in Modira town was
reportedly rendered out of service by airstrikes. A
hospital in Duma city sustained significant damage
from nearby barrel bombs. Also in Duma city, an
obstetrics centre was damaged A hospital in Jisrein
town was reportedly attacked, resulting in the death of
a nurse. The two Syrian Arab Red Crescent centres in
Duma city and Harasta town were reportedly damaged
by the bombardment. Meanwhile - and this is also a
point I have consistently emphasized - mortar shelling
from eastern Ghouta is reportedly killing and injuring
scores of civilians in Damascus city, too.

Members all know the statistics of this conflict.
They know that half the Syrian population has either
fled the country or faced repeated internal displacement.
These people have lost everything. They have seen
their homes destroyed, their neighbours killed, their
loved ones disappear. Everyone knows that the repeated
confirmed or alleged chemical attacks in Syria have
killed and terrorized Syrian civilians.

Eastern Ghouta is a living example of an entirely
known, predictable and preventable humanitarian
disaster unfolding before our eyes. Everyone knows
that nearly 400,000 people are besieged and that they
have been besieged for more than four years. Everyone
knows that in eastern Ghouta thousands upon thousands
of children are facing acute malnutrition the likes of
which we have not seen elsewhere in Syria since the
onset of the conflict. Everyone knows that more than
700 people are in need of urgent medical evacuation to
hospitals just miles away in Damascus city.

We have all seen in recent days the images of
bombs and mortars raining down on bakeries and
medical facilities. According to reports documented
by United Nations human rights colleagues, at least
346 civilians have been killed since the beginning of
this month and close to 900 people have been injured.
Members all heard the Secretary-General yesterday,
in the Chamber, describing eastern Ghouta as "hell on
Earth" and saying that we cannot "allow things to go
on happening in this horrendous way". They also heard
him pleading for "the immediate suspension of all war
activities in eastern Ghouta" (S/PV8185, p. 2).

Earlier this week, UNICEF issued a blank
statement, as it could no longer find the words to
describe the brutality of this war. Its only message was
that "no words will do justice to the children killed,
their mothers, their fathers and their loved ones."

This appalling violence is happening as we face
significantly increased constraints on our ability to
reach people trapped behind conflict lines. In recent
months we have encountered greater difficulties in
accessing people in hard-to-reach and besieged areas,
particularly through cross-line convoys, than during
any period since 2015. Since 1 December, for nearly
three months, we have been able to deploy only three
cross-line convoys, reaching just 67,200 people. Only
7,200 of those people were in besieged areas, less
than 2 per cent of the overall besieged population. In
2017, through November, approximately 53 cross-line
convoys reached people in need, an average of nearly
five convoys per month. A cumulative total of nearly
2 million people were reached in the first 11 months of
2017, or around 175,000 people per month. Therefore
in 2017 we reached 175,000 a month; in the past three
months we have reached 22,000 a month. Those are
not reports or allegations. We have complete, factual
information on this, because they are our convoys.

Moreover, the 2017 access levels were themselves
nearly 40 per cent below our access levels in 2016.
Access is not only limited on aid deliveries, but we
are also seeing growing challenges to our ability to
independently assess needs on the ground and to
monitor aid delivery.

When an entire generation is robbed of its future,
when hospital attacks have become the new normal,
when sieges of entire cities and neighbourhoods have
become a lasting reality for hundreds of thousands of
people, the international community must take urgent
and concrete action. I have said this before and I will
say it again. What we need is a sustained cessation of
hostilities, and we need it desperately - a cessation
of violence that will enable the immediate, safe,
unimpeded and sustained delivery of humanitarian
aid and services, the evacuation of the critically sick
and wounded and an alleviation of the suffering of the
Syrian people.

The Council can still save lives in eastern Ghouta,
and elsewhere in Syria. I urge it to do so. Millions of
battered and beleaguered children, women and men
depend on meaningful action by the Council.

