Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): Let me begin by expressing
our gratitude to the delegation of Sweden for
spearheading the early consideration of the matter before
us and for coordinating work on the draft resolution that
contains the important decision we are about to take,
namely, the establishment of a third Trial Chamber of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda.

 

Since last year, when nine key suspects were arrested
in Operation NAKI by Kenya law enforcement personnel
and handed over to the Tribunal, the activities of the
Tribunal have continued to increase. Currently there is a
total of 23 suspects in custody, out of which six have been
detained for nearly three years while awaiting trial. The
Tribunal cannot abdicate from meeting its statutory
obligations of providing the accused persons with fair and
expeditious trials. As the maxim goes, justice delayed is
justice denied. Undue delay is therefore unacceptable.

Our timely action today, in response to the request by
the Tribunal to expand its capacity to enable it to fulfil its
tremendously important mission, demonstrates not only the
Security Council's support for the Tribunal but also its
determination to help bring about and maintain international
peace and security in the subregion. Indeed, this decision to
establish an additional Trial Chamber averts a crisis which
would inevitably have faced the Tribunal in the not-too-
distant future.

The draft resolution calls upon the Tribunal and its
organs to consider ways to increase further its efficiency as
well as to improve the methods and procedures of its work.
This is an important measure, without which the
effectiveness of the Tribunal in dispensing justice will be
brought into question. In this regard, we note that most of
the recommendations contained in the 1997 report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) on the
operations of the Tribunal, which had identified various
difficulties in its overall management and its organs, have
been implemented. The follow-up OIOS report [A/52/784],
dated 6 February 1998, acknowledges this progress and
notes in the summary, on page 2,

"Improvements were observed in virtually every area
[of the Tribunal] surveyed by the team of investigators
and auditors"

and in paragraph 7 that

"In the past six months, the new officials of the
Tribunal have effected major improvements in its
operations."

Of course it cannot be denied that some aspects of the
environment in which the Tribunal for Rwanda operates,
including logistical and infrastructural limitations, as well
as the lack of adequate facilities, have contributed to the
operational deficiencies experienced since its inception.
These considerations may have been in the mind of Judge
Lai'ty Kama, the President of the Tribunal, when on 8
December 1997 he told the General Assembly that the
Rwanda Tribunal was like "a cottage industry" [Ofi'icial
Records of the General Assembly, F ifty-second Session,
Plenary Meetings, 66th meeting, p. 3] when compared to
the Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. Thus, as we
commend the staff of the Rwanda Tribunal for their
efforts to surmount some of these difficulties, we wish to
stress that unless adequate financial and administrative
resources are provided, the Tribunal will not be able to
overcome these problems.

The primary goal of the two ad hoc tribunals
established by the Security Council is to bring peace
through justice. To this end, the tribunals are critical not
only for the orderly development of jurisprudence in an
area of international law that has regained great
importance, particularly during this period when the
international community is geared towards establishing a
permanent international criminal court, but also for the
role they play in contributing to national reconciliation
and political stabilization, especially in the Great Lakes
region. The Security Council must therefore ensure that
the Rwanda Tribunal is able to fully discharge its
responsibilities without compromising on established
standards of criminal justice. It is for this reason that we
welcome and support this decision to establish the third
Trial Chamber of the Rwanda Tribunal, and are pleased
to co-sponsor this draft resolution.

