Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): We would like
congratulate Japan on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of December and to
thank it for hosting this open debate, which reminds
us of the central mandate that we are all tasked with
pursuing. We cannot overemphasize the centrality of
this subject in the work of the Council and indeed the
entire United Nations. Today's debate is therefore both
timely and fundamental.

The Security Council, born from the ruins of
the Second World War, was created to maintain
international peace and security. That also entails the
active pursuit of peace and security as a prerequisite
for sustainable development and global prosperity. The
world has changed enormously since the 1940s, and
the nature of the threats to global peace and security
has changed accordingly. Today the conflict landscape
consists largely of intra-State conflicts and only a
handful of traditional inter-State wars, which are either
frozen or have decreased in intensity. Indeed, conflicts
today largely reflect internal strife in our Member
States and the transnational threats to them. The nature
of the conflicts that our forebears envisaged when this
Organization was created has therefore changed.

That fundamental change in the nature of
international conflict translates into greater complexity
in the challenges that the Council faces in pursuing and
maintaining peace. Unfortunately, while the world has
changed, the Council has largely remained the same.
Contemporary challenges have highlighted divisions
within the Council, particularly among its permanent
members. At times this has even paralysed the work
of the Council, and that has cost human lives in real
terms. For example, while the situation in Israel and
Palestine has been on the Council's agenda almost
since its creation, the Council's meaningful action on
the matter has been limited. That was evident in this
Chamber two days ago, when the Council was prevented
from taking action by a veto-wielding member State
(see S/PV.8139). The situation in Syria has also
shown that when the Council is divided, it is unable
to meaningfully contribute to peace, its core mandate.
There may be times when that paralysis warrants the
involvement of the entire General Assembly under the
"uniting for peace" formula set out in General Assembly
resolution 377 (V).

The Council is sorely in need ofreform. Through its
excellent work as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
Japan has helped to make incremental improvements in
the Council's working methods, and we commend the
recent work done to update the S/2010/507 document
(S/2017/507). The Council needs such developments in
its working methods if it is to improve the manner and
effectiveness of its efforts.

Ultimately, improved working methods cannot
obviate the need for comprehensive reform of the
Council if it is to better represent the configuration of
today's world. We believe that reform that results in a
more representative Council will enable it to be more
effective in dealing with the complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security. With
regard to emerging and asymmetrical threats such
as terrorism, a broader multilateral approach, one
that does not overemphasize military solutions but
addresses the broader root causes of conflicts and their
prolongation, is essential. We need a truly global and
coordinated response to enable us to deal with such
threats, which include the scourges of transnational
crime and trafficking in persons.

We also face the problem posed by countries
that continue to rely on nuclear deterrence for
their security, entailing postures that themselves
threaten regional and global security. The fact
that the Council's permanent members actively
promote compliance with nuclear-non-proliferation
norms - while continuing to keep their fingers on the
triggers of these instruments and failing to implement
their nuclear-disarmament obligations and related
commitments - creates a credibility problem for the
multilateral nuclear-non-proliferation regime and the
Council's ability to deal with such matters. We are
deeply concerned about the possible use of nuclear
weapons, whether by design, accident or miscalculation,
particularly at a time of heightened international and
regional tensions.

South Africa supports the non-proliferation
agenda, particularly as a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as the
Pelindaba Treaty, which designated Africa a nuclear-
wcapon-free zone while promoting the inalienable
right of States to the peaceful use of nuclear energy
and technology. We were among the core sponsors
of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons,
and welcomed its adoption in July with the aim of
establishing the most stringent possible international
norms for nuclear weapons through prohibition leading
to their total elimination. We call on States Members
of the United Nations that have not signed the Treaty
to do so.

In conclusion, fulfilling the central purpose of the
United Nations - the maintenance of international
peace and security - depends on the Organization's
ability to effectively respond to global threats.
The world has changed, but we are still stuck with
anachronistic structures that, unsurprisingly, have
been found wanting and ineffective in dealing with
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security. We need greater representation and
a stronger voice for those closest to the world's crises
and most able to help to respond to them effectively. We
need a Council adapted to providing truly multilateral
solutions to the threats facing today's world, marked
by consistent and non-discriminatory decision-making
and the pursuit of collective rather than narrow national
security interests.

It is against that backdrop that South Africa will be
introducing a draft resolution in the General Assembly
with a proposal for marking the centenary of the birth
of our late President Nelson Mandela with a peace
summit. The summit would be aimed at reinvigorating
the global commitment to international peace and
security, and we call on all Member States to support
and sponsor the draft resolution to keep the legacy of
Mandela alive as we strive to achieve global peace.

