Mr. Motomura (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to
participate in today's discussion on this important
issue. I would also like to thank the Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Prime Minister of
Somalia for their statements on the current situation in
Somalia.

Let me begin by commending the Government of
Djibouti for its painstaking efforts to assist the people
of Somalia to resolve their conflict by peaceful means.
Indeed, it was at the initiative of President Guelleh that
the Somalia National Peace Conference was held in
Arta, Djibouti, last year, which led to the eventual
establishment of the Transitional National Government
(TNG) in Somalia. Today's public meeting of the
Security Council provides a valuable opportunity for
interested Member States to review developments in
Somalia over the past year.

Before I comment on the political developments
and the humanitarian situation, I would like to
announce today that the Government of Japan has
decided to provide, through the United Nations,
assistance amounting to $4.8 million in the fields of
national reconciliation and humanitarian assistance. I
will describe how this assistance will be used in the
course of my remarks.

Deep-seated divisions among clans and the
competing ambitions of clan-based armed groups have
caused the people of Somalia unspeakable hardships,
and pose the major obstacle to the reunification of the
country. Although the TNG was established as a result
of national reconciliation efforts with grass-roots
participation, armed confrontation among the clans has
not diminished, and the power configuration among
them seems to be exceedingly fluid. Some warlords
have established coalitions to fight against the TNG. At
the same time, northern regions, "Somaliland" and
"Puntland" still refuse to engage in dialogue with the
TNG. They are also in political turmoil, with groups
competing for internal political power in their own
self-governments. Thus the situation throughout the
country is still extremely fragile and volatile.

Japan has long advocated a comprehensive
political settlement to the conflict and national
reconciliation, with the goal of achieving a unified
Somali State. In our View, the establishment of the
TNG is but the first step in the daunting task of
national rehabilitation. Building an effective,
permanent and functioning representative Government
will be far more difficult; and it can only be achieved
with the commitment and agreement of the Somali
people themselves, as well as with adequate assistance
provided by the international community.

Under these circumstances, the rehabilitation of
Somalia will require an approach that seeks to rebuild
the Somali polity from the bottom up, including
support to entities that emerge in different parts of the
country through a participatory process. Japan thus
attaches importance to enhancing the role of civil
society in building peace and in the subsequent
reconciliation process. Toward that end, I am pleased
to announce today that Japan will contribute $500,000
for a project to be implemented by War-torn Societies
Project, a non-governmental organization (NGO). The
contribution will be made through the United Nations
Trust Fund for Somalia.

Somalia has been ravaged by conflict, drought,
flooding, epidemics, famine and the absence of
governance. Many of its people have been displaced;
all are suffering from grinding poverty. This grave
humanitarian situation is, and indeed must be, of deep
concern to the international community.

Japan pays high tribute to the brave and tireless
efforts of the humanitarian personnel working in this
unstable and challenging situation, and insists that they
be adequately protected. The abduction by members of
armed faction groups of NGO members and United
Nations personnel from the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) in March of this year was a
despicable crime and cannot be tolerated. The
international community, and particularly the Security
Council, should call upon all parties to acknowledge
the impartiality of relief agencies and NGOs, and to
cooperate with and ensure the safety of their personnel.

I would also like to commend the extremely
effective and useful activities carried out by such
United Nations humanitarian agencies as the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the World Food Programme (WFP) and
UNICEF, which are coordinated by the able direction
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. Japan, for its part, has been providing
emergency assistance, mainly through the WFP and
UNHCR, to help ease the plight of the Somali people.

Japan attaches great importance to the
educational and training needs of children of displaced
families. In addition to helping sustain their families,
they will also have to assume the future tasks of
national reconciliation and rehabilitation. I am
therefore pleased to announce that Japan will
provide - again through the United Nations Trust
Fund - financial support in the amount of $3.9 million
for the UNICEF project in Somalia, which provides
children with learning opportunities and prepares them
for the restoration of peace, law and order. In addition,
Japan recently decided to provide emergency assistance
amounting to $420,000 in response to the WFP's
appeal for drought-relief assistance.

With respect to the request contained in the
Security Council's presidential statement of ll January
2001 - that the Secretary-General prepare a proposal
for a post-conflict peace-building mission in
Somalia - Japan supports the View expressed in the
Secretary-General's recent report that, with the security
situation being so uncertain, the establishment of such
a mission at this time would be premature.

In the meantime, Japan will continue to closely
follow the situation in Somalia. We stand ready to
respond to urgent humanitarian and emergency needs
as they arise.

