Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin my statement today by
expressing our strong rejection and condemnation of
the terrorist attack that took place at the Dusit complex
in Nairobi, which left at least 14 people dead and
many injured. We extend our deepest sympathy to the
Government and the people of Kenya for the lives lost
and convey our condolences to the families affected.

As this is the first time that I am taking the floor
since the Dominican Republic began its presidency, I
should like to personally congratulate you, Sir, on your
skilful guidance of the work on the Security Council's
agenda this month. I again commend the delegation of
cote d'Ivoire for the very able and successful manner in
which it presided over the Council in December. I also
welcome the newly elected members of the Council
that have joined us in our noble work to maintain
international peace and security.

We welcome Her Excellency Ms. Kamissa
Camara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, to New York.

(spoke in French)

I wish her every success in her post that carries
great responsibility and a pleasant stay in New York. I
thank her very much for her briefing.

(spoke in Spanish)

As the delegations that have taken the floor before
me have underscored, the loss of State authority in
central and northern Mali continues to have security
consequences. Despite strong international support
and mobilization for the full implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the
situation in the country remains very worrisome.
The security situation in northern and central Mali
remains critical. There is ongoing intercommunal
violence among ethnic groups, in particular the Fulani,
the Bambara and the Dogon. A unilateral ceasefire
announced in October 2018 by the Dogon Dan Nan
Ambassagou militia was not upheld and clashes
continued. Terrorist groups take advantage of such
tensions to increase recruitment and attempt to gain
legitimacy in their communities.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would again like
to strongly condemn the ongoing attacks perpetrated
against the Blue Helmets, United Nations personnel,
the Malian armed forces and, above all, civilians. We
express our gratitude and pay a well-deserved tribute
to all defence forces - national and international
alike - that take part in the heroic effort to combat
terrorism and transnational organized crime in Mali
and throughout the Sahel. It should be emphasized
that, since the establishment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali in 2013, 106 peacekeepers have lost their lives,
alongside members of the Malian army and the civilian
population. In spite of the challenging conditions,
we welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and highlight its determination to build peace and
promote social cohesion by funding and implementing
various projects, such as the recent construction and
development of agricultural infrastructure in the
Gao region.

Given the discouraging context I have described,
we encourage the Government of Mali, the Platform
coalition of armed groups and Coordination
des mouvements de l'Azawad to accelerate the
implementation of key provisions of the peace
agreement, which are emphasized in resolution 2423
(2018). In that regard, we welcome the implementation
of the accelerated disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and integration process, which should
allow the army to be better prepared and equipped
to boost security in northern and central Mali, where
jihadists operate. We also welcome the establishment
of the Ministry for Social Cohesion, Peace and
National Reconciliation, which faithfully reflects the
political will of Bamako to institutionalize its efforts
to ensure the full implementation of the agreement.
We call on the international community to support the
efforts of the Government because the solution to the
current situation in this brotherly country lies in fully
implementing the peace agreement, which is the key.

On the path to peace and stability in Mali, it is
important that all political actors and other signatory
parties understand that now is not the time for
backtracking or undermining the progress achieved
following so many years of conflict. They must instead
be resolved to prioritize and support all initiatives aimed
at ensuring a prosperous future for the people of Mali.
In that regard, it is essential to recall that the Pact for
Peace expresses the commitment of the parties to giving
powerful momentum to the implementation of the peace
agreement and serves as a catalyst for strengthening the
inclusive nature of the political process. We therefore
emphasize the importance of including all political
and social agents associated with the signatory armed
movements in the decision-making processes on
political and institutional reforms.

We believe that it is always appropriate, when
considering the situation in Mali and in the Sahel, to
emphasize the nexus between security, governance
and development, among other factors, because in the
long term terrorism will be totally defeated only by
addressing its root causes.

In accordance with the press release issued by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union on
17 December 2018, we reaffirm the multidimensional
nature of the challenges facing Mali and the region,
because counteracting the terrorist threat requires a
comprehensive approach that pools efforts in the field of
security and ongoing development and the improvement
of the socioeconomic conditions of the populations of
the regions that are facing terrorist activities, which
feed on fragile conditions and difficulties, especially
among young people, in the context of efforts to address
the root causes of extremism.

We reiterate the crucial role of women's
empowerment and girls' education programmes in long-
term efforts to combat violent extremism and terrorism.

I conclude by paying a sincere tribute to the hard
and commendable work being carried out by His
Excellency President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita and the
Government of Mali for the return of stability and
State authority to Mali. One result of this effort is
the situation in Kidal, in the north of Mali, where all
political parties were able to come together during the
latest presidential elections to carry out their political
proselytizing in total peace and harmony.

(spoke in French)

We also wish to express our gratitude and
appreciation to France for Operation Barkhane, which
is working with Mali in these efforts.

(spoke in Spanish)

In that regard, we thank and commend Ms. Keita
for her briefing and her endeavour, alongside the
peacekeeping operation, to restore peace to Mali.

