Mr. Baali (Algeria): Allow me at the outset, Sir,
to tell you how pleased I am to see you presiding over
the Security Council and to express our gratitude to
Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sabliere and his team,
whose work deserves recognition by the Council. Let
me also thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for his clear
and comprehensive briefing and to thank you also, Sir,
for the useful information you shared with us on the
outcome of the Berlin conference. I wish also, through
you, to commend the German Government and the
Afghan Government as well as other sponsors of that
conference, which from every standpoint, was a clear
success.

The process established under the Bonn
Agreement will be completed with the holding in
September of the first free and democratic presidential
and parliamentary elections in Afghanistan. But there
are many challenges to be met, in particular insecurity,
which continues to prevail in certain regions of the
country, and the increased production and trafficking of
drugs, which poses a serious threat not only to respect
to the rule of law in Afghanistan but also for the very
development of that country.

The progress that has been made since the first
Bonn Conference in December 2001 is nonetheless
considerable. More than 3 million refugees have
returned home, more than 4 million children have
returned to school, women are returning to work, and a
new Constitution was adopted earlier this year which
provides in particular for gender equality.

The international conference on Afghanistan -
whose outcome, declaration and work plan my country
supports - has made it possible to assess the progress
made, in the context of the political process that began
in 2001, following the adoption of a new Constitution
in January, and has provided a new opportunity for the
international community to reiterate its commitment to
the reconstruction of Afghanistan. It has also allowed
us to identify the necessary benchmarks for the
international community's efforts by taking into
account the current situation in Afghanistan in order to
ensure its stabilization and its recovery.

The announcement of the additional pledges
made by donors and the confirmation of contributions
in the areas of security and of preparations for elections
are vital for the reconstruction of Afghanistan.

In this respect, we welcome Afghanistan's
commitment to the implementation of a work plan
aimed at establishing a State based on the rule of law
that could operate autonomously through established
democratic institutions. In this context, we also
welcome the deployment of new Provincial

Reconstruction Teams - the usefulness and
importance of such teams has been fully
demonstrated- as well as the commitment of the

President of Afghanistan to conclude the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. The
importance of that process is crucial for the holding of
future elections.

The Afghan people and its leaders must work
together to strengthen democratic institutions and to
prepare for national elections. The commitment and
constructive support of States neighbouring
Afghanistan are also key factors in terms of the
recovery of the country and of regional stability.
Afghanistan will have to deal with a number of
challenges in the future, and we hope that the
assistance that has been pledged will be forthcoming so
that security needs can be met and the recovery and
reconstruction of the country can be ensured.

In this context, it is essential that the international
commitment is strengthened, particularly in terms of
security, including by deploying an international force
throughout the country. Afghanistan more than ever
needs the support of the international community.

In conclusion, we fully support the draft
presidential statement, which reaffirms the
commitment of the international community to the
Afghan people.

