Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend the convening of this meeting, and we thank
Mr. Jan Kubis, Ms. Suzan Araf Maroof and Mr. Philip
Spoerri for their briefings.

We note with concern the protests in various Iraqi
cities, some of which are violent, and the consequent
climate of distrust and instability to which they give
rise. We are particularly concerned about the possibility
of new outbreaks of extremism and violent insurgency
at a time when, following the important elections held
in May, a new Government must be established in order
to meet the legitimate demands of citizens and to deal
with the significant challenges facing the country.

We commend the progress made towards the
prompt conclusion of the electoral process following
the complaints submitted and the end of the manual
recounting of votes, as well as the establishment and
underpinning of a Government capable of leading the
country towards a sustainable peace. We underline the
importance of the international community continuing
to support and to assist the Iraqi reconstruction process.

In line with the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/677), we underline the importance of
the full participation of women and young people in
the formation and the political life of the Government,
as well as the process of rebuilding trust, in particular
with the Kurdistan region.

We look forward to progress on establishing the
investigative team on the atrocity crimes committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, particularly
since there continue to be attacks on and the killings of
civilians by the remaining terrorist elements.

We underline that, in order to effectively deal with
that threat, it is necessary to address its root causes by
promoting justice, the rule of law and the inclusive and
sustainable development of the country. Peace should
serve to improve the quality of life of the population.
In that regard, we highlight the national and regional
efforts, supported by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the United Nations
Development Programme, to establish assistance,
reconstruction and development programmes. We
also highlight the development of the national poverty
reduction strategy and the 2018-2022 development plan
geared towards a fairer and more efficient distribution
of oil resources in the various regions of the country.
We also look forward to the development of a United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, in line
with the recovery and resilience programme proposed by
the Secretary-General at the International Conference
for the Reconstruction of Iraq held in Kuwait.

We believe the efforts to promote the return of a
large number ofrefugees to their places oforigin in safe
conditions to be important. However, we believe that it
is also necessary to promote conditions to ensure their
livelihood and well-being. The severe water shortage is
therefore of great concern, given its impact on health,
the desertification of cultivated land and security,
which is particularly critical in the Basra region. It is
necessary to prevent the emergence of conflicts owing
to such a situation by adopting effective measures to
protect the population, especially the most vulnerable.
It is important to prevent their difficult situation from
being exploited by violent extremists. We also hope
for an early resolution of the pending issue of Kuwaiti
prisoners and the disappeared.

In conclusion, I once again highlight the work of
Mr. Jan Kubis and UNAMI, in particular with regard
to the new and essential roles to promote spaces for
inclusive political dialogue and internal reconciliation.
We believe that they are key to promoting a democratic,
just and fair Iraqi society.

