Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
When we came together on 21 August to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1483 (2003), it was in the
wake of the tragic attack of 19 August against United
Nations headquarters in Baghdad. Three short months
later, even more innocent people have sacrificed their
lives in support of a vision of an Iraq that is a
democratic, pluralistic country at peace with its
neighbours and a full member of the international
community. The same forces that have for so long
plagued the Iraqi people continue to resort to murder
and intimidation to prevent the realization of this
vision. We saw these forces strike again in the heinous
12 November attack against the Italian contingent
courageously serving in Nasiriyah. However, they have
not and will not succeed in preventing the emergence
of a new Iraq.

The people of Iraq are achieving success on a
daily basis, some of which we will be discussing today.
Yes, there are difficulties, and the price paid is high.
Violence is directed against the Iraqi people and all
those who are trying to assist them in creating a new
Iraq. The international community owes it to the future
peace and security of the region, as well as to the
memory of the victims of 19 August, 12 November and
other attacks, to build upon the unanimous passage of
resolution 1511 (2003) and help the Iraqi people
defend themselves against those who do not want the
new Iraq to succeed.

Iraqis are well aware of the role they must play in
their own defence, and they are taking on increasing
responsibility for their security every day. The Iraqi
people are working to rebuild a strong Iraqi police
force and to set up a new Iraqi army.

Iraqis also continue to take over administrative
responsibilities and to provide for the delivery of basic
services to their country's 25 million people. Today,
Iraq's ministries are run by Iraqi ministers, appointed
by and reporting to the Iraqi Governing Council. Iraqis
are increasingly at the forefront of the reconstruction
effort, from electricity to oil to schools. And today the
oil-for-food programme comes to an end. This is one
more important step in the establishment of a free Iraq,
where the resources and wealth of the nation are used
by and for the Iraqi people as they take charge of their
future.

Regarding Iraq's political transition, we have
always advocated the most rapid transfer practicable of
governing authority to the Iraqi people. The 15
November announcement by the Governing Council of
a political process to establish a representative
transitional national assembly to assume full sovereign
powers in 2004 was a dramatic step forward, and one
that should be welcomed and supported by the
international community.

This timetable, as called for by resolution 1511
(2003), ensures that Iraqis quickly take control of their
own affairs, while basic freedoms and rights for all
Iraqis are protected under the law. And, in accordance
with the wishes of the Iraqi people, a permanent
constitution will be drafted by a constitutional
convention directly elected by the Iraqi people. The
Governing Council's announcement is an important
step toward realizing the vision of Iraq as a democratic,
pluralistic country at peace with its neighbours.

Under the process announced on 15 November, a
transitional national assembly will be formed to elect
an executive branch, select ministers and serve as a
legislative body. By 30 June 2004, this new transitional
administration will assume full responsibility for
governing Iraq. The Coalition Provisional Authority
will then dissolve, as will the Iraqi Governing Council.

The Transitional National Assembly will be
formed through caucuses at the provincial level. The
selection and structure and powers of the Assembly
will be established by a fundamental law, with basic
principles of openness and transparency established as
part of the 15 November agreement. The delegates to

Sll'V.4869

 

the Transitional Assembly will be selected no later than
31 May 2004.

The fundamental law will protect freedom of
speech and religion and will include a statement of
equal rights for all Iraqis. The law will define the
relationship between the central Government and
provincial authorities. Importantly, the law will have
an expiration date, by which time a permanent
constitution for Iraq is to be drafted and a new
Government of Iraq elected.

The process announced on 15 November
establishes a timeline for the direct election of a
constitutional convention, no later than 15 March 2005,
to draft a permanent constitution for Iraq. The
constitution will be ratified through a popular
referendum, and a new Iraqi Government will be
elected under terms of the ratified constitution no later
than 31 December 2005.

As Iraqis assume increased responsibility for
their own security and governance, those who seek to
undermine a free and democratic Iraq will be further
isolated. These basic steps - increased assumption by
Iraqis for security, creation of the Governing Council,
appointment of effective ministers to run Iraqi
ministries, and continuing transfer of political authority
to Iraqis - are part of our planning for post-Saddam
Iraq.

We are on the offensive in Iraq. While those who
traffic in evil work murder innocents, Coalition and
Iraqi forces are adapting to defeat the enemy and will
prevail.

Yesterday in London, President Bush and Prime
Minister Blair reaffirmed our long-term commitment to
Iraq. I quote from their joint statement:

"The United States and the United Kingdom
stand ready to support the Transitional
Administration in its task of building a new Iraq
and its democratic institutions. Our military
participation in the multinational force in Iraq
will serve the Iraqi people until the Iraqis
themselves are able to discharge full
responsibility for their own security. At the same
time, we hope that international partners will
increasingly participate in the multinational
force."

The continued support of the international
community in reconstruction efforts is also critical.
Last month, the international community came together
when the Security Council adopted resolution 1511
(2003) and pledged over $33 billion in support to Iraq
at the Madrid donors' conference. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the Spanish Government for
its leadership in hosting the donors' conference, which
included representatives from 73 countries and 20
international organizations. Much more, of course,
remains to be done and additional contributions from
all assembled here are very much encouraged.

As President Bush and Prime Minister Blair have
stressed many times, the United Nations has a vital role
to play in Iraq. We would welcome the return of United
Nations international personnel to Iraq to carry out the
mandate called for in resolutions 1483 (2003) and 1511
(2003). We stand ready to discuss with United Nations
officials appropriate security support, as envisioned
under resolution 1511 (2003).

Security and stability underpin all other efforts on
the ground, and creating these conditions constitutes
one of the main priorities for the Coalition Provisional
Authority in its work with the Iraqi people. Despite the
killings, bombings and other attacks we witness in the
media, much of Iraq is calm and our strategy of
enabling Iraqis to assume responsibility speedily for
their own security is achieving success. The reality that
cannot be captured by a television camera is that Iraqis
are coming together to expand conditions of security
and stability, adding more than 130,000 personnel to
the security effort. They join 33 nations, alongside the
United States and the United Kingdom, as part of the
multinational force.

The number of Iraqis contributing to the security
effort is rising steadily. Those Iraqis are actively
engaged in operations to stabilize Iraq and to thwart
the terrorists who are killing Iraqi civilians, aid
workers and Coalition personnel alike. Iraqi security
personnel also are being targeted; their courage,
commitment to their country and hope for the future
are demonstrated by their perseverance in the face of
the casualties they have suffered.

The Iraqi Civil Defence Corps is developing
capacity to foil saboteurs who target electrical
infrastructure, the oil industry and other sectors critical
to Iraq's renewal. The Civil Defence Corps has
approximately 8,000 personnel on duty and that
number will increase to more than 40,000 over the next
several months. In addition, there is a facilities

SANA-869

 

protection service to protect Iraq's strategic
infrastructure, Government buildings and cultural and
educational assets. The protection service currently has
more than 48,000 guards hired and trained, with a
desired strength of roughly 50,000 personnel.

Major progress is also being made with respect to
the Iraqi police force. Over 60,000 police officers are
back on the streets. Looking ahead, 35,000 new Iraqi
police recruits will be trained over the next two years
in Jordan. We are currently improving the physical
facilities at that training site to accommodate up to
3,000 students and 1,000 international trainers and
support staff. The first class will begin next week with
500 students. The United Kingdom, Canada, Poland,
the Czech Republic, Austria, Slovakia, Slovenia and
Finland are planning to contribute police trainers for
the Jordan facility. Other countries, including our
Council colleague Germany, for example, have
indicated an interest in participating in the training
process. Following graduation from the eight-week
basic course, Iraqi police recruits will participate in a
ten-month field training programme at home, led by as
many as 1,500 international police advisers. The
United States plans to provide up to 1,000 of these
advisers, with the first 150 to be deployed in January.

Establishing border security - with Iraqi border
posts capable of interdicting the flow of proliferation-
sensitive materials, radioactive sources that could be
used to create dirty bombs, contraband, terrorists and
foreign fighters - is an obvious security priority. Over
12,000 Iraqi border personnel are now on duty and
Iraq's border police and customs service will steadily
grow to more than 25,000.

As it resumes full control of its affairs, Iraq, like
all nations, will need a military for self-defence. On
October 4, nearly 700 Iraqi troops graduated from
basic training to form the first battalion of the new
Iraqi army. By the fall of 2004, the Iraqi army will
have expanded to about 35,000 troops.

But force and recruit numbers, although they are
headed in the right direction, are only part of the story.
The international community has the opportunity and,
indeed, the obligation to help the Iraqi people build
highly competent organizations that are dedicated to
public service and that maintain both high standards of
professionalism and respect for human rights. Only
through the creation of such an environment can the

Iraqi people have public confidence and develop and
enjoy a sound economy.

Notwithstanding the considerable efforts I have
just described, we must acknowledge that security
conditions in Iraq remain a major preoccupation for us,
for the international community and for the Iraqi
people, and that there remains a need to deliver a
sustainable, improved security situation, particularly in
the centre of the country. None of us wants a repeat of
the terrible events we witnessed through late summer
into the fall and which we recognize to have impacted
on the international community's civilian presence in
Iraq. The aim of the persisting efforts to improve
security as I have described, as well as of our efforts to
improve basic services and empower the Iraqi people,
is to yield the increased stability and security that we
all want. We are determined that those efforts shall
succeed.

Since I already discussed in detail the national
political developments currently taking place in Iraq, I
would now like to focus for a moment on political
developments at the local level. Iraq's democratic
transition is dependant on the vitality and effectiveness
of Iraqi institutions at the local level, Where most of
the decisions affecting individuals are made. Local
Government provides the foundation for democracy
and promotes social stability by allowing citizens a say
in how their Government operates.

Day-to-day operation of the Iraqi Government is
now in the hands of Iraqis. Across the country,
neighbourhood, district and provincial councils
represent the needs and opinions of their constituents
to the Iraqi Governing Council. These institutions are
taking responsibility for the delivery of essential
services and fostering citizen participation in decision-
making. There are municipal councils in all major
cities and most towns, and provisional governorate
councils have been formed across the country. Two
hundred neighbourhood advisory councils help provide
services such as water, education, public sanitation,
health and electricity. More and more councils are
budgeting and managing their own resources. For
example, in each of Baghdad's 88 neighbourhoods,
citizens have freely selected representatives for local
governing councils. They, in turn, choose members of
nine district councils and a 37-member city council.

Overall, more than 800 democratically selected
council members are now hard at work serving their

Sll'V.4869

 

fellow citizens. They include Sunnis, Shias and
Christians, Arabs and Kurds - and more than 75
women. Over the coming months, the Coalition will
continue to work with the Governing Council to
promote diverse and representative citizen participation
within, and among, communities throughout Iraq. Our
focus will be on increasing financial transparency and
accountability and on strengthening the capacity of
local administrations to provide essential municipal
services.

The head of the Office of the Iraq Programme,
Mr. Benon Sevan, gave a lengthy briefing earlier this
week on the phase-out of the oil-for-food programme
and yesterday Secretary-General Arman also addressed
the issue. I would like to commend Mr. Sevan, the
Office of the Iraq Programme and the United Nations
agencies that have worked in Iraq under difficult
circumstances for their role in providing for the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people.

Before I conclude and turn the discussion over to
Ambassador Jones Parry, I would like to address the
disarmament of Iraq. On 16 June, the Iraqi Survey
Group assumed responsibility for the mission of
searching for and eliminating Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction, prohibited missile-delivery systems and
related infrastructure. Led by former International
Atomic Energy Agency inspector David Kay and
United States Army Major-General Keith Dayton, the
Survey Group is comprised of military and civilian
personnel. The Group includes Coalition personnel
from the United States, the United Kingdom and
Australia, as well as experts from the former United
Nations Special Commission on Iraq - UNSCOM. -
with direct experience on the ground in Iraq.

The Survey Group is comprised of two task
forces - one for exploitation, led by the United States
Defense Intelligence Agency, and another for
disablement and elimination, led by the United States
Defense Threat Reduction Agency. The Survey Group
has consolidated the weapons-of-mass-destruction-
related efforts of the various intelligence-collection
operations currently in Iraq under one national-level
headquarters, in order to better exploit developing
intelligence. Using quick-reaction teams, the Survey
Group has been investigating suspect sites based on
leads derived from debriefings, interrogations and tips
by Iraqi civilians. The Group is systematically
reviewing existing sites already identified by
intelligence.

In October an interim report on the activities of
the Iraq Survey Group to date detailed numerous
violations by Iraq of its mandated obligations under
Security Council resolutions. Those included deliberate
efforts to conceal equipment and programme activities
related to weapons of mass destruction from the United
Nations during the inspections beginning late in 2002,
clandestine laboratories and safe houses within the
security service apparatus that contained equipment
subject to United Nations monitoring and suitable for
continuing chemical and biological warfare research,
and plans and advanced design work for new long-
range missiles with ranges up to at least 1,000
kilometres, well beyond the 150-kilometer range limit
imposed by the United Nations. A large body of
information, developed through debriefings, site visits
and exploitation of captured Iraqi documents, confirms
that Iraq deliberately concealed equipment and
materials from United Nations inspectors when they
returned in 2002. This is a large undertaking that will
continue to require significant time and resources.

I would like to say a final word in conclusion.
Iraqis have a long and proud history. We look forward
to continued progress on all fronts as the people of Iraq
work to build a new, stable and secure country.

