Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): The Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) process is of
course a cornerstone of global security and, as one
of its staunch supporters, we welcome the Security
Council's initiative in adopting today's draft resolution
(S/2016/800), aimed at encouraging continuing
progress towards the Treaty's entry into force. That
is fundamental, and we all understand that there are
a number of challenges involved, such as those just
mentioned by Secretary Kerry regarding the fact
that North Korea continues to be able to conduct
nuclear tests. But we also understand - and my own
diplomatic career began precisely in this area of nuclear
disarmament - how important it is that we strengthen
the entire non-proliferation regime.

In drafting today's resolution, we decided to
include the issue of security guarantees, which has
been the subject of discussion within the CTBT process
for a long time. I would like to recall in that regard that
the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons included a clear clause on the
necessity for fully respecting all existing commitments
with regard to security assurances. Since today's
draft resolution mentions security assurances given
in 1995, it is vitally important to keep in mind that
we also have other assurances, such as those in the
Budapest Memorandum, signed in December 1994,
which included very clear obligations for the three
nuclear States concerned regarding respect for the
independence, sovereignty and existing borders of
Ukraine. The paragraph following that part obliged all
those States to affirm

"their obligation to refrain from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of Ukraine, and that none of their
weapons will ever be used against Ukraine".

The primary breach of that security assurance
by a particular country - namely, the Russian
Federation - raises two basic issues. One, of course,
is whether we can trust the security assurances that are
mentioned in today's draft resolution; the issue of trust
as it relates to the whole non-proliferation regime is
also of fundamental importance. The second is whether
those security guarantees are sufficient to enable us to
achieve real progress towards nuclear disarmament. I
would therefore like to urge the Security Council to
look further down the road of the process of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and all
our related efforts, and to once again remind everyone
of the absolute necessity and crucial importance of
respect for all existing commitments with regard to
security assurances. Any breach of such security
assurances should be seen as a fundamental challenge
for all of us.

