Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): My delegation wishes to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. We are very happy to see you presiding over
these deliberations today, and we wish you well. We
have confidence in your ability and hereby wish to
assure you of our support and cooperation. I also wish
to express my delegation's appreciation to the
Secretary-General not only for the very important and
comprehensive report placed before us, but also for his
tireless efforts for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Conflict prevention in all its ramifications refers
primarily to measures that can be implemented before a
dispute escalates into violence. It also refers to
measures designed to counteract the spread of conflict
to other areas. The basic premise of prevention,
therefore, is that actions should be initiated at the
earliest possible stage of a conflict. To be effective,
preventive action should, among other things, address
deep-rooted socio-economic, cultural, environmental,
institutional, and other structural causes of conflicts.

According to the United Nations Charter, conflict
prevention is a primary obligation of all Members.
Although Article 24 of the Charter bestows on the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, our
experience has shown that the primary responsibility
for conflict prevention rests mainly with national
Governments, with civil society playing an important
role. A successful conflict prevention strategy therefore
will require the cooperation of all United Nations
actors, including the Secretary-General, the
International Court of Justice, United Nations agencies,
offices, funds and programmes and the Bretton Woods
institutions.

Although Article 24 of the Charter bestows on the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, a
successful conflict prevention strategy will require the
cooperation of all, including the Secretary-General, the
International Court of Justice and other United Nations
agencies.

In the face of limited financial and human
resources, and given the fact that it is more expensive
to maintain a peace-keeping operation than to
implement conflict prevention measures, the Nigerian
delegation believes that there is a need for members of
the international community to focus more on the
development of a culture of conflict prevention. We
should also focus on preventive investment instead of
intervention in conflicts after many lives have been lost
and much property destroyed.

We will urge the Secretary-General to continue the
use of the tools of "quiet diplomacy," such as fact-finding
and confidence-building missions, informal networks of
eminent persons, mediation, conciliation and arbitration
in his search for peace. My delegation supports the
recommendation in the Secretary-General's report on the
use of interdisciplinary fact-finding and confidence-
building missions in volatile regions.

Considering the importance of the Secretariat to
the success of the Office the Secretary-General in
conflict prevention, adequate funds should be made
available to the various departments to enable them to
cope effectively with the complexities of today's
conflicts. In particular, the Department of Political
Affairs, which is the focal point for conflict prevention,
should be provided with adequate resources and skilled
manpower to enable it to discharge its responsibilities
more effectively.

Considering the fact that the Security Council and
the General Assembly have more than a symbolic role
to play in the prevention of armed conflicts, my
delegation endorses the recommendation contained in
the Secretary-General's report to the effect that the
General Assembly should make more effective use of
its powers, as stipulated in Articles 10, 11 and 14 of the
United Nations Charter.

In addition, my delegation endorses the
recommendation that the Security Council should
consider the establishment of innovative mechanisms,
such as a subsidiary organ or an ad hoc informal
technical arrangement to stimulate the discussion of
conflict prevention on a continuous basis.

The Nigerian delegation welcomes the
recommendation to develop regional strategies that will
involve regional actors in the resolution of conflicts. To
this end, we appeal for financial and logistical
assistance to regional organizations in order to enhance
their effectiveness.
Conflict prevention and development that is
sustainable and equitable are mutually reinforcing.
Consequently, any investment in national and
international conflict prevention efforts is an
investment in sustainable development. We therefore
call on the Economic and Social Council to pay more
attention to the role of development in promoting long-
term conflict prevention.

We also call on the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and other relevant
United Nations agencies to address the issues of drugs
and illicit trade in arms and natural resources
emanating from conflict areas, because of their role in
fuelling conflicts.

On the issue of human rights, the Nigerian
delegation believes that both the short-term and long-
term strategies for the prevention of armed conflicts
must include a focus on strengthening respect for
human rights and addressing core issues of human
rights violations. We welcome the recommendation that
the Security Council and the General Assembly should
make use of information and analyses emanating from
non-governmental organizations, particularly on human
rights violations, in their deliberations on conflict
situations.

We support the need to strengthen the International
Court of Justice, and encourage the peaceful settlement of
disputes, as stipulated in Article 2, paragraph 3, of the
United Nations Charter. We also urge Member States to
ratify or accede to human rights treaties and the Statute of
the International Criminal Court.

In order to enhance the capacity of the United
Nations for the prevention of armed conflicts, there is a
need to strengthen the national capacity of Member
States. My delegation therefore believes that if the
various recommendations and measures highlighted in
the Secretary-General's report are supported with the
necessary resources, better results will be achieved.

Because of the role development plays in conflict
prevention, we appeal to the international donor
community to increase the flow of development
assistance to developing countries, as we pray Member
States to endeavour to implement the recommendations
of the High-level Panel on Financing for Development.

In conclusion, while conflict prevention lies at
the heart of the mandate of the United Nations, our
achievements towards this end have been minimal. In
spite of identified constraints, we must strive towards
the achievement of our collective interest. The most
promising approach for promoting the peaceful and just
international order envisaged in the Charter is to build
national and international capacity for long-term action
to prevent armed conflict.

