Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his informative
briefing. We also welcome Ms. Leila Zerrougui of
Algeria as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), and pay tribute to Mr. Sidikou.

As this is the first time that we are taking the floor
to speak on the subject of MONUSCO, we would first
like to condemn in the strongest terms the attack on
the Blue Helmets of MONUSCO in December, which
led to the deaths of 15 peacekeepers and wounding
of 44 others. The safety of MONUSCO personnel is
absolutely essential to fulfilling its responsibilities,
without which it would be unable to protect civilians.
We therefore resolutely support the decisions adopted
by the Secretariat to implement a plan of action, as well
as the investigations led by Mr. Dmitry Titov, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. We also look forward to the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo's cooperation
in ensuring that those responsible are prosecuted
and convicted.

Secondly, concerning the political process, we
reiterate the importance of maintaining the date of
23 December for the holding of elections, but we
also underscore that it is very important that there be
no further delays and to ensure that the process be
transparent and fair so that it will be acceptable to all
stakeholders. The events of late last year demonstrate
that the need to maintain the support and participation of
the international community to ensure calm conditions
allowing for the appropriate transition of power at the
end of this year continues to be very important.

Thirdly, from the perspective of sustainable
peace, like our colleagues who spoke before us we
stress the gravity of the ongoing humanitarian crisis,
which is primarily affecting children. The support of
the international community and donors is needed to
deal with the situation currently faced throughout the
Congo. We also draw attention to the consequences of
increasing political instability and the deteriorating
economic situation, which is reflected in the rate of
inflation affecting those most vulnerable. We believe
that it is therefore very important to ensure that we
decrease poverty and inequalities in a country that is
facing many challenges in that regard.

Lastly, we emphasize the role that women and
children can play in the political process currently
taking place in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we will support all efforts of MONUSCO aimed at
involving them more substantially in that process.

