Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
wish first of all to convey sincere condolences to the
Chinese delegation regarding the earthquake that
struck China this morning.

I wish also to thank Mr. Pascoe, the Permanent
Observer of the Palestinian Authority and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.

We have come together once more to assess the
situation in the Middle East in the light of recent
events in the region. Since our previous debate, the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been the subject of
intense diplomatic activity. Meeting in Moscow in
March, the international Middle East Quartet called for
a settlement freeze and established a two-year
timetable for a peace agreement. For their part, Arab
League heads of State and other representatives met in
Sirte, Libya, on 27 March to consider the situation in
the Middle East. They declared that they were
favourable to indirect negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians, in line with a proposal made by United
States Special Envoy George Mitchell on his most
recent visit to the Middle East in March.

At the highest level, the United States has made
efforts to help the two parties to overcome their
disagreements and begin negotiations. Vice-President
Joseph Biden visited the region, in a rather difficult
context, to advance the cause of peace. President
Barack Obama received Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu in Washington, DC, for talks aimed at a
rapid resumption of peace negotiations between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority. Gabon welcomes all of
those diplomatic efforts, which give us some reason for
hope, even if the peace process remains at an impasse.
Indeed, recent intransigence in the positions of both
parties is affecting prospects for the resumption of
political dialogue.

Gabon reiterates its position in favour of seeing
the two parties re-engage in peace negotiations and
urges them to follow the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative and to abstain from acts that could undermine
the chances for peace.

In this regard, we fully support the statement
made by the Secretary-General on 24 March 2010 on
the need to lift the Gaza blockade. The effectiveness of
such a decision could contribute to re-establishing a
climate of confidence between the two parties,
enabling proximity talks to be undertaken once again
and re-launching the peace process, which is so vital to
the geopolitical and strategic stability of the entire
region.

