Mr. Wittig (Germany): I wish to thank Foreign
Minister Rassoul for his most valuable statement and,
of course, for his presence here. Minister, it is a great
pleasure to welcome you to the Council today.

I am also grateful to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General de Mistura for his briefing. I
commend him, his entire staff in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
wider United Nations family for their admirable work,
which was carried out under very difficult
circumstances. The support of the United Nations will
remain absolutely pivotal.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later in today's debate by the European
Union.
Germany condemns in the strongest possible
terms the murder of the Chair of the High Peace
Council, Professor Rabbani. Allow me to reiterate the
heartfelt condolences of the Government and the
people of Germany to the Afghan authorities and all
Afghans. We wish Minister Stanekzai, Chief Executive
of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme, and all others who were injured a very
speedy recovery.

Germany welcomes the strong messages sent out
by President Karzai and his Government, at this
decisive moment in their unwavering determination to
stay the course in the peace and reconciliation process.
In that context, I wish to underline the commitment of
support reiterated by the Security Council in its
statement of21 September (SC/10391).

The International Conference on Afghanistan to
be held in Bonn on 5 December will be a crucial
milestone for Afghanistan, as mentioned by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General de Mistura and
Foreign Minister Rassoul. As I outlined to the Council
in July (see S/PV.6574), a core aim of the Conference
is to further define the future engagement of the
international community, both during and after the
security transition, which will have been completed by
the end of 2014. In Germany's view, security transition
marks a new beginning in, not the end of, international
support to Afghanistan.

Several factors need to be kept in mind. A clear
and unequivocal message of long-term support to our
Afghan friends is our bottom line for Bonn in terms of
ensuring security, building a sustainable administration
and, last but not least, fostering economic
development.

On that note, we are encouraged by the continued
progress in security transition. While we remain
concerned about the volatile overall security
environment, we note with appreciation that more and
more security operations in more and more parts of
Afghanistan are being handled by Afghan security
forces.

Regional cooperation is of particular relevance
for the success of the international Afghanistan
strategy. Germany strongly supports recent initiatives
to implement previous declarations on good-
neighbourly relations. We particularly look forward to
the Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, to be held on
2 November. Its results will be of paramount
importance for the future of regional cooperation in the
heart of Asia. Germany also welcomes the bilateral
steps that have been taken, particularly with Pakistan,

such as the recent formation of the Afghanistan-
Pakistan Joint Commission for Reconciliation and
Peace.

As a complement to the ongoing political process,
I would like to emphasize the potential of increased
economic cooperation for positive change in the
region. Only one week ago, in the presence of more
than 15 foreign ministers, 30 delegations from the
region and beyond met here in New York to formulate
their common vision for a New Silk Road to increase
regional economic cooperation with Afghanistan.

That vision requires sincere regional efforts to
become a reality, but it will also need significant
international support over time. Looking towards
Bonn, the Co-chairs - Afghanistan, the United States
and Germany - invite partners to contribute to
charting out options for how best to turn this vision
into a reality, step by step by step.

As I mentioned, the support of the international
community will be required long after the transition
will have ended. From that perspective, our yardstick
must remain the principle of reinforcing Afghan
sovereignty.

In regard to the UNAMA review process
mentioned by Minister Rassoul, and in the light of the
Council's March 2012 UNAMA mandate resolution,
Germany looks forward to the outcome of the review.
As I said earlier, the support of the United Nations will
remain absolutely pivotal. In that context, we note with
appreciation the continued progress of the United
Nations towards delivering as one.

Let me end by giving three recent examples that
underscore how cooperation between Afghanistan and
its international partners to implement the Kabul
process leads to continued progress on the ground,
every day, despite the volatile conditions in the
country.

First, despite serious setbacks, the Kabul process
itself seems to be getting back on track. Germany
welcomes signs that there is now greater clarity
concerning the next steps that need to be taken before
an International Monetary Fund programme can be
approved.
Secondly, while tensions continue between and
inside the different branches of Government after the
first legislative elections held under Afghan leadership,
there is now a solution backing the authority of the

Independent Electoral Commission that offers a
prospect for improved procedures, in line with the
commitments of the Government of Afghanistan to
long-term electoral reform.

Thirdly, the sincere and valuable support of the
Government of Afghanistan for the study undertaken
by UNAMA on the treatment of detainees in several
facilities managed by the Afghan security forces is
highly commendable. This clearly demonstrates the
common interest in the improvement of the human
rights. My Government is strongly convinced that,
once the report has been finalized, the Afghan
Government will find the right answers - and the
international community the right way to support them.

As we continue our support at the Bonn
conference and beyond, Germany will continue to
stand side by side with our Afghan friends.

