Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's open debate, which shows how important you
consider the issue of improving the Security Council's
working methods, both in your position as President
of the Council for this month and as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. I would also like to thank Ian
Martin warmly for his briefing and for his recent report
on the subject in Security Council Report.

The first point I would like to emphasize is that
what is at stake behind our reflections on the Security
Council's working methods is the effectiveness of the
United Nations organ that has primary responsibility for
issues of international peace and security, in accordance
with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Because it is focused on the crises that are currently
disturbing the international order, more than any other
institution the Security Council must be able to adapt its
methods and functioning to changes in its environment.
In order to do that, when necessary it must be able to
reflect on its own work and examine it critically. The
Council's work rests on a foundation based, needless
to say, on the Charter, particularly Chapter V. Apart
from that juridical basis, the Council's rules are listed
in its provisional rules of procedure. This edifice is
crowned by a set of rules and best practices outlined
in the famous note by the President of the Security
Council currently contained in the annex to document
S/2017/507 - note 507.

The second point I want to emphasize is that one
of the Council's strengths is the flexibility of its rules.
The difficult part of the work of the Informal Working
Group lies precisely in its ability to codify those
rules and good practices without depriving them of
that flexibility. The latest version of note 507 - and I
would like to pay tribute to Japan, the previous Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions - records a series of
important and useful steps.

With regard to its form, the note has been simplified
and reorganized to be a clearer guide to the daily work
of the Council. France used it quite often during its
presidency in October. With regard to substance, the
note includes several new elements that reflect existing
practices or goals set by the Council. I will mention a
few points that my delegation considers to be vital.

First, there are details on preparing newly elected
members and future members for the Council. Second
are the good practices in the area of consultations,
including more regular use of different items in
accordance with the development of events, an effort
to make discussions more interactive, and enhanced
transparency through more frequent press statements.
Thirdly, there are recommendations aiming to make
briefings more operational and ensure that they meet
the expectations of the Council. Fourthly, the note sets
out specific guidelines on how texts will be discussed
before they are adopted by the Council, in particular
with regard to the role of penholders. Fifthly, there are
factors to improve the preparation, content and follow-
up of Security Council missions. Sixth are indications
reflecting the goal of strengthening the joint work with
regional organizations, in particular the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.

Following such comprehensive work, our
responsibility - in the first place, that of the Informal
Working Group - is to work to fully implement the
recommendations set by the Council. Much remains
to be done to benefit fully from existing guidelines
before starting new endeavours. Among the areas for
improvement, a few recurring factors should be recalled.

During consultations, our discussions must be
more direct, more interactive and more informal in
order to foster a genuine exchange of views. At public
meetings, in particular open debates, we must do better
to enforce time limits on interventions and ensure that
they are operational in nature. Generally, we should
ensure that the Council continues its efforts to adapt
the format of its meetings to the subjects addressed.
For example, in certain cases we could avoid instances
of redundancy when public briefings are followed
by closed consultations. We should also continue to
benefit from informal meetings, in particular Arria
Formula meetings, and informal interactive dialogue.
France believes that it is essential to ensure systematic
respect for multilingualism for all Council documents
and meetings, including those of its subsidiary bodies.

In parallel to the areas for improvement I have
just mentioned, the Council should continue efforts to
improve the transparency of its work - with regard
to troop-contributing countries, in the framework of
discussions pertaining to peacekeeping, but also with
regard to the States Members of the United Nations in
general, including through public meetings and, like
today, through open debates.

Beyond the issue of transparency in the Council's
work - and even more important - is the matter
of its representativity, and that brings me back to its
basis: the Charter of the United Nations. The Security
Council should better reflects the realiies of our world,
while strengthening its capacity and its legitimacy to
assume its responsibilities with regard to international
peace and security. Beyond the gradual but marginal
improvements I have described, reform of the Security
Council is required.

France's position is well known. We want the
Council take into account the emergence of Powers that
have not only the ability but also the will to shoulder
their international responsibilities. France therefore
supports the candidacies of Germany, Brazil, India and
Japan as permanent members of the Security Council,
as well as a stronger presence of African countries
among permanent and elected members.

It is in the same spirit that France has proposed that
the five permanent members of the Security Council
voluntarily and collectively suspend the use of the veto
in cases of mass atrocities. The measure is voluntary
and would not require a revision of the Charter, but
rather a political commitment. It is about ensuring that
the Council continues to fulfil its responsibilities in the
area of international peace and security, and does not
lose its legitimacy as it faces the deadliest conflicts and
the most serious actions.

In the light of the multiplication of crises and
threats, the role of the Security Council is to live up to
the responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter. More
than ever, France is determined make its contribution.

