Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, the Senegalese delegation would like to thank
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, for his briefing and
congratulate him on the outstanding manner in which
he is coordinating the work of the Committee.

My delegation would also like to congratulate the
new members of the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring
Group, whose high-quality monthly updates enable us
to better understand the situation in Somalia and Eritrea.

With regard to Somalia, the persistent concerns
raised in the successive reports ofthe Monitoring Group
illustrate the considerable challenges that the security
situation in Somalia continues to pose. Through its
presence and harmful actions, Al-Shabaab continues to
pose a threat in its continued occupation of large parts
of the territory and in carrying out attacks, thereby
rendering the country's security situation even more
complex - following the satisfactory conclusion of an
electoral process last February with the election of His
Excellency Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo as
the new President of the Federal Government.

The attacks carried out on 9 and 10 April in
Mogadishu attest to the difficult security situation.
One of those attacks targeted the head of the Somali
National Army and resulted in several deaths and
injuries. Through me, Senegal once again condemns
those acts, offers its condolences to the Somali people
and the bereaved families, and wishes a speedy recovery
to the wounded. My delegation takes this opportunity
to congratulate once again the Somali National Army
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
whose tireless vigilance enabled the Chief of the Army
to escape the attack.

Senegal is also concerned about the threat posed by
the growing presence of the Islamic State in the region
as illustrated by the 8 February operation carried out
against a hotel by the small faction led by Sheikh
Abdulqadir Mumin, which has claimed allegiance to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). It is worth
noting that despite the successful ouster by the Puntland
forces ofthe ISIL faction in Qandala in December 2016,
the group continues to maintain a strong presence in the
surrounding mountains. Accordingly, the Senegalese
delegation would like to reiterate its conviction that
only the full cooperation of the States of the region,
through the regional frameworks and mechanisms
established for this purpose, can enable a coordinated,
and therefore lasting, response to the problem of
Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups that undermine
the region.

With regard to the arms embargo, the Monitoring
Group reported on the discovery on 23 January of
approximately 25,000 blank firing pistols by the Interim
Jubba Administration and contingents of AMISOM. on
board the vessel the SJAfrican in Kismayo. We welcome
the cooperation of those responsible from the Interim
Jubba Administration and AMISOM. and the weapons
experts of the Monitoring Group who were able to gain
access the container and who are working to determine
the origin and destination of these weapons. We also
note that the Group expressed concern about the threat
to peace and security posed by illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing in Somalia, as reflected in its latest
report, the presence of seven trawlers near Bosaso,
which provoked demonstrations by local fishermen
in February.

With respect to the attacks on humanitarian
workers, the hijacking of aid and the obstacles to its
delivery, we firmly condemn all of them, whoever the
perpetrators might be. My delegation therefore calls
for a substantial reform of security in the country and
the eradication of corruption that can be found in many
sectors of activity.

With regard to the ban on the sale of charcoal,
we note with satisfaction the progress made in the
implementation by Member States of the measures
taken to this end. However, illegal export of charcoal
continues, unfortunately, with the use of different
methods to facilitate evasion, in particular, the
counterfeiting of customs documentation. It should also
be noted that although Al-Shabaab is no longer involved
in the charcoal trade, it nevertheless continues to levy
taxes on its production and transport. It is therefore
appropriate to ask AMISOM. to redouble its efforts
to help the Somali Federal Government to prevent
the export of charcoal and facilitate the Monitoring
Group's access to the coal-export ports, including, if
necessary, the provision of means of transport and any
other appropriate security measures.

Regarding Eritrea, the delegation of Senegal
would like to once again invite the country to work
more closely with the Monitoring Group to create the
conditions that could lead to the lifting of sanctions.
In conclusion, we reiterate our encouragement to
the State of Qatar, which, in its capacity as mediator,
spares no effort to resolve the differences between
Djibouti and Eritrea, particularly with regard to the
latent question of the remaining missing persons.

