Mr. Abbas (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
warmly thank you, Sir, for convening this important
meeting, which gives us an opportunity to describe in
detail the situation prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territories and to identify the obstacles
ahead and the means to achieve a peaceful settlement
that includes the two-State solution.

I am deeply grateful to all those who have
contributed to the organization of this meeting. I pay
tribute to the tireless efforts of His Royal Highness
Prince Saud Al-Faisal and the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States to ensure that the meeting would
be held.

Allow me first and foremost to clarify a number
of historical issues that are neither redundant nor dull.
In that regard, I wish to point to the historical map that
figures in the dossier circulated in the Chamber. The
map shows the configuration of the Palestinian
territory beginning in 1937. An Israeli State is shown
in white and an Arab State in yellow. The partition took
place in 1947. The project was unsuccessful and war
broke out, leading to the current situation in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip.

If we are to understand the situation properly, we
need to recognize the outlines of the West Bank, the
Gaza Strip and the Palestinian territory on which we
hope to establish an independent, viable Palestinian
State living side by side with an Israeli State in
harmony, peace and stability. That is the point of
departure allowing us to understand all the aspects of
the question we are seized with today.

Since the war that broke out between the Arab
countries and Israel in 1967, the latter has built
settlements in the West Bank. Those settlement
activities have continued from that day to this. In that
regard, I recall that the Security Council has adopted
more than 10 resolutions prohibiting such settlement
activities, which are considered an impediment to
peace. Some - in particular resolutions 252 (1968), 298
(1971), 465 (1980) and 446 (1979) - even call for the
dismantling of settlements. Those are some of the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council, all of
them either condemning the settlement policy or
calling for the elimination of settlements. There is also
a resolution specifically addressing the question of
Jerusalem, by which the Security Council considered
the building of settlements in Jerusalem to be an illegal
act that must be halted immediately.

I am recalling all of this in order to stress that the
issue of settlement activity is nothing new: it goes back
to the 1960s and 1970s. Despite all the resolutions that
have been adopted, nothing has changed.

On the settlement policy, let me note that there
had been 22 settlements in the Gaza Strip, which
occupied nearly 30 per cent of the territory of the Strip.
The Israeli Government then took the wise if somewhat
unilateral decision to eliminate those settlements. That
was done, even though the pretext offered for the
destruction of those settlements was unconvincing -
for example, claiming that these were holy territories
and formed part of Israel. But in the end, the Israeli
Government did indeed eliminate those settlements -
practically overnight.

The current situation is reflected on the map I am
holding. It depicts the three settlement blocs in the
West Bank: Ariel, in the north; Ma'ale Adummim, near
Jerusalem; and Kfar Etzion to the south. The presence
of those three blocs in the north, near Jerusalem and in
the south could lead one to believe that they preclude
the emergence of a viable, contiguous and independent
Palestinian State: the three settlement blocs divide the
West Bank into no less than four cantons. That means
that President Bush's expressed vision of the
emergence of a viable, contiguous and independent
Palestinian State will not be realized, even though it is
an integral part of the Road Map, which is in turn
endorsed in Security Council resolution 1515 (2003).

That is the situation we are facing today. These
facts convince us that the settlements not only are an
obstacle, but also threaten to completely undermine the
peace process, because the settlement policy has an
impact on other fundamental issues, such as water,
boundaries and Jerusalem. It also has an impact on the
demographic presence of Palestinians: the separation
wall now cuts off 14 Palestinian villages and besieges
about 60 Palestinian villages.
Given the current situation, I would ask how we
can talk of the emergence of a viable, independent
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel.

By the terms of phase I of the Road Map, as
endorsed at the Annapolis Conference, an immediate
end must be put to the settlement policy, including the
"natural growth" of settlements, and the arbitrary
outposts that have been erected must be dismantled.
But nothing has been done. Settlement activity
continues unabated, and the same policy remains in
place right up to the banks of the river Jordan. As
members know, settlements are not confined to the
three blocs I mentioned earlier: they are scattered
throughout the West Bank, even on the banks of the
Jordan, where dozens of settlements exist.

That is the situation relating to the Jewish
settlements that have been erected, even though we
have called for a suspension of settlement-building and
have engaged in negotiations with the Government of
Israel. How can I convince my people to negotiate with
Israel when settlements systematically continue to be
built, inch by inch and bite by bite?

We have seen the adoption of the Road Map and
the establishment of the Quartet, which is responsible
for monitoring the implementation of phase I of the
Road Map. There is no denying that the Israeli side
made commitments, and at a time when we are
fulfilling our duties and shouldering our
responsibilities to the extent possible, there must be a
response: the Israeli side must put an immediate end to
its settlement policy in all its aspects, including
"natural growth", and the more than 100 arbitrary
outposts must be dismantled. Even the Israeli
Government considers them to be illegal.

Unfortunately, the situation remains unchanged.
We have heard some 50 speakers at the Annapolis
Conference; all of them repeatedly referred to the
settlement policy and called for its termination. But,
unfortunately, nothing has happened. Even the French
President, when addressing the Knesset and when he
spoke with us, spoke unequivocally of the need to put
an end to the settlement policy. Despite all of that,
nothing has been done. The United States Secretary of
State, Ms. Rice, has also raised the issue. But none of
this has had any impact: there has been no positive
response, and the settlement policy continues.

In addition to all these elements is the changing
of the character of Jerusalem, including Bab
al-Maghariba. Everyone agrees on the facts, and they
are stipulated in the Geneva Conventions and in the
Israeli-Jordanian agreement. All such agreements
stipulate that no change must be made to the character
of that city. But despite that, and despite all the fine
resolutions that have been adopted, we have nothing
tangible that would improve the situation with our
Israeli neighbours. Pretexts have been put forward and
arguments have been made; for example, we have
heard the Israeli Government claim that it opposes the
settlement policy and that the responsibility lies with
the mayor. How can the Government be contradicting
the mayor? How can the Government be unable to
compel a mayor or the city government to put an end to
these activities? Projects have occasionally been
broached - such as paying compensation to affected
settlers - but nothing of the kind has happened and
the settlement policy continues nonetheless.

Yet we are obliged to pursue negotiations that are
crucial both for us and for the Israeli side - despite
the virulent criticism we receive on a daily basis from
everyone, including from Palestinian leaders, who
regularly ask how we can pursue negotiations while the
settlement policy continues. If we remain on the path
of negotiations it is because we cherish peace, and
peace remains our main objective. But that does not
mean that our agenda will not give high priority to the
settlements issue. It has been noted that tenders for
construction contracts continue to be issued. NGOs
that tackle this issue have referred to a catastrophe with
regard to continued settlement policies. These
settlements have not helped to improve the chances for
peace at all.

Thirdly, with regard to the settlers, we are quite
familiar with their aggression. There have been acts of
aggression by the settlers against the inhabitants of the
region. The settlers do not hesitate to invade villages if
they consider that necessary, not to mention the acts of
official military aggression. Even the settlers feel free
to invade villages, plunder and even kill the
residents - as if it was not enough that the land of
those villages had already been seized, that the people
were already under siege and are also victims of
murder and aggression.

Certainly we cannot tolerate that situation. If the
settlement policy seeks to present us with a fait
accompli, we shall continue to reject it. We still say
that Israeli settlement policy is illegal, and we will not
accept it. The map that I showed the Council shows 22
per cent of historic Palestine. We have accepted that
small percentage allocated to us, imposed on us by the
international community. We are prepared to bend to
the will of the international community. Thus we
accepted the 22 per cent. But even that 22 per cent is
difficult for us to obtain. So how can we arrive at
peace?

We have come to the Council to ask it to shoulder
its responsibility and to say that we are ready to
negotiate and that we will pursue these negotiations. I
will pursue them with Mr. Olmert, and I will never
cease to negotiate, even with his successor. We do not
wish to waste the opportunities available to us, but we
call on the Council to assume its responsibilities. It is
for the Council to implement the dozens of resolutions
that date back to the 19705 and 1980s - resolutions
that the Council itself adopted. How can they be
respected, those resolutions that are still dead letters?
They must be implemented. There are about 15
resolutions that have still not been implemented. It is
truly a serious matter.

Unless the settlement policy is ended, it will be
futile to dream of the peace that we all hope for. If we
fail, if we do not obtain peace, then the alternative
poses a serious threat. Everyone knows what the
alternative will be. It will once again plunge the entire
region, not only the Palestinian territories, into a
hellish cycle of violence. I do not even wish to imagine
what that might lead us to. We thus urge the Council to
be on its guard. We want to recall that we are opposed
to violence and terrorism. We are against anything that
leads to violence. We wish to negotiate for peace.

However, if we are unsuccessful in that venture,
then what to do? Fait accompli does not lead to peace;
understanding might lead to peace. The desire for
peace could lead us to authentic peace. I hope that that
will for peace will take shape so that we do obtain an
authentic peace. Believe me, if peace is established
between Palestinians and Israelis, and also between the
Syrians and the Lebanese and Israel, then peace will
reign not only in the region; it will even surpass the
boundaries of our region. And that is a prerequisite; it
is indispensable for all of us here.

The Council is responsible for global security,
and in its hand global security lies. Therefore it is the
Council's responsibility to shoulder its duty.
