Mr. Eitel (Germany): At the end of your presidency,
I take great pleasure in congratulating you, Sir, on the
prudent leadership and wisdom with which you have
conducted our work during the month of June.

Germany fully supports the statement made by the
representative of Italy on behalf of the European Union. We
also welcome the fact that a number of friendly countries
have again associated themselves with the statement of the
European Union.

The developments in Haiti since the return of
President Aristide in 1994 and the results achieved by
United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) so far are
encouraging. Free and fair elections were held in 1995. For
the first time in Haitian history, a peaceful transition from
one democratically elected president to his democratically
elected successor took place in February this year. The
successful role of UNMIH in laying the foundations for a
new start towards a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
Haiti is beyond doubt. I am glad to say that UNMIH will
probably be recognized as one more of the success stories
of the United Nations.

We all acknowledge, however, that further steps are
needed to stabilize the country, to consolidate democracy
and to advance development in Haiti. This will be possible
only in a peaceful and secure situation, and for the time
being, the peace and security of the situation are still quite
fragile. This requires a continued solid United Nations
presence, especially in the form of policemen to train
Haitian police and a back-up force. After all
the international community has already invested in this
field, we should not stop halfway. The new United Nations
Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH) will certainly help
stabilize, in particular, security and ordre public -
indispensable requirements for a normal life in Haiti.

Germany supports the Haitian and international efforts
to overcome the crisis mainly by a broad development
programme, oriented to the basic needs of the Haitian
population. Besides a programme for structural adjustment,
which it sponsors together with the World Bank and the
Inter-American Development Bank, the German side is
helping Haiti with projects to provide clean water, a more
reliable supply of electricity, sanitation and rural
development - projects aimed at making life more
livable for the people of Haiti. Further projects have been
discussed during the recent visit of President Preval to
Germany.

One crucial condition for the successful outcome of
any United Nations Mission is, as we all know, its
enjoyment of the full support of all parties involved. This
condition is fulfilled in the case of Haiti. President Preval
of Haiti has explicitly requested the continued presence of
a United Nations mission to Haiti. Furthermore, it may be
recalled that the continued presence of a United Nations
mission to Haiti has been recommended not only by the
Secretary-General in his latest excellent report, but also
by the Organization of American States during its recent
session, held in Panama at the beginning of this month,
and, last but not least, by the countries known as the
Friends of Haiti. As a result, the new UNSMIH already
has a solid basis of support from all parties concerned.
This gives it a good chance for success.

I wish to conclude my remarks by expressing my
appreciation to all Member States which have contributed
to UNMIH, first and foremost those that have contributed
troops or police officers. They have made possible the
success reached so far. In this context, we acknowledge
the special contributions by Canada and by the United
States, in the past and for the future.
Finally, I wish to thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, as well as the civilian
personnel, troops and civilian police officers who served
in UNMIH, for their efforts in support of peace and
democracy in Haiti. Our best wishes for luck and success
go to the members of the new UNSMIH.

We shall vote in favour of the draft resolution.

