Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Williams for his
briefing and his significant work on the Middle East
and we wish him success in his future endeavours. The
news he gave us of progress made in the discussions
between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert is
very positive, but the general situation remains serious.
We are concerned that particular stances taken by some
members of the international community may
represent, what Mr. Williams calls, "factors that may
derail long-term endeavours and efforts".

Regarding the Palestine-Israel peace process, the
international community, in our view, has two paths
before it. The first is to seek new Palestinian unity and
support a two-State solution involving the entire
Palestinian population. The second course, which
would appear to have already been selected by some
stakeholders in the process, consists of a two-pronged
policy of supporting the Government of President
Abbas in the West Bank and isolating Hamas in Gaza.

Our delegation expresses its disagreement with
any policy that exacerbates the division of the
Palestinian Authority. This Council has called for unity
and national reconciliation through inclusive dialogue
and, likewise, we encourage the main protagonists in
the peace process to promote national unity in
Palestine through all diplomatic channels available
including opening channels of dialogue with Hamas.

Hamas represents a considerable proportion of
the Palestinian population, and this representation
cannot be excluded from the Palestinian Government.
However, Hamas must be a responsible actor in the
process that would lead to the eventual creation of a
viable Palestinian State. As long as it fails to accept
that the solution to the Palestine question is one of two
States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in
peace, Hamas will remain an obstacle to national unity
and, as such, will not be able to participate in the peace
process.

Israel, too, can and should do much to carry the
process forward. It should put an end to the illegal
construction of the Wall and the settlements in the West
Bank. In addition, it should permit a better flow of
essential goods into the Gaza Strip and prevent its
impending economic collapse. The creation of a viable
Palestinian State presupposes a stable Gaza Strip.
Actions demonstrating Israel's good will would help
tremendously in this regard.

On the subject of Lebanon, we await the
presidential elections of next month. It is extremely
important that these elections be carried out with
transparency and in line with the constitution, in an
atmosphere of peace. Equally important is that the
results under these conditions be accepted by all
Lebanese parties and the international community. The
solution to the situation in Lebanon and lasting peace
in the region resides in the establishment of a
government of Lebanese unity that will bring an end to
the political stagnation that has kept the country down
for almost an entire year.

