We thank our briefers today - Mr. Mark Lowcock, Mr. Qu Dongyu and Mr. David Beasley - for their substantive overview of the current trends in food security around the world. Relevant reports of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the World Food Programme (WFP) on the matter are always on our radar. The recent report of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), which triggered today's discussion, confirms how alarming the situation is. Indeed, the countries that are the focus of that OCHA report - namely, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen and South Sudan together with the north- eastern part of Nigeria - are experiencing human suffering not only because of problems with access of those in need to food, but also because those States have suffered overall instability for quite a number of years and lately have witnessed an aggravation of insecurity. But, unfortunately, this issue is relevant to a number of countries, which clearly makes our discussion much broader. We also take note of the emphasis some speakers have placed on the so-called humanitarian-development nexus. Despite being so extensively promoted, this term nevertheless lacks a clear definition. To date, we have not heard any explanation of what kind of new dimension the concept brings to the existing cooperation between different agencies on the ground. That said, we take this opportunity to pay tribute to all humanitarian workers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen, Nigeria and South Sudan for the everyday fight they undertake with one goal in mind - to help people most in need. Unfortunately, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic imposes additional difficulties and restrictions on their work. Armed conflicts are not the only reason for the increase in the number of food-insecure people in the world today. Instead of focusing in the Security Council on the exclusive link between conflicts and hunger, we need to consider other factors of food insecurity, namely, price volatility in the world food market, world economic stagnation, insufficient exploitation of scientific and technological potential in the field of agriculture, a deficit in investment, environmental degradation and, now, another significant challenge, the COVID-19 pandemic. Unilateral economic measures, undermining the countries' rights and capacities for development, also have their place in this sad list. The solution to the problem of conflict-induced hunger should therefore be sought in the political domain alone. The United Nations development system's and the humanitarian agencies' toolkit plays a primary role in effectively addressing food-insecurity challenges and building the industrial and agricultural potential of countries. Another important aspect is ensuring compliance by all parties of international humanitarian law, which is essential. Respect for United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian assistance, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/182, promotes the understanding of unbiased nature of the provision of humanitarian aid. The Russian Federation considers the fight against food insecurity to be of vital importance. The FAO and the WFP are our main partners in this area. In 2018- 2019, we allocated over $80 million for emergency food aid through these institutions. In 2020, together with the WFP, we have been implementing a food-assistance programme for Yemen with funding in the amount of $4 million. This year, we provided $10 million in support of the FAO's work to fight the locust outbreak in East African countries, including South Sudan. In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our position that every conflict is unique and there is no universal recipe for overcoming crises in every conflict-affected country. In this regard, we adhere to the position that food-security issues should be taken up in the Security Council only in the context of examining the situations of specific countries that pose a threat to international peace and security, with a close look at the root causes of those situations. At bottom, the Council already and inevitably touches upon these issues in its discussions relevant to the situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen, South Sudan and Nigeria.
