Mr. Simonovic': Madam President, I thank you
for inviting the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) to brief the Security Council
on the human rights situation in Syria.

As the Council is aware, the increasingly brutal
violence in the country has spread significantly. Just over
a month ago, the OHCHR reported that at least 92,901
people had been killed between March 2011 and the end
of April 2013. The analysis used involved a rigorous
methodology in which each casualty was confirmed by
name, place and date of death, with that information
being cross-referenced against at least three separate
data sources. Out of the 92,901 individuals killed, at
least 6,561 were minors, 1,729 of whom were under the
age of 10. It has been documented that children have
been detained, tortured and executed. They have also
been recruited as combatants by armed opposition
groups. The independent international commission
of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic has reported
that, since March 2011, 86 child combatants have been
killed in hostilities. The extremely high rate of killings
nowadays, approximately 5,000 a month, demonstrates
the drastic deterioration of the conflict.

Since April, Government forces and militias
have moved to uproot armed opposition groups from
Al-Qusayr and Talkalakh in the Horns governorate,
Aleppo, Damascus and rural Damascus. Government
forces carry out indiscriminate and disproportionate
shelling and aerial bombardments, using, among
other weapons, tactical ballistic missiles, cluster and
thermobaric bombs - all of which cause extensive
damage and casualties ifused in densely populated areas.
As a result, hundreds of civilians, including women and
children, have been killed, thousands injured and tens
of thousands displaced. Many of the displaced in parts
of Horns and rural Damascus remain under siege and
face miserable humanitarian conditions.

Armed opposition groups have also committed
acts of torture, abduction and kidnapping, sometimes
along sectarian lines. Killing, violence and threats
of reprisals by armed opposition groups against
civilian populations perceived to be supportive of the
Government are escalating at an alarming rate. Many
of the armed opposition groups are reportedly engaging
in military operations within populated areas, thereby
endangering civilians, including women and children.

The Council has just heard about the humanitarian
consequences of the recent intensification of shelling
and ground attacks in central Homs. As the shelling
continues, it remains difficult to obtain information on
casualties, but it is quite clear that we must not allow
the suffering, entrapment and death of civilians that
we witnessed in Al-Qusayr to be repeated. All parties
to the conflict must respect their obligations under
international law, avoid civilian casualties and allow
trapped civilians to leave without fear of persecution
or violence. Immediate humanitarian access should
be granted to all conflict-affected populations in
besieged areas. We join calls on States to maintain
an open-border policy for refugees fleeing the Syrian
conflict. We should not wait to encourage humanitarian
negotiations between the two sides to alleviate the most
acute suffering. Humanitarian contacts are not only
vital in their own right; they can also sow the seeds for
political negotiations in the longer run.

In Syria today, serious human rights violations,
war crimes and crimes against humanity are the rule.
In its latest report, the commission of inquiry notes
that a number of incidents, potentially amounting
to massacres, took place between January and May.
OHCHR has received personal accounts of survivors of
massacres by Government forces and affiliated militias
which took place between 2 and 3 May in the village
of Al-Bayda and the Baniyas neighbourhood of Ras
Al-Nabaa, both of which are in the governorate of Tartus.
According to survivors interviewed by the OHCHR, the
massacre in Al-Bayda resulted in at least 200 deaths,
including entire families, women and children, some
of whom appeared to have been mutilated and burned.
In Ras Al-Nabaa, residents trying to flee under intense
shelling before the massacre took place were reportedly
intercepted at Government checkpoints and forced to
return, in some cases to meet their deaths.

OCHCR continues to investigate equally disturbing
allegations of killings along sectarian lines reportedly
carried out by armed opposition groups. Large-scale
displacement, including across the border, on the
basis of religious or other affiliations, is a worrying
indication that intercommunal massacres are now a
real risk. OCHCR is concerned at the use of rhetoric by
religious and political leaders in Syria and the region
that can exacerbate existing sectarian tensions and lead
to more violence and large-scale atrocities. All leaders
have a responsibility to refrain from using or condoning
language that may escalate sectarian tension. States
must take action to prevent incitement to violence on
any grounds.

The continuous influx of foreign fighters into
Syria to support both sides remains of great concern
and fuels the conflict further. The return of foreign
fighters in body bags is exacerbating sectarian tension
in surrounding States and endangering the security of
the region. States should discourage the movement of
foreign fighters into Syria.

The supply of weapons to both sides must stop. The
solution should be political, not military. States with
influence over the parties must work to support an
inclusive, Syrian-led political solution to the conflict.

Parties must initiate immediate negotiations to
reduce violence and human rights violations and
improve the protection of civilians. Progress in those
areas can build confidence between the Government,
armed opposition groups and local communities and
open the political dialogue.

We fully support the Secretary-General's call for
a truce during Ramadan and call on all parties to lay
down their arms, immediately cease acts of violence
against civilians and protect them from hostilities, in
compliance with international law.

Throughout continuing efforts to bring peace, we
should seek to uphold justice and accountability. War
crimes, crimes against humanity and gross human
rights violations must not go unpunished. To that end,
OHCHR once again urges the Security Council to refer
the Syrian crisis to the International Criminal Court.

We urge the Syrian Government to facilitate access
for OHCHR, top officials and staff and the independent
international commission of inquiry on Syria to the
country. We ask the Security Council for its support
in that regard. Through fact-finding and human
rights monitoring, those teams can provide impartial
substantive analysis to support the protection of human
rights and provide for high-level advocacy.

