Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from F rench): The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been raging for almost eight months now. It
involves not only Congolese rebel groups but
approximately half a dozen African countries, and
military operations are being conducted over an ever-
widening area of the territory of that country.

Regional organizations, the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations have not remained inactive
since the outbreak of the crisis, but we must acknowledge
that their appeals for a cessation of hostilities have not
been heeded.

In our debate today - requested by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and approved by the members of
the Council - we must explore ways and means to
achieve a peaceful settlement of this conflict. In this
connection, the French delegation would like to make the
following comments.

We will not attempt to go into the causes of the
conflict. It is well known that they are numerous and that
their analysis can itself be a source of disagreement
among the parties. But we are aware of the effects of the
crisis, particularly the risks of political destabilization in
the States of the region and the humanitarian
consequences - the flows of refugees. The territorial
integrity and national sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are in jeopardy. The principle of
non-interference in the domestic affairs of States, as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations, has not been
respected. France deplores these violations and calls for
their immediate cessation.

What would be the components of a settlement of
the conflict? We can isolate three aspects: the conclusion
of a ceasefire, the implementation of a process of national
reconciliation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the conclusion of the necessary arrangements to
guarantee security and stability in the region.

Concluding a ceasefire is a matter of priority. Efforts
have been undertaken, in particular by President Chiluba,
to reach an agreement. France supports these efforts. We
hope that ways and means can be found to ensure that a
cease-fire is observed by all parties to the conflict.
Considerable work has already been done in the context
of the Lusaka process to define the modalities of a
ceasefire and its implementation. Today the parties must
conclude such an agreement.

 

In its presidential statement of 11 December, the
Council declared itself ready to contemplate the active
involvement of the United Nations, in coordination with the
Organization of African Unity, in order to assist in the
implementation of such an agreement.

Two points should be emphasized. The support of the
United Nations for the implementation of a ceasefire will
require a considerable effort on the part of the
Organization. France hopes that the United Nations will
fully play its part.

It is equally necessary for the Members of our
Organization to call upon the parties to cease hostilities.
There is no military solution to the conflict that could at the
same time represent a genuine solution to the crisis, and
this should be kept in mind. It is noteworthy also that
donors will find it much more difficult to maintain the
provision of assistance from their budgets to countries that
continue to opt for a military solution.

Secondly, a peaceful solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo also would depend on
the implementation of an authentic process of national
reconciliation. Dialogue must of necessity be instituted
among all Congolese. President Kabila committed himself,
during the Africa-France Conference held in Paris last
November, to pursuing the democratization process. We
urge him to follow up on his commitment in specific terms.
We take note of his recent proposal to organize a national
debate, and it is our hope that this will take place in a
genuine spirit of reconciliation.

It is clear that this dialogue among the Congolese must
be embarked upon forthwith. It would be facilitated if, at
the same time, a ceasefire were concluded and respected.

The third aspect of the settlement would involve the
parties' negotiating and concluding the necessary
arrangements to guarantee the security, stability and future
development of the region. These principles, recalled in the
presidential statement of 11 December, were respect for the
territorial integrity and the political independence and
national sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other States in the region, and, in this context,
the orderly withdrawal of all foreign forces; arrangements
for security along the international borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and the re-
establishment of the authority of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo over the whole territory
of the country. In addition, respect for human rights and
humanitarian law are paramount, as well as the need to
tackle the question of refugees.

The United Nations should provide the necessary
assistance to the countries of the region so that these
objectives can be attained. In this regard, France recalls
the potential usefulness, at the appropriate time, of
convening an international conference on peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region under the
auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity. A return to stability must also include the
implementation of an authentic process of national
reconciliation and democratization in all the countries of
the region.

