Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate the Republic of
Poland on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to express my gratitude
for its efforts in organizing the Council's work. I also
thank the Republic of Peru for its efforts during its
presidency of the Council last month. I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing
and to express my gratitude to him and his team for
their hard and sincere work. I also would like to thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and
Ms. Michele Coninsx, Assistant Secretary-General
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, for their briefings.

On 12 May, Iraqis went to the voting polls to elect
the members of the Council of Representatives. Those
elections were particularly important because they
came on the heels of the defeat of Da'esh terrorist gangs
in Iraq, which means that the 2018 Iraqi elections were
another chapter of the war against terrorism in Iraq.

The large and unprecedented participation by
female candidates in the elections for the Iraqi Council
of Representatives was a positive sign and showed
that Iraqi women have begun to prove themselves on
the political scene. A large number of young people
also participated in the elections as both voters and
candidates, and, in doing so, sought to choose who
would represent them and meet their expectations in
the Parliament.

The Government of Iraq, based on its legal and
constitutional duties, was able to provide a secure
electoral environment, which enabled the various Iraqi
segments of society to cast their votes in a safe and
satisfactory manner. The Government also ensured all
the conditions necessary to allow displaced persons to
cast their votes, and thereby contribute to consolidating
the democratic process in the country.

After the announcement of the election results,
the Independent High Electoral Commission allowed
complaints and appeals to be submitted by political
entities and parties that had any observations or doubts
about the results of the elections. The Commission will
examine and audit those appeals in accordance with the
rules and legal standards provided for by law in order
for the Commission to then announce the final results
and submit the names of the winners to the Federal
Court for formal approval and adoption. The Council
of Ministers and the Council of Representatives also
focused on that matter so as to reassure all stakeholders.

During the next phase, Iraq will focus on
revitalizing its economy and restoring normal social
conditions. It will seek to support development and
stability in all provinces and to create an attractive
climate for investment in line with the approach taken
by the previous Government. Iraq will also seek to
implement the following strategies.
First, we will work to implement the strategic
reconstruction plan, which will be a platform for
launching projects in accordance with certain
criteria and priorities that take into consideration
the requirements for achieving the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals, as well as Iraq's vision for 2030.

Secondly, we will carry out the 2018-2022 National
Strategy to Alleviate Poverty in Iraq with a view to
significantly reducing overall poverty and creating
more jobs and opportunities for young people.

Thirdly, the recovery and resilience programme
launched by Secretary-General Anto'nio Guterres
consists of nine elements, three of which are to be
implemented in high-priority communities where
extremism is more likely to take root.

Fourthly, our national youth strategy, which
was launched in cooperation with the United Nation
Population Fund and is the first of its kind in the
country, aims at preparing a generation that is
productive and well educated, enjoys good mental,
social and psychological health, maintains its national
identity, plays a pivotal role in local communities and is
immune to radical terrorist ideologies.

The Da'esh terrorist organization has shown
extraordinary cruelty towards its victims, including
men, women and children.

The Security Council's adoption of resolution
2379 (2017) was a victory for justice and fairness for
the victims. The implementation of the resolution is
currently under way, including procedures to set up
the international investigative team. The team will be
responsible for collecting evidence of crimes committed
by Da'esh terrorist gangs and submitting it to the
national judiciary in order to punish criminals. Iraq
looks forward to cooperating fully and constructively
with the investigative team.

Iraq will continue its efforts to provide redress
and compensation to all the victims of horrendous
crimes of sexual violence. It will involve women in
all peacebuilding, reconciliation and reconstruction
initiatives. We reaffirm our commitment to addressing
the suffering of the victims of conflict-related sexual
violence, which was made clear through the signing
of the 2016 joint communique by the United Nations
and Iraq to prevent and address conflict-related sexual
violence, and the endorsement of the implementation
plan of the joint communique, which outlines specific
measures on justice, accountability and services.
The signing took place during the latest visit to Iraq
by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
upon an invitation from the Government, between
26 February and 5 March. Iraq looks forward to
concrete outcomes from the implementation plan and a
timetable for its assessment.

Iraq also issued the Iraqi national report on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on 7 March,
on the occasion of International Women's Day, which
will be presented to the United Nations. Iraq will be
the first country in the Middle East to report on the
implementation of the resolution with regard to the role
of women in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

Iraqi authorities received Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michele Coninsx,
Assistant Secretary-General of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, during their joint
visit to Iraq on 7 and 8 March. The visit yielded fruitful
results, including continued efforts to meet Iraq's 16
priorities set by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate in 2015 and the implementation
of capacity-building projects to meet five of the 16
priorities. They include developing skills among youth
through capacity-building in vocational and technical
training institutes in Baghdad and Fallujah, supporting
the development of a comprehensive national strategy to
combat terrorism, combating the financing of terrorism
through the most effective national and regional action
plan, combating terrorist discourse through capacity-
building for strategic communications and preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.

Iraq has established normal and balanced relations
with all neighbouring countries and the with region to
safeguard the interests of the Iraqi people on the basis
of respect for sovereignty, mutual interests and the
quest for common denominators, instead of conflicts
that have destroyed the region. Iraq seeks to build a
new foreign policy based on positive neutrality, while
avoiding siding with one side against another. It is in
Iraq's interest to stay away from conflicts in the region.
Iraq believes that cooperation, partnership and mutual
interests in various areas is the only way to achieve
the aspirations of our people for security, stability
and development, by enhancing political, security,
economic and trade cooperation.

Iraq looks forward to building genuine and strategic
partnerships based on the principle of integration with
friendly and allied countries to help Iraq create a sound
economic investment environment and thousands of j 0b
opportunities for young people and improve the living
conditions and standards of its citizens. Development
in Iraq is linked to the development of the entire region
and of all its neighbours. It should be recalled that
Iraq as a whole, and due to the war against terrorism,
suffered from a decline in sustainable development.
There are considerable opportunities for investment in
all Iraqi provinces.

My country's Government has sought to fulfil
the obligations related to outstanding issues between
Iraq and the sisterly State of Kuwait. With regard to
the issue of Kuwaiti missing persons, the competent
Iraqi authorities continue to conduct their research
and investigation. According to witness testimony,
they have begun exploration and excavation processes
in Shakhat and Ain Tamr in Karbala, Salman Pak in
Baghdad, Khamisiyah in Dhi Qar, Salman Road in
Muthanna and Al-Razi Street in Diyala. No remains
have been found. The Iraqi Government is in the
process of handing over the first recently found batch of
Kuwaiti property and archives, following an agreement
with UNAMI. The material will be transported to the
State of Kuwait by air.

Lastly, I am pleased to highlight Iraq's willingness
to extend the mandate of UNAMI for an additional year,
according to the letter oins Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq addressed to Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, on 3 May. That is in accordance with
the letter and spirit of resolution 1770 (2007), as well
as the political mandate of the Mission, which has the
ability to meet Iraq's needs in the post-victory period
over Da'esh with a view to extending State authority
across the country. Given the challenges faced by Iraq,
UNAMI's mandate must remain as is in order to allow
it to meet its commitments and provide advice and
assistance to the Government and the people of Iraq,
in particular on social and economic issues that affect
the lives of Iraqi citizens. Iraq hopes that UNAMI and
all the relevant United Nations agencies in Iraq will
play a major role in rebuilding the country following
the devastation caused by the war and the subsequent
decline in basic services infrastructure, especially to
restore stability in liberated areas and ensure the return
of internally displaced persons.

In conclusion, I would like to clarify that the
current criminal trials in Iraq cannot be concluded in
minutes, as stated by my colleague the representative
of Kazakhstan. Legal and judicial processes require
that the investigating judge conduct a full investigation
over an extended period before the case is referred to
another judge, who will then adjudicate on the matter,
according to Iraqi law.

